UNIVERSITY OF NOVA GORICA GRADUATE SCHOOLEVOLUTION OF KARST IN THE LOWER PART OF CRNA REKA RIVER BASINDISSERTATION     Marjan TemovskiMentors:	Prof. Dr. Andrej MihevcProf. Dr. Philippe Audra

UNIVERZA V NOVI GORICI FAKULTETA ZA PODIPLOMSKI ŠTUDIJRAZVOJ KRASA V SPODNJEM DELU POREČJA CRNE REKEDOKTORSKA DISERTACIJA     Marjan TemovskiMentorja:	prof. dr. Andrej Mihevcprof. dr. Philippe Audra

Hereby I declare that this thesis is entirely my author work.Izjavljam, da je doktorsko delo v celoti moje avtorsko delo.

AcknowledgementsI would like to express my gratitude to everyone who helped and supported  me during my doctorate studies.I would especially like to thank the mentors, Dr. Andrej Mihevc and Dr.  Philippe Audra, for their continuous  support  and  numerous  discussions,  suggestions and advices of scientific and personal nature, as well as providing me with possibilities of analyses,  scientific contacts  and  scholarships.  I would  also  like to thank Dr. Pavel Bosak and Dr. Nadja Zupan Hajna  for  the  fruitful  discussions and  help  with paleomagnetic  dating of  sediments.  A special  thanks  and acknowledgment goes to Dr. Andrej Kranjc for his continuous support of young karstologists, willing to help whenever possible. I am grateful to the Karst Research Institute in Postojna and its members and employees for their hospitality,   companionship   and  discussions, making my visits in Postojna always pleasant.For support and help with fieldwork I would like to thank Zlatko Angeleski and other fellow cavers from SK Zlatovrv – Prilep: Darko Nedanoski, Darko Jovanoski, and Mario Andonoski. Cavers and mountaineers from PSD Orle – Kavadarci, especially Nikola Minčorov and Jože Zmajšek are thanked for unselfish sharing of cave maps and locations. I would also like to thank SD Peoni – Skopje for providing me with coordinates and cave map of Živovska Propast.I am extremely grateful to my parents Dragan and Biljana Temovski and my brother Ivan Temovski,  for  their  unselfish  and  continuous  support  throughout  my life  and during my doctorate studies.This work  was  partly  funded  by  the  Ad  Futura  Scholarship  for  foreign  doctorate students in Slovenia (No.11011-2/2009), and therefor I  would  like  to  thank the Slovene Human Resources Development  and  Scholarship  Fund   (Javni  sklad Republike Slovenije za razvoj kadrov in štipendije) for their support.I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  French  Institute  in  Slovenia  for  receiving  French Government Grant in 2010 (No.702376F) and 2013 (No.786060J), which funded my research stay in Nice, France.

AbstractEvolution of karst in the lower part of Crna reka river basinThis    thesis    represents    mostly   a    regional    karstological    work,    giving    first comprehensive information on the extension, development and evolution of the karst terrains in the lower part of Crna Reka river basin. Its aim is to understand and give general overview of the spatial and temporal evolution of karst terrains, as well as to determine the influence of Kožuf/Kozjak volcanism; Neogene-Quaternary deposits in Tikveš and Mariovo basins; and incision of Crna River Valley to the general karst evolution in the area.The  main  approach  used  to  understand  karst  development  in  the  area  is  through studying characteristics and evolution of caves, combining morphological analyses with    analyses    of    cave    sediments    and    correlation    with    geological    and geomorphological evolution.Both epigenic and  hypogenic  karst  development  has  been  recognized  in  the  lower part of Crna Reka river basin. Hypogenic karst development is mainly connected to hydrothermal speleogenesis due to increased geothermal gradient, connected to the Pliocene-Pleistocene Kožuf/Kozjak volcanism,  at  places  converging with other hypogenic processes/mechanisms connected to  local   geological or lithological control. Sulfuric acid speleogenesis is registered in Provalata Cave as a second phase of cave development in previously formed  cave  due  to  cooling  of  thermal  waters,with  40Ar/39Ar  dating  of  speleogenetic  alunite  allowing  to  constrain  the  timing  ofMariovo  Lake  draining  between  1.8  and  1.6  Ma.  Ghost-rock  weathering  process connected to the hydrothermal speleogenesis is registered  in  the  Precambrian dolomitic  marbles  between  Melnica  and  Podot   areas,   and   in   Upper   Triassic dolomites  in  Kožuf  locality,  dissolving  calcite  matrix  and  leaving dolomitic sand alterite, with later removal of alterite residue leading to  exposure of remnant non- dissolved pendants on surface or phantom cave development.Per-ascensum epigenic development of rising phreatic cave passages is connected to deposition of lacustrine to fluvial pyroclastic derived deposits of Vitačevo (Pliocene) and/or Mariovo  (Early Pleistocene)  Formations  leading  to  covering  and  closing  of karst system at lower elevations  in  Mariovo,  Tikveš  Basin  and  paleo  Crna  Reka
Valley (Mariovo and Central Macedonian Lake). Draining of Mariovo Lake (Early Pleistocene) and Central Macedonian Lake (as late as Middle Pleistocene) due  to general uplift and subsidence in the Aegean Sea, led to incision of Crna Reka Valley and its tributaries with karst development and per-descensum epigenic speleogenesis controlled by lowering of base  level  position  and  retreat  of  overlying pyroclastic derived caprock sediments. Besides influencing karst  development by caprock retreat, overlying pyroclastic sediments are also the  main source for deposition of clastic cave sediments leading to paragenetic development due to local (in cave) or to regional (valley) aggradation.Quaternary  incision  of  river  valleys  also  influenced  the  surface  karst  morphology with allogenic rivers crossing the karst terrains developing through  valleys,  or reactivating   previously   formed   (and   filled   with   Pliocene-Pleistocene deposits) valleys. This further influenced  the  fluviokarst  surface development,  with  deep incision  developing  steep  slopes  on  karst  terrains,  and  continuous  development  of vadose karst zone, preventing development of karst depressions.Main  controls  on  karst  development  in  the  lower  part  of  Crna  Reka  river  basin therefore are the evolution of Crna Reka Valley as a base level controlling factor; the evolution  of  the  Tikveš  and  Mariovo  Basins,  thickness  and  distribution of their deposits which controlled base level position and rate of karst exposure after draining of the Macedonian lake systems and the Kožuf/Kozjak  volcanism,  increasing  the geothermal gradient producing hypogenic speleogenesis as well as supplying most of the material for the basin deposits in Pliocene and Early Pleistocene.Keywords: karst evolution, epigenic speleogenesis, hypogenic speleogenesis, Crna Reka river basin
Contents1. Introduction	11.1. Foreword	11.2. Goals, objectives and approach	22. General overview of the research area	52.1. Geographical location	52.2. Previous research	62.3. Geological setting	82.4. General geomorphology	172.5. Climate	192.6. Hydrography	202.7. Karst extension	223. Methodology	253.1. Concepts	253.1.1. Karst evolution and speleogenesis	253.1.2. Epigenic speleogenesis	263.1.3. Hypogenic speleogenesis	333.1.4. Karst and caves in conglomerates	373.2. Research methods	393.2.1. Morphological analyses	393.2.2. Sediment analyses	403.2.3. Water analyses	423.2.4. Cartographic methods	424. Hypogenic cave development	454.1. Melnica and Podot thermal caves	464.1.1. Provalata Cave	524.1.2. Melnička Peštera 1 & 2	674.1.3. Karši Podot Cave	77i
4.1.4. Indicators of thermal speleogenesis found on surface	864.2. Kožuf hydrothermal karst	904.2.1. Hydrothermal alteration of carbonate rocksin Allchar ore deposit	904.2.2. Kožuf thermal springs	954.3. Discussion	1005. Epigenic cave development	1055.1. Vitačevo karst	1055.1.1. Aramiska Peštera	1115.1.2. An unroofed cave in Kamenica Valley	1215.1.3. Dragoželska Propast	1245.1.4. Garnikovska Propast	1305.1.5. Caves at Zelen Izvor locality	1375.1.6. Budimirica Cave	1465.1.7. Čulejca Cave	1605.2. Caves in the western part of Dren and Kozjak Mountains	1735.2.1. Podot Caves and Gugjakovski Izvori	1735.2.2. Pešti Cave	1815.2.3. Živovska Propast	1865.3. Caves in the eastern part of Dren and Kozjak Mountains	1885.3.1. Cave Lekovita Voda	1885.3.2. Cave Vodna Peš	1935.3.3. Temna Peštera – Mrežičko	1985.3.4. Cave Pešterski Kamen	2045.3.5. Other caves	2115.4. Discussion	2126. Characteristics of karst surface	2277. General conclusions	2357.1. Evolution of Crna Reka Valley and karst development	2367.2. Influence of Tikveš and Mariovo Basin evolutionon karst development	239
7.3. Influence of Kožuf/Kozjak volcanismon karst development	2407.4. Main speleogenetic mechanisms	2417.5. Draining of Mariovo Lake – Contribution to the understanding of the evolution ofMacedonian Neogene-Quaternary lake system	2427.6. Some considerations for future research	243References	247Appendix A:	259 Cave mapsAppendix B:	299 XRD graphics of sampled sedimentsAppendix C:	317 Temovski M., Audra Ph., Mihevc A., Spangenberg J.E., Polyak V., McIntosh W., Bigot J-Y, 2013:  Hypogenic origin of Provalata Cave, Republic of Macedonia: a distinct case of successive thermal carbonic and sulfuric acid speleogenesis, International Journal of Speleology, 42 (3), 235-246. Tampa, FL (USA)List of figuresChapter 1Figure 1.1IntroductionGeographical situation of Republic of Macedonia with karst rockoutcrops, Crna Reka river basin and location of research area.1Chapter 2Figure 2.1General overview of the research areaGeographical situation of the research area.6Figure 2.2Geological map of the research area.11Figure 2.3Simplified structural map with main tectonic structures.12Figure 2.4Extension of karst rock outcrops.23
Chapter 3Figure 3.1MethodologyConcepts of vertical cave development.27Figure 3.2Per ascensum model of speleogenesis during the Messinian–Pliocene cycle.30Figure 3.3Common epigenic cave patterns.31Figure 3.4Paragenetic evolution in phreatic and vadose settings.32Figure 3.5Sulfuric Acid Speleogenesis concept.35Figure 3.6Conceptual model of the hypogenic cave patterns.36Figure 3.7Schematic illustration of weathering processes in conglomeratesat the Hochgrat site in the Mollase Basin (northern margin ofAlps).38Chapter 4Hypogenic cave developmentFigure 4.1Karst areas with hypogenic speleogenesis.45Figure 4.2Geological setting of Melnica karst area.46Figure 4.3Panoramic view from Pantelejmon (1344 m) to the north, with alook of Manastir-Bešište plateau, Buturica valley, Pešta Hill andSkrka (1187 m).47Figure 4.4Geological characteristic and location of caves and springs inPodot locality.48Figure 4.5View from the east to Podot locality in Crna Reka valley.49Figure 4.6Cross-section of Crna Reka valley at Podot locality anddownstream areas with Pliocene-Pleistocene deposits and riverterraces.50Figure 4.7Geological setting of Provalata Cave with surface features andMelnica Spring.52Figure 4.8Map of Provalata Cave with distribution of prominent cupolas,feeders and larger gypsum deposits.53Figure 4.9Morphological features of Provalata Cave.54Figure 4.10Figure 4.11Cave deposits in Provalata Cave.Sample location and δ18O and δ13C values from calcite coatings56and marble host rock.57Figure 4.12Calcite fabrics from the calcite crust in Provalata Cave.58
Figure 4.13Remnant cave features on surface near Provalata Cave.61Figure 4.14Schematic representation of the evolution of Provalata Cave.63Figure 4.15Local geological setting of Melnica.67Figure 4.16Carbonate conglomerates from Melnička Peštera 1.68Figure 4.17Simplified map of Melnička Peštera 1.69Figure 4.18Morphological features of Melnička Peštera 1.70Figure 4.19Cave deposits in Melnička Peštera 1.71Figure 4.20Cave rafts in Raft Passage of Melnička Peštera 2.73Figure 4.21Cross-section of Pešta Hill with Melnička Peštera 1 & 2.74Figure 4.22Extended profile Karši Podot Cave with geological andhydrological characteristics.77Figure 4.23Plan view of Karši Podot Cave with lithology and location ofcharacteristic hydrological and morphological features.78Figure 4.24Morphological features in Karši Podot Cave.79Figure 4.25Cave deposits in Karši Podot Cave.81Figure 4.26Schematic model of ghost-rock weathering and phantom cavedevelopment in Karši Podot Cave.84Figure 4.27Ghost rock weathering and thermally altered dolomitic marble atGumnište locality.87Figure 4.28Thermal vents on surface.88Figure 4.29Disolutional features and deposits on Čavkarnik cliff.89Figure 4.30Geological setting of the Kožuf thermal karst.90Figure 4.31Geological map of Allchar locality.91Figure 4.32North-south longitudinal profile through Allchar locality withgeological, alteration and mineralization relationship among theFigure 4.33northern, central and southern zone of the area.Toplek 2 thermal springs, located on the left side of Majdanska93Figure 4.34Reka riverbed.Cross-section of Buturica valley with hypogenic karst features and relationship with Mariovo Basin deposits.98100Figure 4.35NNW-SSE cross-section trough Podot (Crna Reka) and Melnica(Buturica River) karst areas with schematic representation of thepossible hydrogeological relationships.102
Chapter 5Figure 5.1Epigenic cave developmentLocation of Vitačevo karst area.105Figure 5.2Panoramic view taken from Sokol (956 m) to the NE ofVitačevo Karst.106Figure 5.3Geological map of western part of Vitačevo Plateau.107Figure 5.4Paleo-valleys filled with deposits of Vitačevo Plioceneformation in the upper part of Kamenica valley.109Figure 5.5Location of Aramiska Peštera and other caves in the upstreampart of Kamenica valley.111Figure 5.6Simplified cave map of Aramiska Peštera with morphologicalinterpretation of passages.112Figure 5.7Morphological features (1) in Aramiska Peštera.113Figure 5.8Morphological features (2) in Aramiska Peštera.114Figure 5.9Cave sediments in Aramiska Peštera.117Figure 5.10Flowstone outcrops in a small gully in the downstream location.121Figure 5.11The unroofed cave in Kamenica Valley (downstream location).122Figure 5.12Simplified map of Dragoželska Propast.124Figure 5.13Figure 5.14Characteristic features in Dragoželska Propast.Cross-section of Kamenica Valley showing relationship of125Dragoželska Propast to local geological structure andtopography.128Figure 5.15Location of Garnikovska Propast and other caves in thedownstream part of Upper Kamenica valley.130Figure 5.16Simplified map of Garnikovska Propast.131Figure 5.17Characteristic features of Garnikovska Propast.133Figure 5.18Longitudinal profile of Kamenica and Garvanica Rivers withcaves Garnikovska Propast, Temna Peštera, Zelen Izvor and NadZelen Izvor.134Figure 5.19Figure 5.20Extended profile of Mala (Ubava) Peštera.Cross-section showing relationship of Zelen Izvor Cave, Nad136Zelen Izvor Cave and Kamenica River.137Figure 5.21Location of Zelen Izvor and Nad Zelen Izvor caves and spring.139Figure 5.22Panoramic view of Nad Zelen Izvor Cave.140
Figure 5.23Simplified cave map of Temna Peštera – Dragožel.141Figure 5.24Figure 5.25Characteristic features of Temna Peštera – Dragožel.Caves at Zelen Izvor locality and their correlation to river143terraces.144Figure 5.26Geological map of the lower Kamenica Valley.146Figure 5.27Simplified cave map of Budimirica Cave.147Figure 5.28Paragenetic morphology in Budimirica Cave.148Figure 5.29Characteristic features in Budimirica Cave.149Figure 5.30The Karši Budimirica Cave.150Figure 5.31Detail of the Left Passage with sediment relationships andlocation of sampling profile.151Figure 5.32Relationship of sampled sediments to other cave fills andposition of major unconformities152Figure 5.33Photo of the sediment profile with position of paleomagneticsampling boxes and major unconformities.153Figure 5.34Example of AF demagnetization of sample (position 33.5 cm)with normal paleomagnetic polarity from the Budimirica Cave.155Figure 5.35Figure 5.36Basic magnetic properties, Budimirica Cave.Cross-section showing the relationships of Budimirica Cave and156Čulejca Cave to Kamenica and Crna Reka valleys.157Figure 5.37Simplified map of Čulejca Cave.161Figure 5.38Characteristic morphological features in Čulejca Cave (1).162Figure 5.39Characteristic morphological features in Čulejca Cave (2).163Figure 5.40Figure 5.41Cave deposits in Čulejca Cave.Schematic representation of plan pattern development with166phreatic passage formation along faults and bedding partings dueto base level rise and sediment deposition.167Figure 5.42Interpreted evolution of Čulejca Cave with regards to the geomorphological evolution of Tikveš Basin and Crna RekaValley.170Figure 5.43Geological characteristic and location of caves and springs inPodot locality.173
Figure 5.44View of Podot terrace with location of Gugjakovo Springs andcaves Podot 1 & 2.174Figure 5.45Simplified map of cave Podot 1.175Figure 5.46Simplified map of cave Podot 2.176Figure 5.47Characteristic features of Podot caves.177Figure 5.48Cross-section of Podot locality showing caves, springs andterraces.178Figure 5.49Extent of karst rocks with Suva Planina as possible recharge areaof Gugjakovo Springs (Podot locality).179Figure 5.50Geological setting between Živovo and Gugjakovo villages withlocations of Pešti Cave, Živovska Propast, Dupkite and Podotcaves.181Figure 5.51Simplified map of Pešti Cave.182Figure 5.52Characteristic features of Pešti Cave183Figure 5.53Maps of caves Dupkite 1 and Dupkite 2.184Figure 5.54Cross-section of Crna Reka valley with caves and springs andtheir relationship with Pliocene-Pleistocene sediments andFigure 5.55terracesMap of Živovska Propast with plan view at different depths,185modified from SD Peoni (2005).186Figure 5.56Map of Cave Lekovita Voda.189Figure 5.57Figure 5.58Characteristic features of Lekovita Voda Cave.Cross-section showing the relationship of Cave Lekovita Voda190and Čulejca Cave to Crna Reka and Doljani River valleys.191Figure 5.59Geological setting of Cave Vodna Peš.193Figure 5.60Geological cross-section through the NE part of Kozjak Mt.,showing the relationship of Cave Vodna Peš to Crna Reka andSušica River valleys.194Figure 5.61Simplified map of Cave Vodna Peš.195Figure 5.62Characteristic features of Cave Vodna Peš.196Figure 5.63Geological map of the area between Temna Peštera – Mrežičkoand Pešterski Kamen caves, on the NW foothill of Kožuf Mt.198
Figure 5.64Geological setting of Temna Peštera in the valley of MrežičkaReka.199Figure 5.65Simplified map of Cave Temna Peštera – Mrežičko.200Figure 5.66Figure 5.67Characteristic features of Temna Peštera – Mrežičko.Geological cross-section showing Pešterski Kamen Cave and its201relationship with Kozarnik and Blašnica valleys, as well asMariovo and Vitačevo Formations around Rožden.204Figure 5.68Simplified map of Cave Pešterski Kamen with distribution ofparagenetic morphologies in sub-horizontal paragenetic phreaticpassages and direction of later vadose passage development withexcavation of sediments and deposition of speleothems.205Figure 5.69Figure 5.70Characteristic features of Cave Pešterski Kamen.Schematic representation of the interpreted evolution of Cave207Figure 5.71Pešterski Kamen.Schematic reconstruction of Neogene-Quaternary evolution and209Figure 5.72events along Crna Reka Valley (Mariovo and Tikveš Basins).Plot showing elevations of caves (located in or close to river212valleys) against long profiles of Crna Reka Valley and its majortributaries.213Figure 5.73Location of caves along Kamenica Valley and correlation offormer Kamenica base level to caves (Temna Peštera –Dragožel, Budimirica Cave) and paragenetic passages (AramiskaPeštera, Garnikovska Propast).215Figure 5.74Simplified cross-section showing cave relationships to Pliocene–Early Pleistocene deposits and Quaternary valleys.218Figure 5.75Timeline of events (incision and deposition) in Crna RekaValley (Tikveš Basin), and supposed timing of Čulejca Caveevolution connected to base level changes. Miocene incision connected to the Messinian Salinity Crisis (MSC) or tectonicuplift.219
Figure 5.76Early Pliocene paleogeography of the Mediterranean and EasternParatethys with the proposed marine gateway between theAegean Sea and Dacic Basin and location of lower part of CrnaReka river basin.220Figure 5.77Map of epigenic caves by source of clastic cave sediments.223Chapter 6:Figure 6.1Characteristics of karst surfaceThe allogenic through valleys of Crna Reka, Kamenica andBlašnica River.228Figure 6.2Figure 6.3Distribution of slopes in karst terrains.Stacked distribution of areas with slopes smaller or bigger than229Figure 6.420° in elevation classes of 100 m.Distribution of surface area of slope classes by different karst231rocks.232Figure 6.5Karst surface on low slope terrains.233Chapter 7:MapGeneral conclusionsKarst in the lower part of Crna Reka river basin245List of tablesChapter 2:	General overview of the research areaTable 2.1	Chemical analysis of marbles from Pletvar, 20 km NNW from9Crna Reka.Table 2.2	Surface area of karst rocks outcrops in the research area.	22Chapter 4:	Hypogenic cave developmentTable 4.1	Results of measurements of stable isotopic compositions of fluid inclusion water from two replicates of the calcite crust from	59Provalata Cave.Table 4.2	Summary of 40Ar/39Ar results from Provalata Cave	59Table 4.3	Stable isotope properties of marble, calcite crust (δ18O, δ13C),60gypsum and vitrinite (δ34S) from Provalata Cave and nearby
coals.Table 4.4	Some basic physical and chemical parameters of the Melnica62thermal spring.Table 4.5	Mineral composition of clay and sand from Karši Podot Cave.	80Table 4.6	Some physical and chemical parameters of thermal waters in the831st spring (Karši Podot Cave).Table 4.7	Geochemical characteristic of Topli Dol thermal waters.	95Table 4.8	Geochemical characteristics of the thermomineral waters near96Kožuf volcanic complex.Table 4.9	Some physico-chemical parameters of Toplek springs.	98
Chapter 5:	Epigenic cave developmentTable 5.1	Mineralogical composition of clay sediments in AramiskaPešteraTable 5.2	Field measurements of pH, Electronic conductivity andtemperature of stream and drip water in Aramiska Peštera.Table 5.3	Mineral composition of clay and silt in Temna Peštera –Dragožel.Table 5.4	Mean paleomagnetic values and standard deviations, Budimirica
116118142152

Table 5.8	Mineralogical composition of clay and paleokarst deposits inČulejca Cave.Table 5.9	Correlation of speleogenetic phases with geomorphologic andgeologic events in Tikveš Basin.
165171
Table 5.10	Some physical and chemical parameters of Gugjakovski Izvori.	175Table 5.11	Clastic cave sediments found in epigenic caves and their source.	221 Table 5.12	Epigenic cave types, their position within the karst system and
type of recharge.
224

Chapter 1: Introduction1.1. FOREWORDKarst terrains in Republic of Macedonia, considering the area of karst rock outcrops, represent 12 % of its total area (Temovski, 2012). Their distribution is in more or less isolated, generally smaller areas (karst oasis by Manakovik, 1980), with largest areas and most of the karst terrains located in the western and central part of Republic of Macedonia. Consequently these areas were the main interest for karstological research in Republic of Macedonia (Kolčakovski, 1989, 2005; Temovski, 2008).Figure 1.1 Geographical situation of Republic of Macedonia with karst rock outcrops (grey shade), Crna Reka river basin (red shade) and location of research area (red line).
The  research area is  located  in the  southern  part of  Republic  of Macedonia and  is generally a harsh and hardly accessible, largely unpopulated (or depopulated) area, with karst terrains dispersed in several separated areas. The main characteristic of the area are the hilly and mountainous terrains cut by the deep valley of Crna Reka. It is one of the  least  studied  karst  areas  in  Macedonia,  with  only few  published  papers regarding karst and caves, and also some speleological exploration done by cavers. It is  an  area  of  highly complex  geological and  geomorphological  evolution,  yielding rocks from Precambrian to present age.This    thesis    mostly   represents    a    regional    karstological    work,    giving    first comprehensive information on the extension, development and evolution of the karst terrains in the lower part of Crna Reka river basin. Considering the size of the area, and the general lack of previous research, it represents a rather enthusiastic attempt.The results presented in this thesis are therefore a contribution to the general knowledge  of  karst  development  and  evolution  in  this  area,  and  in  Republic  of Macedonia, although some of the results carry a  much  wider  regional  and  general scientific significance.1.2. GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND APPROACH     The  general  aim  or  goal  of  this  thesis  is  to  understand  and  give  a  general overview  of  the  spatial  and  temporal  evolution  of  karst  in  the  lower  part of Crna Reka river basin.     From this general aim we can extract several main objectives, with regards to the caracteristics of the research area:A. To determine the influence of the volcanism in the Kožuf area to the evolution ofthe karst.B. To  determine  the  influence  of  the  Cenozoic  sediments  to  the  evolution  of  the karst.C. To determine the influence of the incision of Crna River valley to the  general evolution of the karst in the area.
     Because of the lack of information from karst surface morphology, this work is based on the thesis, that it is possible to explain the evolution of the karst through the information that we get from the caves in the area. Therefor a speleogenetic approach is used to understand the karst evolution in the research area.This approach includes undertaking several tasks:- Systematic surface search.To make a systematic search for new caves, besides the already known caves.- Detailed mapping of the caves.To map new caves and make new detailed maps of the known caves from which pattern and passage analyses can be made.- Morphological analyses.To analyze the patterns, passage types, and the micro forms imprinted on the walls of passages and cave rooms.- Sedimentary analyses.To describe and analyze composition of cave deposits and correlate them with surface (and other) possible source of deposits.- Comparison and correlation.To compare and correlate the caves with the local or regional relief evolution.

Chapter 2:General overview of the research area2.1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATIONThe researched area is located in the southern part of Republic of Macedonia, in the lower part of Crna Reka drainage basin.Crna Reka is the second longest tributary to Vardar river (the biggest river and main drainage system in Macedonia) flowing with W-E direction in the southern part of Republic of Macedonia. Karst areas within its basin are located in the upper part in Demir Hisar area, and in the lower part in Mariovo and Tikveš Basins, and also in the basin of its major tributary Raec River (Fig.1.1).The lower part of the basin addressed in this research, is mostly hilly to mountainous area   dissected   by   the   deep   river   valleys   of   Crna   Reka   and   its   tributaries. Morphologically comprises parts of two tectonic basins: Mariovo Basin to the south, and Tikveš Basin to the north and north-east, separated by Kozjak  Mountain. The north-eastern boundary of the researched area is on Vitačevo Plateau, a sedimentary volcanoclastic plateau; the north-western boundary is the Dren  Mountain Massif (Suva Planina, Radobilska Planina and Orle); south-eastern  boundary is  on  Kožuf Mountain and south-western boundary is Satoka River. Central part of the area is the deep valley of Crna Reka, with also deeply incised  valleys  of  tributaries  Buturica, Blašnica and Kamenica rivers (Fig.2.1).The  area  is  situated  on  the  boundary  between  the  Pelagonian  Massif  and  Vardar Zone, two  major  geotectonic  units  in  Macedonia,  and  also  comprises  parts of two geographical and historical regions: Mariovo and Tikveš. It is mostly a remote area with small and  mostly  depopulated  villages  with  lack  of   infrastructure,   with rudimentary agriculture and mining as the main economy.Karst here is found as several separated karst areas, which is a general characteristic of karst terrains in Republic of Macedonia (oasis karst type by Manakovik, 1980).
It is developed on Precambrian and Cambrian marbles, Triassic marbly limestones (or marbles) and dolomites, Cretaceous limestones and Pleistocene travertine rocks, without well expressed karst surface, but with well expressed karst underground.Figure 2.1 Geographical situation of the research area. Karst rock outcrops are given in red shade.2.2. PREVIOUS RESEARCHPrevious  research  of  karst  in  this  area  has  been  very  scarce,  mostly  due  to  the generally harsh, hardly accessible and depopulated terrains.
Geological studies  of  the  area  included  study  of  the  carbonate  rocks  in  the  area, determining their spatial distribution, stratigraphy, age, structural characteristics and relations to the other rocks.  Although  geological  research  in  the  area  has  been conducted since the beginning of the 20th century, the first comprehensive work is as part of the creation of the basic geological map of former Yugoslavia in scale 1:100 000, presented on sheets Vitolište, Kožuf, Prilep and Kavadarci (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976; Hristov et al., 1965; Rakičević et al., 1965; Rakićević & Pendžerkovski, 1970). The area is also included in the comprehensive work from Arsovski (1997) that gives an overall view to the tectonics and stratigraphy of Macedonia.There  are  only  few  works  dealing  with  the  karst in the area. Manakovik  (1971) publishes the first information about the caves in Kamenica River. He studied three caves:  cave  Aramiska  Peštera,  Buturica  Cave  and  Crkviče  Cave,  explaining their evolution with the successive draining of Central Macedonian Lake and incision of Kamenica River in the limestone rocks, with Aramiska Peštera  considered as the oldest, located in he upstream part with highest elevation of the three, with Buturica and Crkviče considered as younger, at lower elevations downstream along the valley of Kamenica River.Small notes on the karst in Mariovo are given by Manakovik & Andonovski (1984) as part of the geomorphology of Mariovo. They only address the extension of carbonate rocks,  and  describe  some  karst  surface  features  such  as  karren  and  dry valleys.Kolčakovski et al. (2004) published first results about cave Provalata (named Gulabinka in the paper), giving morphometric information and noting the presence of gypsum deposits. Although contributing the presence of gypsum to dissolution of the marble by hydrothermal  waters  enriched  with  H2S,  they  conclude  that  the  cave  is fossil ponor cave.Speleological  work  in  this  area  was  also  done  by  cavers,  locating  and  mapping generally caves which were previously known to the local population. In the western part (Mariovo area), during the last 10 years, caving clubs SK Zlatovrv from Prilep and  Ursus  Speleos  from  Skopje  have  explored  Pešti  Cave  and  caves Melnička Peštera 1 & 2, while SD Peoni from Skopje has explored Provalata Cave and cave Živovska Propast (Propast Provala). In the eastern part, cavers from PSD Orle from
Kavadarci  have  documented  a  number  of  caves,  mostly  in  the  1960s  and  1970s, describing location, general size  and  also  mapping  most  of  them.  SD  Peoni from Skopje also located and explored Čulejca Cave, and French cavers  (ASBTP from Nice) in collaboration with PSD Orle and SD Peoni worked also in Gališka Peštera and Čulejca Cave.2.3. GEOLOGICAL SETTINGThe research area belongs to two major pre-Cenozoic tectonic structures: Pelagonian Massif and Vardar zone, overlaid by Cenozoic tectonic structures and sediments. It is composed of rocks from various ages from Precambrian to recent.Pre-Cenozoic stratigraphyPelagonian  Massif  consists  of  Precambrian  gneiss  and  schist  rocks,  covered  by  a thick section of dolomitic and calcitic marble in the upper part, and with abundant granitic plutons (Arsovski, 1997; Dumurdžanov et al., 2005). Dolomitic marbles are mostly developed  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  Precambrian  marble  series,  and  grade upwards  to  calcitic   marble.   They  are   found   along  the   eastern   border   of the Pelagonian Massif, in a NNW-SSE stripe, with dolomitic marble more widespread in the southern parts (south from Crna Reka), and calcitic marble in the northern parts (north of Crna  Reka).  They  are  mostly  white  to  gray,  small  grained to massive, highly fractured, and mostly pure  carbonate  rocks  (Tab.2.1)  with  less  than  1% silicate component (Stojanov, 1974; Dumurdžanov et al, 1976)Dolomitic marbles overlay gneiss rocks and dip to the ENE by 25 to 50°, as part of the  NNW-SSE  oriented  Veprčani  Monocline.  Precambrian  gneiss  and  micaschist rocks, with granitoid plutons are also found in the Vardar Zone, as part of the Kozjak horst.Paleozoic  metamorphic  rocks  determined  as  Cambrian  are  developed  in  both  the exterior and interior part of the Vardar Zone. The thickness of the complex it’s not well determined because in most of the area, they are overlaid by Cenozoic deposits, but presumed to  be  around  1500  m.  The  Paleozoic  complex  is  presented with different facies (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976): marbles; marbles and cipolin marbles;
quartzite-sericite schists and quartzites; amphibolites and amphibole schists; phyllite- micaschists,  greenschists  and  carbonaceous  schists.  A  significantly  thick  mass  of marbles lay along the eastern edge of the Pelagonian massif. At Pantelejmon (1344m) in the southern parts, the Cambrian complex starts with schist in the lower parts, and through carbonaceous schists and cipolin marbles pass to medium bedded marbles. North of Melnica, the schists are found only as lenses within the Cambrian marbles which lay directly on top of the Precambrian marbles.Table 2.1         Chemical  analysis  of marbles  from  Pletvar,  20  km  NNW from  Crna Reka (Stojanov, 1974).Dolomitic marble (%)Calcitic marble (%)CaO32.5054.35MgO19.631.02SiO20.270.50FeO0.10/Fe2O30.140.21Al2O30.33/CO249.9643.80CaCO358.0497.06MgCO341.052.13Triassic rocks are presented in form of a tectonic block with N-S  direction, composed  of terrigenous  and carbonate  sediments.  They start  with middle  Triassic slate and sandstone deposits as the basal unit (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976; Robertson et  al.,   2012),   above   which   are   deposited   grey   shallow-water   Upper Triassic carbonates presented with limestones and dolomites, significantly metamorphosed, mostly platy and thick bedded, rarely massive (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976; Robertson et  al.,  2012).  The  upper  part  of  the  carbonate  platform  includes a thin interval of recrystallized chert, shale and thin  bedded  limestone  which  pass  transitionally upwards into further thick-bedded, recrystallized limestone of possible Jurassic age (Robertson et al., 2012). They are locally highly deformed by isoclinal folding.Jurassic   ophiolitic   rocks   are   found   as   elongated   lenses   along   many   tectonic structures, diapirically  emplaced.  They  are  localized  in  four  main  tectonic  zones,
along vertical or thrust faults (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976). The first is along many faults in the Upper Cretaceous rock delineating the west border of Kozjak block; the second is connected to the Galište - Arničko graben along NNW-SSE oriented faults; the third is along the faults forming the west border of Pološko-Ržanovo graben; and the fourth starts from Crna Reka trough Kumaničevo village and to the SSE below the  tertiary-quaternary  deposits.  Lithologically  they  are  composed  of  serpentinites and peridotites, gabbro and diabase.Upper Cretaceous sediments are presented with thick section of Turonian and Senonian sediments (Rakićević & Pendžerkovski, 1970; Dumurdžanov et al., 1976). Turonian sediments have thickness of around 2000 m and are localized in two zones. The first is on the western edge of the Vardar zone, as a part of the Dren-Vitolište graben. The  sediments  are  overthrusted  onto  Senonian  sediments  to  the  west  and have a fault connection with the Kozjak horst to the east. The second zone is in the inner  part  of  the  Vardar  zone  as  part  of  the  Pološko-Ržanovo  graben.  They  are covered  with  pyroclastic  sediments  to the  south,  and  have  fault  guided connection with the Triassic rocks. Three facies can be separated (Rakićević & Pendžerkovski, 1970; Dumurdžanov et al., 1976): conglomerates and sandstones; sandstones, shales and conglomerates; limestones. The limestones are found in the upper layers of the Turonian sediments, and as layers and lenses inside the clastic sediments. They are massive, platy and thick bedded, micritic, gray to gray-white in color with sandy to marly alternations at places, containing numerous  fossil  fragments  (Rakićević  & Pendžerkovski, 1970; Dumurdžanov et al., 1976).In    the    Senonian    sediments    several    facies    are    determined    (Rakićević    & Pendžerkovski, 1970; Dumurdžanov et  al.,  1976):  limestones;  flysch:  sandstones, siltstones, shales and  limestones;  sandstones,  shales  and   conglomerates;   and conglomerates  and  sandstones.  Senonian  limestones  are  found as the topmost formation of the Senonian sediments in the Dren-Vitolište graben and as part of the flysch deposits in the Galište-Arničko graben. They are platy to thick bedded, grey to white, rarely pinky and locally sandy or marly.
Figure 2.2 Geological map of the research area, compiled from data after Dumurdžanov et al. 1976; Hristov et al. 1965; Rakićević et al. 1965; Rakićević and Pendžerkovski 1970; Geološki Zavod - Skopje, unpublished).
Main tectonic structures in the Pre-Cenozoic rocksPre-Cenozoic  rocks  within  the  Vardar  zone  were  strongly  deformed  in  the  latest Cretaceous to Paleocene time (Laramide phase), in number of folds and faults with NNW direction (Arsovski, 1997; Dumurdžanov et al., 2005).Figure 2.3 Simplified structural map  with  main  tectonic  structures.  1-  Klen reverse fault,  2-Vrspsko  reverse  fault,  3-  Kozarnički  fault,  4-Dračevički  fault,  5  - Smrdeliški fault, 6- Čatenaški fault. Note the difference in symbols between map and cross-section, with cross-section represented in original as given by Dumurdžanov et al. 1976.
In Vardar zone we can separate two structural segments: Kozjak-Drenovo and Veles- Klepa-Tikveško Ezero segments (Fig.2.3).  Most  of  the  area  is  part  of  the  Kozjak- Drenovo segment, a system of horsts and grabens built from different complexes and formations divided by faults (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976; Arsovski, 1997):Kozjak  horst  extends  in  sub  meridian  direction  over  30  km,  starting  from Raec Valley to the north, trough Dren and Kozjak to south, 4-6 km wide. It is settled between Dren-Vitolište graben to the west and  Galište-Arničko graben to the east, divided by regional faults (Vrpsko reverse fault to the west and Kozarnički fault to the east), along which small lenses or bigger masses of tectonized serpentinites are found. It is composed of rocks from the gneiss and  micaschists  series,  and  granitoides  of  the  Precambrian complex, and represents a cutoff part from the Pelagonian massif.Dren-Vitolište graben, located to the west of the Kozjak horst, has system of longitudinal reversed faults (Vrpsko reverse fault) as part of the west border fault system of the Vardar Zone. In the middle of the graben the  Turonian formation prevails, intensively dislocated, with lenses of   serpentinites inserted along the faults. This middle part of the graben is overthursted on the west side over the Senonian flysch (Klen reverse fault), which overlays the Precambrian and Paleozoic complex of the Pelagonian massif.Galište-Arničko  graben  lies  to  the  east  of  the  Kozjak  horst,  as  a  narrow graben, 2 km wide in the north part, and 1 km wide in the south. This graben is composed of Senonian flysch sediments, intensively folded into  isocline folds.  From   the   both   sides   the   graben   is   isolated   by   regional faults (Kozarnički and Dračevički faults) alongside which lay elongated  lenses  of serpentinites.Rožden horst lies to the east of the former graben. It is built from the Triassic sediments, intensively folded, mainly into isocline folds. In the north part the folds  lean  to  the  east,  and  the  whole  structure  is  overthursted  trough  the cretaceous sediments to the east, along the Smrdeliški fault. The south part of the horst is divided into two parts by the Pološko-Ržanovo graben.
Pološko-Ržanovo   graben   has   N-S   direction   and   is   built   of   Turonian sediments, which form significantly big anticline (Crna Reka anticline) with axis parallel to the direction  of  Crna  Reka.  To  the  south,  this  anticline  is deformed by the Čatenaški fault.Veles-Klepa-Tikveško Ezero segment (Rakićević & Pendžerkovski, 1970; Dumurdžanov et al., 1976; Arsovski, 1997) here is presented with couple of folded structures in the Turonian sediments along the north part of the Tikveš Lake, in the western part of Vitačevo plateau. Main folds are the Kamenica Anticline and Dragozel Syncline, with NW oriented axis, cut by the NW-SE Dragozel fault, and several second order folds having NE oriented axis.Cenozoic stratigraphy and tectonicsCenozoic evolution is connected with two phases of basin development in late Eocene  to  recent  time  and  reflects  two  major  periods  of  extensional  deformation separated by a short period of shortening (Dumurdžanov et al., 2004, 2005).During  the  first  period  of  extension  in  late  Eocene,  Tikveš-Ovčepole  basin  was formed as a forearc basin lying to  the  west  of  the  regional  magmatic  arc.  Five litozones   are   separated   within   the   Paleogene   sediments,   of    which    basal conglomerates with fragments originating from Turonian sediments are found in the vicinity   of    Dragožel,    Garnikovo    and    Kumaničevo    villages    (Rakićević   & Pendžerkovski, 1970; Petrov et al., 2010).In the late Oligocene-Early Miocene, the strata in Tikveš basin were deformed as a result of two short periods of shortening (Pyrenian and Savian phases). These short periods of deformation were followed by a period of erosion that reduced the landscape to low relief and separated the first and second major periods of extension (Dumurdžanov et al., 2004, 2005; Petrov et al., 2010).The second period of extension started in late early Miocene and became the dominant mode of deformation within Macedonia to the present. Basin formation in Macedonia during the second period is described in five cycles by Dumurdžanov et al. (2004,  2005).  Tikveš and Mariovo Neogene grabens, which are located in  the researched area, were formed during the second cycle (late Miocene: late Sarmatian - Meotian), partially controlled by N-S and NE-SW trending faults.
Mariovo Basin is located in the western part of the research area, and is filled with lacustrine and  pyroclastic  sediments  deposited  from  Upper Miocene  to  Pleistocene (Dumurdžanov et al., 2004):- Nerezi  Formation  (Upper  Miocene)  -  gravel  and  sandstone;  siltstone  and silty claystone that grades upward into claystone and coal; and siltstone and sandstone followed by a hiatus.- Solnje   Formation   (Pliocene)   -   poorly   stratified   gravel   and   sandstone, overlain by:- Vitačevo  Formation  (Pliocene)  –  stratified  tuff  overlaid  by  sandstone  and gravel  interbedded  with  beds  of  diatomite,  tuff,   and   sandy   claystone; travertine deposits, tuff-agglomerate and sandstone.- Mariovo  Formation  (Pleistocene)  -  pyroclastic  rocks  with  nine  travertine layers and a 20-m-thick travertine deposit on top.Tikves Basin is bounded on its western side by normal faults of N-S and  NW-SE strike, while two NE-striking parallel faults bound its northwestern and southeastern sides. Three formations are recognized in the central and southern part of the basin (Dumurdžanov et al., 2004):- Nerezi Formation (Upper Miocene) – lies unconformably on Eocene rocks, starting with (the basal unit) basal conglomerate with gravel, sandstone, and brown claystone overlain by sandstone and mottled claystone;  interbedded grey claystone, coal-bearing claystone  and  coal  beds  overlain  by  marl  and marl-rich  (the  middle   unit);   interbedded   sandstone,   siltstone,   and   silty claystone (upper unit).- Vitačevo Formation (Pliocene) – sandstone overlain by tuff and agglomerate with diatomite and tuff at the top; overlain by interbedded yellow sandstone, tuff, and agglomerate, locally containing travertine; with tuff agglomerate and tuff as the topmost part.- Mariovo Formation (Pleistocene) - strata deposited in a lacustrine environment that was terminated during Pleistocene time by deposition thick beds of breccia conglomerate with volcanic material, above which lies agglomerate, tuff, volcanic breccias, and locally travertine.
Remnants of Pliocene deposits (Solnje Formation) as well as Pleistocene travertines (Mariovo Formation) are also found along the valley of Crna Reka, indicating possible connection of the Mariovo Lake with the Central Macedonian Lake (Dumurdžanov et al., 2003; Dumurdžanov et al., 2004).Dumurdžanov et al. (2004,  2005)  interpret  the  evolution  of  the  Neogene  basins  in Macedonia in 5 cycles, with Mariovo and  Tikveš  basins  forming  in  cycle  II  (late Miocene: late Sarmatian-Meotian), with total hiatus at the end of cycle III (Pontian). In Pliocene – cycle IV (Solnje formation and Vitačevo Formation in  Mariovo; Vitačevo Formation  in  Tikveš)  a  transgression  occurs,  accompanied  with  volcanic activity  in  Kožuf  and  Kozjak  Mts.,  which  continued  through  Early Pleistocene (Mariovo formation). With the draining of the lake system in  central Macedonia (which started probably as late as Middle Pleistocene; Dumurdžanov et al., 2005) as a result of general uplift in Macedonia and subsidence in the Aegean Sea, Mariovo Lake also drained, thus Crna Reka established its fluvial basin.New information regarding the Pliocene deposits invokes different interpretation to the evolution of the basins along the Vardar valley during the end of Miocene and in Pliocene time.  A  Gilbert-type  fan  delta,  the  postponed  signature  of  the  Messinian Salinity Crisis (MSC), has been documented in the Pliocene sediments southward of Skopje at Dračevo (Clauzon et al., 2008). It follows a previous phase of incision of deep valleys due to the lowering of base level as a result of almost  complete desiccation  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  Such  results  demonstrate  that  the MSC impacted the region of Skopje as it did for the northern Aegean region (Thessaloniki) and Western Dacic Basin (Turnu Severin). Hence, a marine gateway is considered to have connected the Aegean Sea and the Dacic Basin (Eastern Paratethys) through the Balkans  Chain,  replacing   the   generally   suggested   corridor   in   the   present-day Bosphorus Strait area (Fig.5.76).Considering the location of the Tikveš Basin along the Vardar Zone between Skopje and Thessaloniki, MSC event must have impacted this area as well, with the hiatus at the end of Nerezi Formation  (Upper  Miocene)  to  be  considered  as  a  result  of  this event. The Pliocene deposits along the Crna Reka Valley also indicate valley incision prior   to   the   Pliocene   deposition,   which   might   be   connected   to   the   MSC. Consideration of the possible  MSC  impact  on the evolution of  the area is  of great
importance, since such event would have had significant effect on the general relief formation, and also on karst development.2.4. GENERAL GEOMORPHOLOGYThe  base  of  the  relief  in  the  area  is  constituted  by  structural  forms:  horsts  and grabens formed as part of the South-Balkan extensional system. The horst structures are Kozjak and Dren Mountains, and the  grabens  are  Mariovo  and  Tikveš basins. Overprinted onto these macro-relief forms, as a result of fluvial-denudation, coastal, and karst erosion processes, are meso and micro-relief forms, different in shape and size.Dren Mountain massive (Kjave, 1557 m) has a W-E direction and is composed of three morphological units.  This  is  due to the  lithology and  older  tectonic  structure influencing the relief. To the west is the Suva Planina mountain with NW direction, built of Precambrian, Cambrian and Cretaceous rocks. In the middle is the main ridge of Dren Mountain, composed of Precambrian gneiss and Cretaceous sediments, and to the east lies Orle Mountain, containing Triassic and Cretaceous rocks.Kozjak Mountain (Baldova Čuka, 1822 m) continues to the south of Dren Mountain and has an N-S general direction. It is composed of Precambrian to Cretaceous rocks. To the  west  it  is  highly  eroded  as  part  of  the  small  Vitolište  basin  and  Buturica valley,  and  borders  the  Mariovo  basin.  To  the  east  it  is  separated  from  Vitačevo plateau by the valley of Blašnica.Neogene lakes of Tikveš and Mariovo basin have left traces of lacustrine terraces. In Mariovo  Manakovik  &  Andonovski  (1984)  determined  two  lacustrine  terraces,  at 1100-1150 m and at 1000-1050 m.   Traces of the terrace at 1100-1150 m are found on the slopes of Pantelejmon, west side of Kozjak and on the ridge of Cucul (1229 m), Šipka (1182 m) and Gola Skrka (1187 m). The second terrace at 1000-1060 m is more pronounced in the area, and traces are found around  Pantelejmon, Polčiško Pole, on the west side of Kozjak where it  is  more  pronounced,  also  around  Cucul (1229 m), Šipka (1182 m) and Gola Skrka (1187 m). The best preserved remnants are on Polčiško Pole. This terrace is considered as the central lake plain during Upper Pliocene by Manakovik & Andonovski (1984). In Tikveš, Manakovik (1971) found
four lacustrine terraces, at 900 m, at 740-800 m (due to the pyroclastic sediments), at 660-700 m and at 600-620 m representing the former central lake plain. The biggest remnant   of   the   lacustrine   environment   are   the   thick   sediments,   sands,   clays, conglomerates, that are filling the Mariovo and Tikveš basins, which in Mariovo end with 20 m thick travertine  deposit.  They are  deeply incised  by valleys, and in the higher areas completely eroded.The interpretations of the evolution of the Tikveš and Mariovo basins (Manakovik, 1968; Manakovik & Andonovski, 1984) should be revised, due to the new data on the sedimentation  of  the  basins  and  age  of  sediments  (Dumurdžanov  et  al,  2004, 2005).  Also  data  (from  south  of  Skopje)  suggesting  marine  environment  in upper Miocene, possible influence  of  the  Messinian  Salinity  Crisis  and  Pliocene marine transgression connecting the Aegean sea with the Dacic basin (Clauzon et al. 2008), which contradicts to the previous explanation of continuous lacustrine environment in the basins in Macedonia, events that surely influenced the valley of Crna Reka and Tikveš and Mariovo basins.Fluvial relief covers most of the area, presented with the drainage of Crna Reka. The main form is the valley of Crna Reka that has gorge characteristics. It cuts through the area in W-E direction with a deeper valley segment separating Dren and Kozjak mountains. The upper parts of this gorge (on Dren and Kozjak Mountains) are wider and are remnants of  old valley of Crna Reka, while at several locations along the valley in the lower parts Pliocene deposits are found, indicating Miocene age of the paleo Crna Reka Valley (Manakovik & Andonovski,  1984).  From  the  confluence with Blašnica, Crna Reka continues to the N, and also has gorge-like characteristics until Vozarci village where Crna Reka has formed a wider alluvial plain, continuing to the confluence with Vardar River.Her tributaries have smaller drainage basins and smaller discharge than Crna Reka, so most of them did not managed to adjust its long-profile to the base level of Crna Reka.  In  the  valley  of  Crna  Reka  Manakovik  &  Andonovski  (1984)  determined fluvial terraces at different relative elevations (380-400 m, 310-340 m, 230-240 m, 200-210 m, 130-140 m, 115-120 m, 65-70 m, 40-55 m, 15-20 m and 5 m).
2.5. CLIMATEAs a  result  of  the morphological configuration  the  area  is  characterized  with  local climate, with modified Mediterranean influence coming from downstream valley of Crna Reka (from the Aegean Sea, through the valley of Vardar River), and temperate continental influence coming from upstream valley of Crna Reka (from Pelagonian Basin).  Of   the  climate  parameters  only  temperature  and  precipitation  will  be presented.According  to  the  thermal  regime  (and  the  climate  in  general)  the  area  has  three different  parts  (Stankoski,  1984):  the  narrow  belt  along  the  valley  of  Crna Reka, starting from Tikveš and up to around 600 m elevation (Manastir  Village), has modified Mediterranean thermal  regime  with  mean  annual  temperature of 12.4 °C and maximal rainfall in May (68.1 mm); the areas of the valley of Crna Reka above 600 m up to 900 m, with the hilly terrains in Mariovo and Tikveš have almost same thermal regime as in the Pelagonian Basin, with mean annual temperature 11.3 °C. Summers are warm, and winters cold with more rainfall in autumn, giving temperate continental characteristics to the thermal regime; mountain areas of Kožuf, Kozjak and Dren mountains have mountain climate with mean annual temperatures from 6°C at the summits and ridges to 8-10 °C on the slopes. Absolute temperatures in the area are maximum of 40.1 °C in July and minimum of -19.8 °C in December.Annual distribution of precipitation  in  the  area  is  very  irregular  as  a  result  of  the complexity of the relief, winds, and the position regarding the Aegean Sea. The area has modified Mediterranean pluvimetric regime with maximum in spring (May) and second  maximum  in  autumn  (November)  and  minimum  in  August  and  July. The precipitation is mainly influenced by the relief, resulting in precipitation of up to 500 mm in the valley of Crna Reka, to 600-700 mm on the hilly terrains of Mariovo and Tikveš, and 800-1000 mm on the mountain areas. Most of the precipitation comes in spring (32 %),  autumn  has  28  %,  winter  22  %  and  summer  18  %.  Average precipitation is 570 mm with maximum in May (102.9 mm) and minimum in August (30.5 mm). Of the overall annual precipitation, snow takes from 9 % in the valley of Crna Reka up to 30-40  %  above  1500  m.  In  average snow starts in the middle of December (14.XII) and lasts until middle of March (10.III) Special characteristic of the pluviometric regime in the area are the continuous no-rain days – draughts. They
are most common in summer, when continuous no-rain days reach up to 58 days in some years, and every year there is period of almost one month with drought (Stankoski, 1984).If we summarize, the area has three climate zones: modified Mediterranean climate along the valley of Crna Reka (in narrow belt along the valley downstream to Tikveš) with maximum precipitation in spring (May) and autumn (November), and minimum in summer; temperate continental climate occupying the hilly and plateau parts of the area, with maximum precipitation in November and secondary in May, and minimum in July and August; mountain climate in the area of Kozjak, Dren and Kožuf mountains.Overall the area has average annual precipitation of 570 mm, most of it precipitated in spring and autumn, except the mountain parts that have higher precipitation up to 1000 mm and more even annual distribution. The average annual temperatures range from 6-10 °C in the mountains to 12.4 °C in the lower parts in valley of Crna Reka, with maximum of 40.1 °C and minimum of -19.8 °C (Stankoski, 1984).2.6. HYDROGRAPHYThe area occupies the lower part of the drainage basin of Crna Reka, starting from the confluence of  its  right  tributary  Satoka  River,  to  the  confluence  of  its  biggest tributary, Raec River. In this area Crna Reka has number of tributaries of which the right tributaries are characteristically bigger and with bigger discharge, draining the mountainous areas of Nidže, Kozjak and Kožuf mountains. Main  tributaries in the area are: Buturica, Blašnica and Kamenica to the right, and Gališka and Drenovica to the left.Crna Reka is the second longest tributary to Vardar River, the biggest river and main drainage system in Macedonia. It starts in Demir Hisar area, to the west  of Pelagonian  Basin,  with  the  Železnec  springs  considered  as  the  source.  From  the source to the confluence with Vardar River it has a length of 207 km, with vertical difference of 631 m between the source and the confluence elevation, and average slope of the longitudinal profile of 3 ‰, which in Mariovo is higher at 5.9 ‰, and at some sections even 11 ‰. Average annual discharge, measured at the measurement
station in Skočivir  at  the  entrance  to  Mariovo  area  (prior  to  the  research  area,  so withouth the water coming from the later described tributaries), is 19.3 m3/s, with the highest  discharge  in  March  (71  m3),  and  lowest  in  September  with  0.10  m3 (Gaševski, 1984).Buturica River, in the upper part called Vitoliška Reka, emerges on  Kozjak Mountain at 1600 m in the area called Vlaški Kolibi. It has a number of smaller right tributaries  which  come  from  east  from  a  more  forested  part  of  its  basin.  Before Vitolište Village, Buturica flows in NE direction where receives a right  tributary coming from  the  area  of  Živovo  Village.  After  this  confluence,  Buturica has  W direction  down  to  Melnica,  where  it  receives  its  biggest  tributary Polčiška Reka. Downstream from here, Buturica takes NW direction and before the confluence toCrna Reka turns to N direction. Buturica River is 20 km long and has basin of 102 km2. Its valley is mostly gorge like (Gaševski, 1984).Blašnica River is the biggest tributary to Crna Reka in the research area. Begins on Kozjak at 1700 m close to the river head of Buturica and confluences to Crna Reka near Tumba (384 m), having length of 28 km, drainage area of 210 km2 and average drainage elevation of 980 m. It has more developed drainage than the  other tributaries in the area. Bigger tributaries are Krusta, Kozarik, Dabov Dol, Topli Dol, and Mrežička Reka. Blašnica has gorge like valley, with some smaller parts where its profile has smaller gradient, mostly due to the different lithology (Gaševski, 1984).Kamenica River is 14 km long, starting from its head near Bojančište village at about 940 m until its confluence to Tikveš Lake. It has several tributaries, of which Dragoželska Reka is the biggest (Manakovik, 1971).There are two bigger left tributaries of Crna Reka in the area. One is Gališka Reka that emerges at 1110 m below Kjave (1557m) on Dren Mountain, with length of 9 km and SE direction connecting with Crna Reka on the beginning of the  Tikveš Lake. The other is Drenovica, also 9 km long, and emerging below Kjave (1557 m) at 1100 m on the eastern slopes of Dren Mountain, flowing in NE direction to the Tikveš Lake near the dam.
2.7. KARST EXTENSIONIn the before defined general borders of the research area, karst rocks cover 187.67 km2,  which  is  22.36  %  of  the  area  (total  area  of  839.42  km2).  Karst  rocks  are represented   with   carbonate   rocks   with   various   degrees   of   diagenesis   and metamorphosis, with marbles, limestones, dolomites and  travertines,  having  ages from  Precambrian,  Cambrian,  and  Cretaceous  to  Pleistocene   time.   Important characteristic of the Precambrian formation is that most of the marbles are dolomiticmarbles.Table 2.2         Surface area of karst rocks outcrops in the research area.AgeRock typeSurface area(km2)% of karst rocksPrecambrianDolomitic marble8.534.55%PrecambrianCalcitic marble2.081.11%CambrianCalcitic marble6.623.53%TriassicMetamorphosed limestone and dolomite97.9352.18%TuronianLimestone23.9012.74%SenonianLimestone32.4617.30%PleistoceneTravertine/tufa16.158.61%TOTAL187.67100 %The Upper Triassic carbonate formation has the largest extent, with little more than half  of  the  karst  rock  surface  area,  having  both  dolomites  and  limestone,  partly metamorphosed. The  calcitic  Precambrian  marbles  have  the  smallest  surface area, together with the Precambrian dolomitic  marbles  and  Cambrian  calcitic  marbles, although  their  thickness  is  quite  significant,  with  most  of  these  rocks  covered  by younger sediments.Spatially  carbonate  rocks  here  are  generally  located  in  three  NNW-SSE  oriented stripes, with tectonic or sedimentary borders to the west and east, transversely cut in segments separated by river valleys or Neogene-Quaternary deposits.The western stripe is located along the eastern edge of the Pelagonian Massif, composed of Precambrian and Cambrian marbles, separated by a thin clastic section
from the  overlying  thick  Senonian  limestones.  The  western  border  is  sedimentary with  the  underlying  Precambrian  gneiss  formation,  while  the  eastern  border  is represented  by  an  overthrust  fault  along  which   Turonian   clastic  formation  is overthursted onto the Senonian limestones.Figure 2.4       Extension of karst rock outcrops in the research area.The middle stripe is mostly composed of Upper Triassic limestones and dolomites, with tectonic borders to the west and east; with small Senonian limestone stripe to the west,  and  Turonian  limestones  to  the  east.  The  eastern  stripe  is  composed  of Turonian limestones which  continue  from  the  Turonian  limestone  in  the  central stripe, with western border defined by contact with the underlying clastic formation
or by faults,  while  to  the  east  they  are  buried  by  the  Neogene-Quaternary  Tikveš Basin deposits. To the north and south these carbonate rocks are generally buried by Neogene-Quaternary lacustrine, fluvial and pyroclastic deposits.  Travertine  rocks represent   generally   the   topmost   formation    of    Mariovo    Basin    deposits.
Chapter 3: MethodologySince the approach to understanding the evolution of the karst in the research area will be mostly through speleological research, an overview will be given of the main concepts regarding speleogenesis.3.1. CONCEPTS3.1.1. KARST EVOLUTION AND SPELEOGENESISKarst is a terrain formed on especially soluble and fractured (carbonate) rocks resulting in  development  of  special  karst  landforms  (depressions,  caves,  sinkholes etc) and extensive subterranean water drainage (Gams, 1973; Ford &  Williams, 2007). It is an evolving system due to progressive dissolution, with caves being both product  and agent  of this evolution.  Most  of  the  karst  systems  receive  their  inputs from recharge sites at the surface, which also evolve over time as a consequence of dissolution. Karst can also operate only in the subsurface,  without  any  apparent relationship to the surface (Ford & Williams, 2007).Temporal and spatial karst evolution therefore operate as a combined system between the karst surface supplying recharge, and karst underground as an evolving transmitter of karst waters.Karst underground  can  also  operate  as  isolated  system  from  the  surface  recharge. This is characteristic for the hypogenic karst development (Klimchouk, 2007).Continuous downward development of karst, and surface lowering, can completely destroy (dissolve)  previously formed  underground  karst  features.  Clear example  of the effect of continuous development of karst can be seen in the Classical Karst of Slovenia, where surface karst denudation has reached caves formed at more than 100 m  below the  former  surface, exposing relicts as  unroofed caves,  filled  with clastic
sediments and flowstone, often with some preserved cave passages leading to them (Mihevc et al., 1998; Mihevc, 2001, 2007).Fluviokarst   development   combines   both   the   development   of   karst  and   fluvial features. While karst underground is functioning as normal  karst  system,  karst surface can have fluvial  morphology.  Active  fluviokarst  can  form  when  karst development is young and/or hydraulic gradient is  very  low.  In  dry  areas  with seasonal torrential rains a regular dendritic valley patterns can develop having heads in the karst rocks. They are formed  by  channeled  runoff  during  storms,  while between storms epikarst is able to sufficiently drain any surface water. Such terrains can have significant caves developing below. Where high discharge allogenic waters are crossing through karst terrains, a through-valley or gorge can develop, acting as a regional base-level (Gunn, 2004; Ford & Williams, 2007).Temporal evolution of karst can be continuous, or can be interrupted by transgression or   burial   and   later   exposure,   exhibiting   several   phases   of   karst   development (Klimchouck & Ford, 2000).Cave  development  is  connected  to  three  broadly recognized  speleogenetic  settings (Klimchouk, 2007; Ford & Williams, 2007):  1)  syngenetic/eogenetic  (coastal and oceanic), generally in young rocks of high matrix porosity and  permeability, connected   to   mixing   of   waters   of   contrasting   chemistry  at   the halocline; 2) hypogenic, predominantly confined, by water that recharges the cavernous zone from below, independent of recharge from the overlying or immediately adjacent surface; and 3) epigenic (hypergenic),  unconfined,  where  water  is  recharged  from  the overlying surface.This research is based on the concepts of epigenic and hypogenic speleogenesis.3.1.2. EPIGENIC SPELEOGENESISEpigenic caves have been defined as caves formed by waters which solutional capacity is due to carbon dioxide acquired from the atmosphere and/or (most importantly) from the soil (Palmer, 1991; Palmer, 2007; Audra & Palmer, 2013).
Caves formed by epigenic waters received far more attention throughout the history of cave study. Most of the known caves have been considered epigenic by its origin (80-85% according to Palmer, 2007), and therefor epigenic caves have been usually considered as “normal” caves.Epigenic  caves  can  form  in  three  hydrologic  settings:  in  the  vadose  zone  where conduits with free-surface streams develop; phreatic zone with closed conduit flow along gentle gradients; and epiphreatic zone which is flooded during high water and drained during low water, thus containing both types of flow (Palmer, 2007; Ford & Williams, 2007). Their identification is generally based on analysis of typical cave patterns in both horizontal and  vertical  dimension,  passage  morphology,  micro morphology and sediments (Palmer, 2007; Ford & Williams, 2007).Figure 3.1 Concepts of vertical cave development: Left: The Four State Model by Ford & Ewers (1978); Right: Vertical cave patterns by Audra & Palmer (2013).Vertical cave patternsVertical  development  of  cave  passages  is  generally  connected  to  the  geomorphic evolution of the surrounding landscape.  The  Four  State  Model  by  Ford & Ewers (1978) states that the  vertical  cave  patterns  of  cave  passages  depend  on  fissure
frequency. The initial fissure frequency is low, but increases with time and fractures become  wider  due  to  stress  release  as  a  result  of  erosional  unloading  and  cave development.  In  state  1  due  to  low  fissure  frequency  a  bathyphreatic  cave is developed with few phreatic loops that extend deep below the water table. With the increase  of  fissure  frequency  a  multi-loop  phreatic  cave  develops  (state 2) with shallower loops  and  water  table  drops  with  increase  of  permeability. In state 3 a mixture of shorter and shallower loops and water table segments develop. With very high fissure frequency (state 4), there is a  low  resistance and phreatic loops can’t form so cave passages develop almost entirely along the water table.Audra (1994) emphasized the importance of epiphreatic zone for development  of high-amplitude apparent phreatic loops on studies of caves in the Alps, stressing that high-level passages with large vertical loops are not necessarily the oldest. Audra & Palmer (2013) questioned the idea of diminishing of phreatic loops in progressively lower and younger passage levels. Palmer  &  Audra  (2004)  and  Audra  &  Palmer (2013)  thus  proposed  vertical  cave  patterns  development  due  to control by time (juvenile pattern), by the position of the aquifer (perched vs. dammed), by recharge type (regular vs. irregular), and by base-level changes (lowering vs. rising).The juvenile pattern is a time-controlled pattern that prevails where soluble rocks are exposed by uplift and by removal of any impermeable cover. The water table is steep and high above the fluvial base level due to sparse fracturing. Initial phreatic passages are later  entrenched  with  lowering  of  water  table  and  shifting  to  vadose setting. This pattern often corresponds to the initial phase for most vertical passages and is common in young rapidly developing karst (Palmer & Audra, 2004; Audra & Palmer, 2013).Perched caves develop where the aquifer is perched above base level on an underlying aquiclude.  There is  no  significant  phreatic  cave  development,  so  shafts and canyons converge to form conduits at the aquiclude top draining to springs along hill-slopes. Dammed karst is characterized  with  karst  aquifer  extending  below the spring  outlet  which  location  is  determined  by  fluvial  or  structural  base level. The main drain is along the water table with major passages either following the water table  or  have  shallow  phreatic  loops  (Palmer  &  Audra,  2004;  Audra  &  Palmer, 2013).
Looping caves develop in the epiphreatic zone as a result of an irregular recharge. During high  flow  water  rises  in  phreatic  lift  tubes  emerging  at  overflow  springs. During  low  flow  water  follows  lesser  openings  at  lower  elevations.  This creates looping passages in the epiphreatic zone which are enlarged by  aggressive high flows. Amplitude of the loops depends on vertical amplitude of the epiphreatic zone, and with that on the height and velocity of flooding. The irregular recharge can be due to storms or from glacial or snow melt, or as the result of concentrated surface runoff into dolines. Water table caves can develop as a  result of regular  recharge which  can  be due to semi-permeable  cover  that  filters  the  recharge  which  leads to uniform  transfer  and  mainly  water  table  flow;  or  in mature through caves  with passages  large  enough  to  allow  transfer  of  all  stages of flow fed by extensive impermeable catchment (Palmer & Audra, 2004; Audra & Palmer, 2013).Base level changes can have profound effects on vertical cave patterns. Lowering of base-level can  lead  to  reorganization  of  drainage  in  dammed  karst  settings  where patterns depend on base level position. With lowering of water table,  successively lower phreatic passages will develop, and new invasion vadose shafts and canyons will extend the vadose zone to the new water table. Former conduits and springs are abandoned  and  partly  filled  with  floodwater  sediments  and  secondary minerals. Pause in base-level lowering can produce cave levels that  correlate with river terraces (Palmer, 1987). Base-level rises on the other hand cause flooding of conduits resulting  with  per-ascensum  speleogenesis  (PAMS).  Although some of them can become sediments filled, the main flow lines remain active, creating ascending routes which result with  phreatic  lifts,  chimney-shafts  and  vauclusian  springs.  Base  level rise  influencing  PAMS  can  be  due  to  various reasons such as river aggradation, tectonics, glacial dam, sea level rise etc. (Audra et al., 2009a; Palmer & Audra, 2004; Audra & Palmer, 2013).An expressive example  of  the  PAMS  is  seen  in  the  southern  France,  where  deep phreatic cave  systems  are  connected  to  the  Messinian  Salinity  Crisis  (MSC). Fast entrenchment  of  canyons  was  initiated  as  a  result  of  the   desiccation   of   the Mediterranean  Sea  during  the  MSC  (5.96  –  5.32  Ma),  which reflected in vertical development of karst following the abrupt base-level  drop. Pliocene transgression then flooded the karst systems forcing upward cave development, with cave levels correlating  to  successive  positions  of  the  base  level  due  to  sediment  filling  of  the
Messinian canyons, and later fluvial aggradation. Pleistocene re-entrenchment partly or entirely drained some cave systems, while others remain flooded. (Audra et al., 2004; Audra et al., 2009a; Mocochain et al., 2009)Figure 3.2       Per  ascensum  model  of  speleogenesis  connected  to  the  Messinian– Pliocene cycle (Audra et  al.,  2009a):  a  –  Deepening  of  karst  drainage due to Messinian canyon entrenchment; b - Deep drainage uses phreatic lifts to emerge as vauclusian springs, recording successive positions of the base level. If the Messinian canyon is located below the current base level, it remains fossil. The karst remains flooded and discharges by a vauclusian spring; c - if the Messinian canyon is located above the current base level, the canyon is exhumed and the karst is drained. The current drainage uses the deep Messinian drain; the  Pliocene  phreatic  lifts  are abandoned as fossil “chimney-shafts”.Plan-view cave patternsPalmer (1991, 2007) identified several plan-view cave patterns: branchwork,  maze (network, anastomosis, spongework) and ramiform. The most common  (epigenic) cave pattern is branchwork (at least 60 % of all caves according to Palmer, 2007). They contain passages that join as tributaries. Each first order branch starts from a discrete recharge source and converges into higher order passages that become fewer and larger in the downstream end (Palmer, 1975). Maze caves can be formed in both epigenic and hypogenic settings (Palmer, 2011), with ramiform caves typically being hypogenic formed by sulfuric acid or less commonly by mixing processes (Palmer, 2007).Network   caves   consist   of   angular   grid   of   interconnecting  fissures   formed  by widening of nearly all major fractures. Closed loops are common feature. In epigenic settings they are produced by uniform seepage through overlying insoluble rock or by periodic floodwater. Anastomotic caves have curvilinear tubes which intersect in a braided pattern with many closed loops, usually as a two-dimensional array along a favorable parting or low angle fracture. They are formed by floodwaters and usually
are superimposed on branchwork caves. Spongework caves consist of interconnected solution cavities of varied size in a random three-dimensional pattern like pores in a sponge. Most appear to have formed by coalescing of intergranular pores. Ramiform caves have irregular rooms and galleries that wander in three dimensions with branches   extending   outward   from   the   main   areas   of   development.   They   are characteristic of hypogenic caves (Palmer, 1991, 2007, 2011).Figure 3.3       Common epigenic cave patterns (Palmer, 1991).Caves consisting of single-passages are generally considered as rudimentary forms of any of the before mentioned types (Palmer, 1991, 2007).Meso and micro morphologyMeso-morphology of caves can be observed at passage level in cave cross-section. There is a clear distinction between passages formed in free surface flow or in closed conduit flow (Lauritzen & Lundberg, 2000; Palmer, 2007; Ford & Williams, 2007). The  most  common  vadose  passage  types  include  shafts  and  canyons.  In  phreatic setting dissolution is symmetric  and  directed  radially  out  from  the  passage axis, which enlarges the passage along the entire perimeter  producing  tubular passage. Tubular passages develop also in the epiphreatic setting, where passages can be dry for a long period, but during floods they are completely  water filled and act as phreatic tubes. Their main difference is the small scale scallops that reflect the high velocity flow in the epiphreatic zone. Some passages have composite character, most common of which is the keyhole passage which is a tube with canyon incised in the floor.Smaller scale forms in caves (microforms) are features much smaller than  the passage diameter (Lauritzen & Lundberg, 2000). The can develop in various settings
with most typical representatives in various types of pockets, cupolas, scallops, notches,  potholes,  anastomoses,  spongework,  ceiling  channels,  pendants,  grooves, ramps, flutes, rills (Slabe, 1995; Lauritzen & Lundberg, 2000; Palmer, 2007;)Figure 3.4      Paragenetic evolution in phreatic and vadose settings, after Farrant& Smart (2011).ParagenesisIn epigenic caves, especially in caves with allogenic input where big amounts  of sediments can be transported within the cave system, as well as in caves affected by regional base-level  rise,  sediment  deposition  can  have  major  influence  on  cave passages  development.  In  phreatic  passages  accumulation  of sediment  on the floor can force upward dissolution of the ceiling, due to shielding of the floor which leaves only the upper  surfaces  of  the  tube  to  be  dissolved  by the  aggressive water. With upward retreat of the ceiling more sediment accumulates to maintain the equilibrium between erosion, deposition and water velocity.  The  upward migration will stop when the tube reaches the water table. This  mechanism is known as paragenesis (Renault, 1968; Farrant & Smart, 2011).  Passages formed by paragenesis can be easily mistakenly for vadose or phreatic passages. They can be distinguished from vadose passages by phreatic wall  morphology  (scallops,  pendants,  grooves).  In
meandering paragenetic passages, meander migrations axis propagate upwards in the direction  of   flow,   as   opposed   to   vadose   meanders   where   the   axis   propagate downwards  (Lauritzen  &  Lundberg,  2000).  Keyhole  passages  can  also develop in paragenetic setting. Along with the passage form, typical solutional features that can identify paragenetic development include pendants and half tubes, drainage grooves, bedrock fins and paragenetic solution rams (Farrant & Smart, 2011).Condensation corrosion (in epigenic caves)Condensation corrosion can also influence passage morphology and evolution, although in epigenic caves it is not considered as a cave forming process (Ford & Williams,  2007;  Palmer,  2007).  Condensation  occurs  where  warm  moist  air  rises from the lower regions and reaches cooler surfaces. In caves with rising moist air, condensation can form irregular tubes, domes and cupolas that extend upwards from the original passage,  and  also  it  can  etch  speleothems  (Palmer,  2007).  It  can be significant process in cave entrances or through-caves with strong draft, having high temperature and relative humidity gradients. It is more significant  process  for hypogenic caves.3.1.3. HYPOGENIC SPELEOGENESISHypogenic  speleogenesis  historically  has  received far less research attention  than epigenic speleogenesis, but lately there has been an increase in research  focus  on hypogenic cave development (Klimchouk, 2007, 2009, 2013; Palmer, 2011).Hypogenic speleogenesis or hypogenic caves have been defined by Palmer (1991) as caves formed by acids of deep-seated origin, or epigenic acids rejuvenated by deep- seated  processes,  and  have  no  relation  to  recharge  through  the  overlying  surface. Klimchouk (2007, 2009) later adopted a hydrological  approach  to   hypogenic speleogenesis, defining it as the formation of solution-enlarged   permeability structures by water that recharges the cavernous zone from below,  independent of recharge from the overlying or immediately adjacent surface. In the general context of   groundwater   flow   system   (Toth,   1963),   Klimchouk   (2007) associates the development of hypogenic karst to discharge regimes of  regional  or  intermediate
flow systems, with epigenic speleogenesis predominantly associated with local flow system.There is still an ongoing debate between defining hypogenic speleogenesis  using hydrological or geochemical approach (Palmer, 2011; Bosak,  2012;  Klimchouk, 2013).Several dissolution mechanisms are operating under hypogenic settings (Palmer, 1991, 2007; Klimchouk, 2007), such as mixing corrosion, cooling of thermal waters, H2S oxidation and condensation corrosion. Some of them  (CO2, mixing corrosion) are also important in epigenic settings (Palmer, 2007; Ford & Williams, 2007).The recognition  and  interpretation  of  hypogenic  caves,  especially inactive  ones,  is based on lack of  genetic  relationship  to  recharge  from  overlying  or  immediately adjacent surfaces, characteristic morphology and certain diagnostic speleothems and minerals (Audra et al., 2009b, 2009c, 2009d; Palmer, 2007).Palmer (1991, 2007) describes ramiform and maze patterns (spongework, network, anastomoses) as most common hypogenic cave patterns. Audra (2007) and Audra et al. (2009c) based on analysis of more than 350 hypogenic caves gives a conceptual model of a cave pattern, integrating all kinds of hypogenic caves. They subdivide them into two main types: deep phreatic systems with isolated geodes, 3D and 2D maze caves and deep phreatic shafts the typical representatives; and upwardly dendritic caves, isolated chamber, water table sulfuric caves and smoking shafts as cave systems developed above the water table.Two major classes of hypogenic caves develop due to dissolution of carbonate rocks by CO2 and  H2S  rich  thermal  waters  (Palmer,  1991;  Dublyansky,  2000a).  A  brief overview of the concepts will be given bellow.Rising  thermal  carbonic  waters  cool  down  along  their  flow  path,  increasing  their aggressiveness due to the inverse relationship between solubility and  temperature, which leads to a progressive increase in CaCO3 solubility, and also a drastic drop of solubility near the water table due to the loss of CO2. As a result a geochemical zone of carbonate dissolution and zone of carbonate precipitation appear within the aquifer (Dublyansky, 2000a). While degassing produces oversaturated water and deposition near the water  table,  above  the  water  table  there  is  a  concentration  of  gas,  which
produces dissolution (Audra et al., 2002). Where H2S rich waters mix with shallower oxygen rich waters, sulfuric acid forms at or near water table, which rapidly dissolves the  carbonate  rocks  (Egemeier, 1981).  This  process  is  known  as  sulfuric acid speleogenesis and has been recognized as a significant cave forming process in many caves  around  the  world,  such  as  Carlsbad  and  Lechuguilla  Caves in New Mexico (Hill, 2000), Frasassi caves in Italy (Galdenzi & Menichetti, 1995), Cueva de Villa Luz in Mexico (Hose & Pisarowicz, 1999), Chat cave in France (Audra, 2007), and Kraushöhle in Austria (Plan et al., 2012). Above the water table H2S escapes in the cave air and redissolves in water condensation droplets on cave walls. There it oxidizes to sulfuric acid which attacks the carbonate rock and converts it to gypsum by forming replacement gypsum crusts on cave walls and ceiling.Figure 3.5       Sulfuric Acid Speleogenesis concept (Palmer, 1991, 2013).Considering that condensation-corrosion can be significant in thermal caves (Audra et al.,  2007),  rising  CO2  or  H2S  rich  thermal  waters  can  form  cave  passages  and smaller morphologies in both phreatic and vadose environments.Phreatic  speleogenesis  includes  cave  patters  such as isolated geodes, 2D and  3D maze caves and deep phreatic shafts (Audra et al., 2009c), with morphologies that include more common hypogenic morphologies such as feeders leading to rising wall and ceiling channels and cupolas, described as the  “morphological  suit  of  rising
flow” (Klimchouk, 2007), as well as phreatic chimneys, bubble trails, thermo- sulfuric discharge slots (Audra et al., 2009d). In vadose settings due to condensation- corrosion isolated chambers, upwardly dendritic caves and smoking shafts can develop, with smaller morphologies including wall niches, ceiling cupolas, condensation-corrosion channels, megascallops, condensation domes and  vents. Some morphologies are typical of sulfuric acid caves, such as features produced by replacement of carbonate rock with gypsum (replacement pockets), dripping tubes, sulfuric karrens and cups, as well as water table features such as corrosion tables and flat roof notches (Audra et al. 2009c, 2009d).Figure 3.6 Conceptual model of the  hypogenic  cave  patterns  (Audra  et  al., 2009c).Identification of hypogenic caves based only on morphology can be sometimes ambiguous.   Therefor   presence   of   some   characteristic   deposits   associated   with sulfuric   acid   speleogenesis,   or   thermal   carbonic   speleogenesis   can   help   in interpreting  hypogenic  origin.  Manu  known  hydrothermal  caves  are  lined  with scalenohedral (dogtooth spar) calcite crystals (Dublyansky, 2013). Gypsum deposits,
found as replacement crusts are indicative of sulfuric acid speleogenesis. Replacement  gypsum  crusts  may  detach  and  form  mounds  or  blocks  of  massive gypsum on the floor (Egemeier, 1981; Galdenzi & Maruoka 2003). Massive gypsum can  also  form  below  water  table  as  a  result  of  sulfate  supersaturation  of  the groundwater,  as  documented  in  the  caves  of  the  Guadalupe  Mountains  in  U.S.A where the rising water contained much sulfate that escaped reduction, which gave the water a head start in depositing subaqueous gypsum (Palmer &  Palmer, 2000). In contact with alumino-silicates, sulfuric acid produces a characteristic suit of minerals such as alunite, jarosite, natroalunite, hydrated   halloysite. They are of high importance since dating  of  these  K-rich  sulfate  minerals that formed during the speleogenesis have potential to yield the age of the cave forming process (Polyak and Provencio, 2001).3.1.4. KARST AND CAVES IN CONGLOMERATESCarbonate conglomerates present important part of the younger carbonate deposits in the research area, and have some karstic features, therefor an overview of the recent research on conglomerate karst and caves will be given, with main focus to speleogenesis.Conglomerate rocks with carbonate fragments are common deposit in various environments. Their carbonate matrix material combined with mostly carbonate fragment makes them act as a compact carbonate rock.Karst  in  conglomerates  has  been  studied  in  Udin  Boršt,  Slovenia  (Kranjc,  2005), Montello,  Italy  (Castiglioni,  2005),  Molasse  Basin,  northern  margin  of  the  Alps (Goeppert et al., 2011), Catalonia, Spain (Bergadà et al, 1997). Some notable caves in conglomerates are also  the  Oreshnaya  Cave  in  Russia  (Klimchouk, 2004)  and Pozodel Portillo System in Honduras (Finch & Pistole, 2011). Beside these examples there is still lack of knowledge regarding karst in conglomerates (Gabrovšek, 2005; Goeppert et al., 2011).
Figure 3.7       Schematic  illustration  of  weathering  processes  in  conglomerates  at the Hochgrat site in the Molasse Basin (northern margin of Alps), after Goeppert et al. (2011): a) mechanical weathering resulting  in  erosional channels;  b)  chemical dissolution    of    well-cemented    carbonate    conglomerates    with    karren (true karstification); c) karren with the non-soluble  components  that  protrude  during karstification.The conglomerates in the reported cases consist mostly of carbonate fragments cemented by  calcite  matrix  with  smaller  part  of  the  fragments  consisting  of  non- carbonate  rocks.  In  all  of  these  areas  karst  has  most  of  the  normal  features with dolines and smaller scale forms on surface, and caves underground. Goeppert et al. (2011) report even uvalas and small-scale poljes in the Molasse Basin conglomerates in the Alps. Most of the caves have water table or vadose passages with branchwork pattern, and are developed at or close to the contact with an underlying impermeable unit. Gabrovšek (2005) points that the settings of high  primary porosity and permeability of the Udin Boršt conglomerates with autogenic recharge would exhibit a curvilinear branchwork geometry.Goeppert et al. (2011) describe the combined action of mechanical weathering and chemical  dissolution  of  carbonate  rocks,  with  the  later  mostly  prevailing,  as  the mechanism responsible for karstification of the Hochgrat site in the Molasse Basin. This was noted in the development of surface features such as karren as well as on cave walls.
3.2. RESEARCH METHODSAs the approach to understand the evolution of karst in the researched area is through speleogenesis, this thesis is based on research made mostly in caves.This generally includes morphological analyses based on cave maps and field observations, combined  with  sediment  analyses  and  in  some  cases  dating  of  cave sediments.3.2.1. MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSESCave morphology was used for interpretation of environment in which caves were formed. Analyses were made of macro (cave patterns), meso (passage morphology) and micro forms imprinted on walls of cave passages.Cave passage patterns were analyzed in both horizontal and vertical dimension, using detailed cave maps.Morphology at cave passage scale was analyzed to interpret development in phreatic, epiphreatic or vadose settings, as well as development in hypogenic settings. Special care was taken to differentiate morphologies and passages formed by paragenesis.Typical small-scale morphology was taken in consideration in interpretation of cave passages.Cave surveyMost of the caves studied were previously not known, or not published. Only some of them (Kolčakovski et al., 2004; Manakovik, 1971; PSD Orle, not published) were surveyed, but most of the cave maps were found lacking in detail and/or precision, with even big directional errors in some of them. Therefor they were not useful for analyses,  and  new  cave  maps  were  produced  not  only  for  the  newly  discovered caves, but also for most of the known caves.Cave surveying was done with a detailed in-scale field mapping in 1:100 scale using Leica laser distance meter (Disto D3), and Suunto compass (Suunto KB-20). Field data (sketches, measurements) were later processed in Therion cave mapping software (Budaj &  Mudrak,  2008),  to  produce  cave  maps  in  plan,  profile  and  3D view.
3.2.2. SEDIMENT ANALYSESDistribution  and  stratigraphy  of  cave  sediments  and  deposits  were  described  for every cave. Samples from characteristic sediments and deposits were collected for X- ray analysis. Alunite and jarosite from Provalata Cave were  dated  by  40Ar/39Ar method, and sediments from Budimirica Cave were dated by paleomagnetism.X-ray analysesX-ray analyses were carried out at the CEREGE – CNRS, France. X-ray  powder diffraction (XRD) patterns  were  recorded on a Philips diffractometer  using Cobalt radiation (λ = 1.79 Å) with a secondary graphite monochromator. The diffractometer optic used to record all samples was a front fixed slit of 1°, a scattered radiation slit of  1°  after  the  sample,  and  a  0.2  mm  detector  slit.  The  X-ray  tube operating conditions were 40 kV and 40 mA and the step-scan data were  continuously collected over the range 3.5 to 78° 2θ using a step interval of 0.05° 2θ and a counting time of 2.5 s/interval.Stable isotope analyses (δ13C, δ18O and δ34S)Calcite crust from Provalata Cave, with a presumed thermal origin, was sampled for stable isotope δ13C, and δ18O analyses. The sample was collected from the ceiling of a small channel emerging from the north part of the First Room. The δ13C and δ18O stable isotope ratios were measured at the Stable Isotope Laboratory at Saint Louis University (Department  of  Earth  and  Atmospheric  Sciences),  Missouri,  USA.  The isotopic ratio is given in per mil (‰), according to  VPDB  international  standard, with analytical error of 0.03‰ and 0.06‰ for δ13C and δ18O, respectively.The sulfur isotope ratio of cave gypsum was analyzed at the Institute of Mineralogy and Geochemistry of the University of Lausanne using a Carlo Erba 1108 elemental analyzer (EA) connected  to  a  Thermo  Fisher  (Bremen,  Germany)  Delta  V  isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) that  was  operated  in  the  continuous  helium flow mode via a Conflo III split interface (EA-IRMS). The stable isotope composition of sulfur is reported in the delta (δ) notation as the per mil (‰) deviation of the isotoperatio relative to known standards: δ = [(Rsample - Rstandard)/Rstandard] x  1000, where R is the ratio of the heavy to light isotopes (34S/32S). The sulfur standard is the Vienna Cañon Diablo Troilite (VCDT). The reference SO2 gas was calibrated against
the IAEA-S-1 sulfur isotope reference standard (Ag2S) with a δ34S value of –0.3‰. The   overall   analytical   reproducibility   of   the   EA-IRMS   analyses,   assessed   by replicate analyses of three laboratory standards (barium sulfate, with a working δ34S value of +12.5‰; pyrite Ch, +6.1‰; pyrite E, –7.0‰) is better than ±0.2‰ (1 SD). The  accuracy  of  the  δ34S  analyses  was  checked  periodically  by  analyses  of the international reference materials IAEA-S-1 and IAEA-S-2 silver sulfides (0.3‰ and+22.7±0.2‰, respectively, values from IAEA-Catalogue and Documents) and NBS- 123 sphalerite (+17.09±0.31‰, value from NIST-Catalogue and Documents).Fluid inclusions analysis (δD and δ18O)Sample  of  the  calcite  crust  covering  the  wall  in  northern  part  of  First  Room  in Provalata  Cave  was  analyzed  also  for  fluid  inclusions  by  Yuri  Dublyansky  at the Institute of Geology, University of Innsbruck in Austria. Double-polished  sections for fluid inclusion petrography observations were prepared employing  low-speed precision sawing and polishing, which minimize thermal and mechanical stresses on the samples.To analyze  the  isotopic  composition  of  water  trapped  in  fluid  inclusions  (δD  and δ18O) samples were crushed in a heated  crushing  cell  (Dublyansky,  2012).  After cryogenic focusing, the water was transported by He flow into the high-temperature reactor of the TC/EA unit (Thermo Fisher) and pyrolized into H2  and CO at 1400°C. The evolved gases were separated in a chromatographic column and analyzed using a Thermo Fisher Delta V Advantage isotope-ratio mass  spectrometer. Analytical precision was better than 1.5 ‰ for δD and ca. 0.5 ‰ for δ18O (1 σ). For a detailed description of the method see Dublyansky and Spötl (2009).40Ar/39Ar datingSamples of alunite and jarosite (pale yellow sand) from Provalata Cave were dated by the 40Ar/39Ar method at the New Mexico Geochronology Research Laboratory in Socorro, New Mexico, USA. Two aliquots of each sample were analyzed, one unwrapped and one wrapped in Ag with a platinum crimp. The second analysis was not a complete degassing. Results were similar for both the alunite and jarosite, but some higher step ages were apparent at the end of degassing, indicating minor  to trace amounts  of  contamination  from  another  older  phase.  Because  of  this,  the
results are considered maximum ages. Actual crystallization ages could be slightly younger.Paleomagnetic dating56 samples from a profile of cave sediments in Budimirica Cave were collected for paleomagnetic dating using sampling methodology described by Zupan Hajna et al. (2008).Samples  were  analyzed  at  the  Institute  of  Geology,  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the Czech Republic (Bosak et al, 2013). Oriented  hand  samples  were  collected  from individual  horizons.  Sediments  were  sampled  to  small  plastic  cubes  20 x 20 x 20 mm. In the laboratory, they were measured on the JR-6A spinner  magnetometers (Jelínek, 1966). Totally 56 specimens were demagnetized by the  alternating field procedures, up to the field of 100 mT in 10 to 13 steps. The LDA apparatus (AGICO, Ltd.) were employed for AF demagnetization. The remanent magnetization (RM) of specimens in  their  natural  state  (NRM)  is  identified  by  the symbol M. Graphs  of normalized  values  of  M/Mo  =  F(H)  were  constructed  for  each  analyzed  specimen. Volume  magnetic  susceptibility  (MS)  was  measured  on  a  KLY-4  kappa-bridge (Jelínek,  1973).  Separation  of  the  respective remanent magnetization components was  carried  out  by  multi-component Kirschvink analysis (Kirschvink 1980). The statistics of Fisher  (1953) was employed for calculation  of  mean  directions  of  the pertinent remanence components derived by the multi-component analysis.3.2.3. WATER ANALYSESWater from springs: Gugjakovski Izvori, Karsi Podot and Melnica spring was sampled and analyzed for basic physical and chemical parameters at the Center for Public Health in Prilep, Macedonia.Field  measurements  of pH,  EC  and temperature of some springs and cave  streams were later done with a HI 98129 (Hanna Instruments) multi-parameter tester.3.2.4. CARTOGRAPHIC METHODSKarst rocks outcrops, together with other geological data were digitized from basic geological maps in  1:100  000  scale,  sheets  Vitolište,  Kavadarci,  Kožuf  and  Prilep (Dumurdžanov et al. 1976; Hristov et al. 1965; Rakićević et al. 1965; Rakićević and
Pendžerkovski 1970) as well as unpublished geological maps in 1:25000 scale (Geological survey Skopje) using Global Mapper software. Aster GDEM data, version 2 (Meyer  et  al.,  2012)  was  used  for  terrain  analysis  and  representation  in maps.Digitized data was used to produce geological, karst and general geographical maps of the research area. Data from geological maps was also used to interpret extension of paleo valleys in Vitačevo plateau.Digitalization was done  in  Global  Mapper,  and  final  maps  were  produced  in  Esri ArcGIS Map 10 and Golden Software Surfer 11.Morphometric analysis of karst surface (slope and elevation distribution) was done using the Spatial analyst tool in ArcGIS Map 10.

Chapter 4:Hypogenic cave developmentHypogenic karstification  have  been  registered  in  three  localities  in  the  researched area: Melnica  - in the NE part of Mariovo  Basin,  west foothill of  Kozjak Mt., the northern margin of the small Vitolište graben; Podot - north from Melnica, in Crna Reka Valley; and Kožuf - between the southeast foothill of Kozjak Mt, and northwest foothill of Kožuf Mt (Fig.4.1).Figure 4.1        Karst areas with hypogenic speleogenesis.Caves  have  been  found  in  Melnica  and  Podot  localities,  with  cave  developmentattributed  to  thermal  waters  and  sulfuric  acid  speleogenesis.  In  Kožuf  locality
hypogenic   caves   were   not  found,   but  several   thermal  springs   emerging  from carbonate rocks  indicate  that  karstification  is  ongoing  in  deeper  parts  of  the karst system.4.1. MELNICA AND PODOT THERMAL CAVESMelnica Karst  area  is  located  in  the  eastern  part  of  Mariovo  Basin,  on  the  west foothill of Mt. Kozjak. Melnica karst encompasses the area between  Pantelejmon (1344 m) and Gola Skrka (1187 m) mountain peaks, including the  plateau area between Manastir, Bešište and Polčište villages. In the middle part, this area is cut by the superimposed valley of Buturica River, with its tributary Polčiška Reka (Fig.4.2).Figure 4.2 Geological setting of Melnica karst area. Geological data after Dumurdžanov et al. (1976), Geološki Zavod – Skopje, unpublished.This area belongs to the Pelagonian Massif, with mountain parts developed in pre- Cenozoic rocks with Neogene and Quaternary deposits filling the Mariovo graben. The pre-Cenozoic rock formations are part of the Veprčani Monocline, starting with Precambrian  Gneiss  rocks  to  the  west,  with  some  Paleozoic  granitoid  intrusions, overlain by Precambrian dolomitic marbles. To the east the Precambrian formation is overlain by Cambrian rocks, starting with phyllito-micaschists in the southern parts covered by calcitic marbles, while in the northern parts (north of Buturica Valley) the calcitic marbles lie directly on the Precambrian dolomitic marbles, with some schist lenses found  close  to  the  contact  with  them.  To  the  east  they  are  covered  by
Cretaceous   (Senonian)   rocks,  starting  with   clastic   rocks,   followed  by  a   thick limestone formation. This whole complex (Veprčani Monocline)  has  NNW-SSE direction and dips to the ENE by 25 to 50° (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976).Overprinted on  the  Pre-Cenozoic  formation,  between  Pantelejmon  and  Gola  Skrka lays   the   Mariovo   graben.   It   yields   deposits   of   Miocene,   Pliocene   and Early Pleistocene age, deposited in a lacustrine to fluvial environment. Four  sedimentary formations are recognized in Mariovo Basin (Dumurdžanov et al., 2004):- Nerezi Formation (Upper Miocene) - gravel and sandstone; siltstone and silty claystone that grades upward into claystone and coal; and siltstone and sandstone followed by a hiatus.- Solnje   Formation   (Pliocene)   -   poorly   stratified   gravel   and   sandstone, continuing to:- Vitačevo  Formation  (Pliocene)  –  stratified  tuff  overlaid  by  sandstone  and gravel  interbedded  with  beds  of  diatomite,  tuff,   and   sandy   claystone; travertine deposits, tuff-agglomerate and sandstone.- Mariovo formation (Pleistocene) - pyroclastic rocks with nine  travertine layers and a 20-m-thick travertine deposit on top.Figure 4.3       Panoramic view from Pantelejmon (1344 m) to the north, with a look of Manastir-Bešište plateau, Buturica Valley, Pešta Hill and Skrka (1187 m), photo by M. Temovski.In Pleistocene this area was affected by the general uplift of central  Balkan Peninsula, as well as the subsidence and shaping of the present Aegean Sea, which influenced  draining  of  the  Mariovo  Lake  (as  late  as  Middle  Pleistocene;
Dumurdžanov et al., 2005), with Crna Reka and its tributaries establishing its fluvial basin. Buturica River then incised its valley first in the Mariovo Basin deposits, then forming the superimposed valley in the Pre-Cenozoic rocks of Veprčani Monocline. The  plateau  area  between  Manastir  and  Bešište  villages  is  of  sedimentary  origin, covered by travertine deposits, and is largely preserved, affected by fluvial erosion only in the northern and southern  parts  (by Crna  Reka,  Buturica  and  Satoka  river valleys).Three caves are found in Melnica karst area, two of which are developed in Pleistocene carbonate conglomerates (Melnička Peštera 1 and Melnička Peštera 2), and Provalata Cave is developed in Cambrian calcitic marbles. Beside  them, remnants of  thermal  karstification  can  be  seen  on  surface:  below  Provalata  Cave, along the valley of Buturica River; at Gumnište and Crveno  Gumnište  localities between Provalata Cave and Melnička Peštera 1 & 2; at Čavkarnik locality, on the southern foothill of Pantelejmon Mt; as well as the thermal vents Uškova koliba and Skrka located on the southern slopes of Pantelejmon (1344 m) and Skrka (1187 m).Figure 4.4 Geological characteristic and location of caves and springs in Podot locality. Geological data modified after Dumurdžanov et al. (1976), Geološki Zavod– Skopje (unpublished).Podot area is located to the north of Melnica area, in Crna Reka Valley, in the sameVeprčani Monocline. It is developed in Quaternary travertine deposits, covering the
Pre-Cenozoic  rock  formations.  The  Pre-Cenozoic  formation  is  quite  thinned  here, changing from Precambrian gneiss, through dolomitic marbles, Cambrian  calcitic marbles, to Cretaceous (Senonian)  clastic  rocks  and  limestones  in  only  300 m distance. As in Melnica, the Pre-Cenozoic formation is dipping to the ENE by 30- 50°. Both the travertine deposits and the older rocks are cut by Crna Reka Valley.Figure 4.5 View from the east to Podot locality in Crna Reka Valley. Travertine deposits are outlined by dashed line. Photo by M. Temovski.Between Podot locality and the confluence of Gugjakovska Reka with Crna Reka 4 km downstream (Fig.4.4, Fig.5.50), there are remnants of terraces as well as clastic and travertine deposits mainly located on the right side of the valley. The  clastic deposits (sand, silt and gravel) are considered as Pliocene (Solnje  Formation), and the travertine deposits as Pleistocene (Mariovo Formation) by  correlation with similar deposits in Mariovo Basin (Dumurdžanov, 1976, 2003) The clastic deposits are found above 400 m up to 600 m a.s.l. (Gramos, Ramnište, Volčja Jama) with the travertine deposits overlain onto them, ranging from 500 m up to 650 m elevation (Gramos, Milevi Nivi, Ramnište), and carbonate conglomerates with tufa also found above them at Peštera (700-750 m) and  Vrlalnikot  (700-800  m)  localities. The travertine deposits in Mariovo Basin, which are found from 550 to 1000 m elevation, are considered as topmost formation of  the  lake  system,  deposited in shallow lacustrine environment (Dumurdžanov et al., 2003), before draining of the lake and onset of fluvial drainage.These travertine deposits are micritic, as in Mariovo Basin, sub-horizontal, except at Milevi  Nivi,  where  they are dipping to the south by 30°. Here it looks that  the travertine deposits are cut by WSW-ENE fault, with the southern block uplifted. This
fault is not clearly expressed, but small karst depression is formed along this fault in the travertines, and fragments of travertine deposits are found in the southern block up to 800 m elevation, along the steeply sloping valley side.The sub-horizontal surfaces at Milevi Nivi (620 m) and Gramos (570-590 m)  are likely depositional. At Milevi Nivi, smaller remnants of a terrace cuts the travertine deposits at 565 m, and in clastic deposits at Ramnici below Gramos (515 m), with remnant of terrace (540 m) also cutting travertine and clastic deposits at Ramnište locality.Figure 4.6 Cross-section of Crna Reka Valley at Podot locality and downstream areas with Pliocene-Pleistocene deposits and river terraces: 1 – sand, silt and gravel of Pliocene Solnje Formation; 2 – travertines of Pleistocene Mariovo Formation; 3 – Younger    Pleistocene   travertines:    tufaceous    limestones,    tufa    and   carbonate conglomerates.Travertine deposits are also found at lower elevation in Podot locality, although they are quite different from the micritic travertine deposits at higher elevation in a way that   they   are   mostly   bioconstructed   with   various   encrusted   plants.   They   are composed  of   tufaceous   limestones   and   tufa,   with   some   carbonate   breccia- conglomerates in them composed of marble and limestone fragments. Two terraces are  found  in  these  deposits,  one  at  440  m  (Podot),  and  the  other  at  350 m (Karši Podot).Downstream from  Podot  locality there  are  travertine  deposits  all  along  the  350  m terrace. Podot  travertines  are  likely  of  younger  Pleistocene  age  than  the  higher travertines, being deposited in a  paludal  environment  in  a  stable  period  after
aggradation in Crna Reka Valley. The travertines at the 350 m Karši Podot terrace are covering alluvial deposits, later cut by Karši  Podot  Cave.  The  high  discharge Gugjakovo karst springs and the thermal spring in Karši Podot  Cave,  which are located in the travertine deposits close to the riverbed of Crna Reka  may have facilitated rapid deposition of calcium carbonate, building the thick  travertine sequences. Beside the two terraces (at 440 m and 350 m), conglomerate layers in the travertines indicate  that  their  deposition  may  have  occurred  in  several  phases, connected to the evolution of the Crna Reka Pleistocene valley.Based  on  the  distribution  of  the  Pliocene  clastic  deposits  covered  by  Pleistocene micritic travertine deposits, as well  as  terraces  cut in  these  deposits  and the lower Podot travertine deposits and terraces we can assume that the  sub-horizontal areas (terraces) at Gramos and Milevi Nivi at 570-590 m and 620 m respectively, represent lacustrine depositional surfaces, with terraces at 565  m  (Milevi Nivi), 515 m (Gramos) and 540 m (Ramniste) cut later by Crna Reka in the travertines and clastic deposits after draining of the lake (Pleistocene). The Podot terraces at 440 m and 350 m  are  fill  terraces,  formed  after  change  of  incision  and aggradation in Crna Reka Valley. Remnants of terraces are also found cut in limestone at elevation of 385 m and 335 m opposite Dupkite caves, with the lowest terrace at 5 m above present Crna Reka river bed, having Gugjakovo karst springs perched on it. The relative elevations of  the  preserved  remnants  of  river  terraces  in  and  below  the  Pliocene-Pleistocene deposits  therefor are at 250  m (Milevi  Nivi), 220 m (Ramnište), 200 m (Gramos), 120 m (Podot), 70 m (Rekata), 30 m (Karši Podot), 20 m (Rekata) and 5 m (Podot and Rekata).Caves are found in travertines on both terraces at Podot locality, with numerous cave entrances on Podot terrace, of which two were penetrable (Podot Cave 1 & 2), while thermal Karši Podot Cave is located in Karši Podot terrace, developed in travertines, alluvial deposits and dolomitic marbles.
4.1.1. PROVALATA CAVEProvalata Cave is located at the top of the southern slope of the superimposed valley of the Buturica River,  with  entrance  at  823  m  on  the  bottom  of  a  collapse  doline (Fig.4.7). The cave is mostly formed in Cambrian  marbles,  with  some  (mostly upper) parts formed  in  marble  breccia,  which  together  with  the   underlying Precambrian dolomitic marbles and overlying Cretaceous rocks are  dipping to the ENE by 25 to 50°, as part of the NNW-SSE oriented Veprčani  Monocline.  In  the northern  parts  (north  of  Melnica  area)  these  Cambrian  marbles have lenses of phyllito-micaschists,  and  to  the  south  they  lie  directly  over Cambrian phyllito- micaschists  (Dumurdžanov  et  al.,  1976).  One  such  lens  is located just west of the cave (the cave is formed near the contact of marbles and phyllito-micaschists).Figure 4.7 Geological setting of Provalata  Cave  with  surface  features  and Melnica Spring.
The cave was first explored by caving clubs Peoni and Ursus Speleos from Skopje, and first published in scientific literature (as Cave Gulabinka) by Kolčakovski et al. (2004). They noted the presence of gypsum in the cave and suggested that the origin of the cave is connected with dissolution of marble by hydrothermal waters enriched with H2S, although concluded that the cave is a fossil ponor cave.Figure 4.8 Map of  Provalata  Cave  with  distribution  of  prominent  cupolas, feeders and larger gypsum deposits.
Cave morphologyProvalata is a ramiform cave with a total length of about 230 m and total depth of 24m. There are two major rooms (First and Second) with more or less vague (due to collapse)  outlines,  and  two  main  passages  (Lower  and  Upper)  with  more  distinct (fracture guided) morphology (Fig.4.8).Figure 4.9       Morphological  features  of  Provalata  Cave.  A:  Cupolas,  with  some replacement pockets in between; B: Replacement pockets on  a  pendant  between cupolas; C: Small half tube wall channels rising from feeders to a ceiling channel; D: A suite of feeder leading to wall channel, rising to cupola at the top. Lower parts are covered with calcite popcorns (the horizontal line is due to photo merging); E: Continuation of the ceiling channel shown in C, with some wall channels joining it; F: The feeder at the bottom of the rising suite at D. Photos by M. Temovski.The most representative and common morphological features of the cave are cupolas and solution pockets (Fig.4.9: A, D). Cupolas vary in form and size, often combining several cupolas overlain on another. They are most abundant in the Lower Passage as well as in the Upper Passage, but the highest ones (up to 7 m) are in the First Room,
in marble breccia, as well as the entrance shaft which is a cupola formed in marble breccia opened to the surface by collapse. Two generations of cupolas and solution pockets  can  be  clearly  detected  in  the  cave:  one  formed  in  marbles  (or  marble breccia) and covered with  calcite  crust,  and  the  other  formed  in  the  calcite  crust covering the first cupolas, or completely cutting through the calcite crust to the first generation cupola, and creating a secondary cupola or solution pocket.Half tube wall channels are found in the Lower Passage, starting from feeders and leading to ceiling channels and cupolas (Fig.4.9: C, D, E, F); they are 10-15 cm wide, mostly  vertical  and  sometimes  bifurcating.  They  rise  from  discrete  small  feeding channels along the floor sides, and lead to a central ceiling channel.The ceiling channel is curvilinear in plan view, 30-40 centimeters in diameter, and continues to SW to the neighbor passage rising in a big cupola. The small feeding channels have similar dimensions as the wall channels they lead to. The passage wall between rising wall channels is covered with white calcite popcorn speleothems. The popcorn distribution starts from the central ceiling channel downwards, with popcorn speleothems  covering  some  of  the  half  tube  passages  as  well  (Fig.4.9:  C).  Small gypsum crusts are also covering lower parts of passage walls with  detached crust covering the floor near the walls. Along some prominent fractures the half tube wall channels lead to cupolas.The genesis of this set of small feeding channels rising to half tube channels which converge in a central ceiling channel is attributed to condensation corrosion, with the feeding channels representing vents supplying the rising moist air. Rising vapor from the vents cools and condenses at the contact with wall in upper parts producing film runoff  due  to  accumulation  of  condensation.  Cooler  air  that  sinks  warms  up  and produces  evaporation.  This  leads  to  condensation-corrosion  in  the  upper  part, and evaporation-deposition in the lower part (Audra et al., 2007). The  condensation- corrosion is largest at the ceiling producing the  central  ceiling  channel, with popcorns and replacement gypsum deposited below  the  ceiling  channel along the passage walls due to evaporation. The ceiling channel then continues to SW to the neighbor passage rising to a big cupola developed in calcite crust.Gypsum  replacement  pockets  (cf.  Galdenzi  and  Marouka,  2003)  can  be  found  at several places with gypsum deposits already removed. In the Upper Passage they are
developed in marble between two cupolas (Fig.4.9: A, B), but replacement pockets formed in calcite crust can be also seen in the First Room. Their size ranges from few centimeters up to few decimeters in diameter.Figure 4.10 Cave deposits in Provalata Cave. A: Schematic cross-section of sediments, showing stratigraphic relationships; B: Grey clay (montmorillonite, kaolinite, sanidine, albite, muscovite, quartz); C: Pale yellow sand (alunite, jarosite, muscovite, quartz); D: Pink clay (halloysite-7Ä, natroalunite, muscovite, quartz); E: Corroded calcite crust; F: Replacement gypsum crust; G: Gypsum crust, detached from the wall; H: Detached gypsum crust piled as gypsum blocks. Photos by  M. Temovski.On the basis of distribution and association with deposits two sets of morphologies were   identified   and   attributed   to   two   separate   speleogenetic   phases:   phreatic morphologies (cupolas) formed by cooling of rising carbonated thermal  waters, covered  with  mammillary  calcite  crust  (first  phase);   vadose   morphologies
(replacement pockets, second generation cupolas and pockets, vents, half tube wall and ceiling channels), formed by condensation-corrosion by sulfuric vapors (second phase), with second phase morphologies partly or completely imprinted onto the first phase morphologies.Cave depositsA calcite crust (sample  PR09),  black  to  transparent,  up  to  0.5  m  thick  and  highly corroded (Fig.4.10: E), is covering the walls  and  ceiling  throughout  the  cave.  In places it is completely corroded.It covers various channel features with phreatic morphologies, such as cupolas, and solution pockets. The crust has mammillary morphology with mostly acicular calcite crystals. The morphology and thickness suggest formation by carbonic degassing in shallow thermal waters (Palmer, 1991; Dublyansky, 2000b; Audra, 2009b) preceding the clay infilling and sulfuric acid phase.Figure 4.11 Sample location and δ18O and δ13C values from calcite coatings and marble host rock.Five  samples  from  a  ~20  cm  cut  through  the  calcite  crust  and  marble  host  rock (Fig.4.11) were collected for δ13C and  δ18O  analyses,  two  of  which  were from the weathered marble host rock (C1, C2) and three from the calcite crust (C3, C4, C5). All of the five samples have light δ18O ratios (-12.7 to -10.4 ‰), but quite heavy δ13C ratio  (2.8  to  7.2  ‰).  The  values  of  δ18O  are  within  the  typical  range for thermal
calcite (Dublyansky, 2000b), but the values for δ13C are quite high for the  calcite (Tab.4.3).Figure 4.12 Calcite fabrics from the calcite crust in Provalata Cave: A – Palisade aggregates of crystals (crystal growth started at nearly the same nucleation point); B- Aggregates of erratically oriented crystals (arrow mark intra-granular inclusions). (Y. Dublyansky, pers. comm., 2013).Fluid inclusions analyses of a sample from corroded calcite crust from the northern part of the  First  Room  indicate  deposition  at  moderate  depth,  and  at  temperatures lower  than  50°  (Y.  Dublyansky,  pers.  comm.,  2013).  The  calcite  is not a typical mammillary calcite, growing from many centers of nucleation,  forming  either palisade   aggregates   of   crystals   with   high   aspect   ratios   (length to width), or aggregates of rather erratically oriented crystals with smaller aspect ratios (Fig.4.12). The  character  of  the  crystalline   aggregate   suggest   growth  in conditions  of supersaturation and, possibly, of non-quiet hydrodynamics, which is not typical of a deposition in conditions of  a  lake  (e.g.  cave  clouds),  rather  more  consistent  with conditions of a feeder of a karstic spring, discharging supersaturated water.Stable isotope composition of water from fluid inclusions (Tab.4.1.) suggests meteoric character of the mineral-forming water (Y. Dyblyansky, pers.  comm., 2013).Grey clays (Fig.4.10: B) cover the lower parts of cave passages, but small patches of grey clay can be found filling parts of cupolas in the Upper Passage, suggesting a complete infilling of the cave at some time, and later removal. X-ray analyses (sample PR04) confirmed composition of sanidine, kaolinite, montmorillonite, albite, muscovite and quartz. Considering the composition, its origin is likely related to the
overlaying pyroclastic sediments (tuff) of the Mariovo Formation. X-Ray analysis of a  tuff  sample  from  Sadevite locality (sample T01)  nearby Provalata  Cave,  showed composition of sanidine, kaolinite, montmorillonite, albite, biotite and goethite. This is also suggested by results of X-Ray analyses of clays from caves on the Vitačevo plateau, formed in limestones covered by similar pyroclastic sediments (Chapter 5.1: Vitačevo Karst).Table 4.1 Results of  measurements of stable isotopic  compositions  of  fluid inclusion water  from  two  replicates  of  the  calcite  crust  from  Provalata  Cave.  (Y. Dublyansky, pers. comm., 2013)Sample ID   δ18O(‰ SMOW)δ2H(‰ SMOW) Sample weight (g)Water content (µL/g)Water amount (µL)Prov_a-12.0-81.00.200.940.19Prov_b-11.9-83.60.250.480.12Fine grained pale yellow sands can be found in the First Room, covering the walls and ceiling, and filling fractures (Fig.4.10: C). X-ray analyses of sample PR10 from the wall in the SE end of the First Room confirmed the presence of alunite, jarosite, quartz and muscovite. 40Ar/39Ar dating of alunite and jarosite gave maximum ages of1.6 Ma and 1.46 Ma, respectively (Tab.4.2).Pink clay was found on the wall at the entrance part of the Lower Passage (Fig.4.10: D).  X-ray  (sample  PR08)  confirmed  a  composition  of  halloysite-7Ä,  natroalunite, muscovite and quartz. It has a white to pale pink color and it is dehydrated, with a waxy texture.Table 4.2         Summary of 40Ar/39Ar results from Provalata Cave.SampleLab #IrradiationMineral  Age analysisSteps/analysesAge (Ma)±2σMSWDCommentProvalata- a60983247alunitelaser step- heat31.600.051.03maximum ageProvalata- j60984247jarositelaser step- heat31.460.031.19maximum age
Gypsum deposits (sample PR05) are the most characteristic cave deposits. They are found in  every  part  of  the  cave,  except  some  places  which  have  periodic  vadose percolation, where gypsum most likely was dissolved.Gypsum deposits are present as replacement crusts up to 40 cm thick (Fig.4.10: F), or detached replacement gypsum crusts (Fig.4.10: G) that accumulated in gypsum blocks (Fig.4.10: H). Preliminary stable isotopes analyses (Tab.4.3) of sulfur  from cave gypsum (2 samples) gave δ34S values of -2.3 to -1.9‰.Table 4.3    Stable isotope properties of marble, calcite crust (δ18O, δ13C), gypsum and vitrinite (δ34S) from Provalata Cave and nearby coals.LocationSample.δ34S (‰)δ18O (‰)δ13C (‰)Coal seams nearby Vitolište village(Lerouge et al., 2007)Gypsum (7K)17.2MgSO4 (7K)14.9Gypsum (8L)17.3Gypsum (8R)8.5Vitrinite (8R)13.2Vitrinite (8M)5.4Provalata CaveCave gypsum (P4)-2.1Cave gypsum (P5)-2.2Marble (C1)-10.64.9Marble (C2)-10.42.9Calcite crust (C3)-11.86.8Calcite crust (C4)-11.97.2Calcite crust (C5)-12.76.7The  origin  of  H2S  involved  in  the  sulfuric  acid  speleogenesis  of  Provalata  Cave might be attributed  to  the  coal  deposits,  if  we  consider  the  proximity  of  the coal deposits in Mariovo Basin to Provalata Cave, and the fact that no sulfate rocks have been found in the stratigraphy in this part of Macedonia.Sulfur in the coals from Mariovo Basin is found as organic sulfur, pyrite and gypsum (Lerouge et al., 2007). Gypsum in coals can be a weathering product of pyrite when occurring closely connected with pyrite, while gypsum in fine layers associated with calcite  is  considered  to  be  formed  by  crystallization  of  calcium  and  sulfate  ions dissolved  in  the  pore  water  during  the  sedimentation  (Lerouge  et  al.,  2007). Total
sulfur content in the coals is low, 1.18 to 1.3% (Raleva et al., 2012), with high sulfur content in macerals (1.2 to 2.3%), showing that measured sulfur can be attributed to organic matter (Lerouge et al., 2007). δ34S values are ranging from +8.5 to +17.3‰ for gypsum in coal seams and from +5.4 to +13.2‰ for vitrinite (Tab.4.3).Considering the complexity of sulfur isotopic evolution that can derive from generation of H2S by bacterial sulfate reduction or thermochemical sulfate reduction, depending  on  paucity  and/or  supply  of  hydrocarbon  electron  donors  and  sulfate (Wynn et al., 2010), as well as modification due to contribution of secondary source of S (ex. pyrite, Onac et al., 2011), further stable isotope analyses of cave gypsum, coal and  sulfate  of  Melnica  spring  are  necessary  to  determine  the  origin and evolution of sulfur participating in the sulfuric speleogenesis of Provalata Cave.Calcite popcorns are covering the corroded calcite crust at various places. Also small flowstone deposits  are  developing  in  a  few  places  in  the  cave  as  a  result  of  late vadose percolation.Figure 4.13    Remnant  cave  features  on  surface  near  Provalata  Cave:  A:  Calcite crust close to the entrance of Provalata Cave; B: Cupola exposed on Buturica Valley slope, close to the contact of marbles with phyllito-micaschist.  Photos  by  M. Temovski.Remnant features on the surfaceRemnants of cupolas and solution pockets are also found on the surface, exposed by denudation, in the small gully in the gorge following the contact of marbles and the
phyllito-micaschist lens.  Remnants  of  a  similar  calcite  crust  can  be  found  on  the surface, near the entrance of the cave (Fig.4.7; Fig.4.13).Melnica springIn 2010, a  small  spring in  the  riverbed of  the  Buturica  River  (Fig.4.7),  just  below Provalata Cave (at 715 m), reemerged after (according to the local population) ~40 years of inactivity. The spring is discharging at several locations along the left bank of Buturica River, near the contact of Cambrian marbles with a  lens  of  phyllito- micaschists. Considering that both Provalata Cave and the spring are located along the contact of marbles with phyllito-micaschist lens, and remnants of cupolas with calcite are found in between, along the same contact, the spring might be the present discharge point of the same system that formed Provalata Cave.Table 4.4 Some basic physical and chemical parameters of the Melnica thermal spring:   temperature   (T)   in   °C,   ion   concentrations   in   mg/l,   specific   electric conductivity (EC) in µS/cm and Total Hardness (TH) in dH.DateTpHECTHHCO3CaMgNO3ClFeSO4measured in21/072012226.989118.6634.4105.734.643.188014.7lab24/11201221.56.64945////////field27/012013216.74892////////field09/02201320.66.62914////////field24/02201321.16.7972////////fieldPreliminary analysis of some physical and chemical parameters show  slightly thermal waters (20-22 °C), with a high amount of dissolved solids, EC values from 891-972 μs/cm, and slightly acidic pH ranging from 6.62-6.9 (Tab.4.4).
Figure 4.14     Schematic representation of the evolu tion of Provalata Cave.If Melnica spring is considered as a late stage phase of Provalata Cave evolution due to incision of Buturica River, then the question of cease of sulfuric acid dissolution remains. If origin of H2S for Provalata Cave sulfuric acid speleogenesis is attributed to the nearby coal deposits, then the sulfuric phase can be a temporal manifestation,
which ceased  after  lowering  of  water  table  below  the  elevation  of  the  coal  field. Further analysis of Melnica spring chemistry, cave gypsum and Mariovo  coal deposits are needed for this hypothesis to be tested.SpeleogenesisThe thick mammillary calcite crust was deposited in shallow phreatic environment by thermal waters, filling previously formed passages and convectional features (cupolas, pockets) formed in a previous phase in deeper parts of the thermal system due to cooling effect of rising carbonated thermal waters.The cave was later completely filled with clay deposits (Fig.4.14), originating from weathering  of  pyroclastic  sediments  most  likely  from  Mariovo  Formation,  which were deposited in a lacustrine environment in Early Pleistocene (Dumurdžanov et al., 2004).Presence  of  alunite,  jarosite,  natroalunite  in  altered  clay  deposits,  combined  with large deposits of  gypsum  found  as  replacement  crusts  or  gypsum  blocks,  and morphological  features  such   as   gypsum   replacement   pockets   point   towards dissolution by sulfuric acid.Gypsum  replacement  crusts  in  sulfuric  caves  are  considered  to  be  of  sub-aerial origin by condensation of H2S  rich  vapors  on  carbonate  rock  (Galdenzi and Marouka, 2003; Palmer, 2007, 2013). In Provalata Cave they are found covering walls in several locations, with best  examples  found  in  the  Second  Room  and Upper  Passage,  where  detached  crust  are  found  piled  below  still  standing  wall crusts.Morphological features such  as  pockets  and  cupolas  developed  in  calcite  crust,  as well  as  trough  the  calcite  crust  in  the  marble  host  rock  suggest  second  phase  of dissolution after the deposition of the calcite crust. Based of their association with gypsum deposits (gypsum replacement crusts and replacement  pockets found on calcite crust), their origin is attributed to dissolution by sulfuric acid. At places these second  generation  cupolas  are  also  connected  to  feeders  and wall and ceiling half tube channels. Such features are often indicative of  convective cells in phreatic conditions (the “morphological suite of rising flow”, Klimchouk, 2007), but can be also formed by condensation corrosion above  the  water  table,  by highly  corrosive
vapors (Audra, 2007;  Audra  et  al,  2007,  Audra  et  al.,  2009d;  Palmer,  2013).  The rising suite in the Lower Passage was produced by condensation corrosion with the small  feeding   channels   representing   vents   supplying   rising   moist   air,   with condensation-corrosion producing half tube wall and ceiling channels and popcorn speleothems and gypsum crust depositing in the lower parts due to evaporation.The sulfate minerals (alunite, natroalunite and jarosite) are clear evidence of alteration  of  clay  by  sulfuric  acid  (Polyak  and  Provencio,  2001).  As  pointed  by Palmer (2007, 2013) alunite is formed by alteration of clay by low pH (less than 4) sulfuric acid. Sulfuric acid is most likely to reach such low pH needed to produce the alunite only in vadose moist droplets on clay (Palmer, 2007, 2013). The distribution of deposits and morphology connected with the sulfuric acid speleogenesis indicates that most of the  dissolution  in  the  sulfuric  phase  was  above the water table by condensation-corrosion. Typical watertable morphology such as corrosion tables, flat roof notches (Audra,  2007;  Audra  et  al., 2009d)  should be expected to develop  in such environment. This was not evident in Provalata Cave and the absence of such morphology might be due to the presence  of the formerly deposited gray  clay. Covering the passages floors, the clay might have shielded the calcite crust or marble host rock from aggressive sulfuric waters or such morphology is located in a lower (presently not accessible) part of the cave.40Ar/39Ar dating of alunite and jarosite from the First Room gave maximum age of1.6 and 1.46 Ma. Considering their formation in a vadose environment, such condition could  have  been  achieved  only  after  the  draining  of  Mariovo  Lake  and incision of the valley of Buturica River.Since last layers of tephra can be found in the travertine layers deposited in lacustrine environment  as  end  part  of  Mariovo  formation,  with  volcanic  activity  in  Kozjak (Kožuf) Mt. active from 4.0 ± 0.2 to 1.8 ± 0.1 Ma (Kolios et al., 1999), and with the oldest maximum age of cave alunite at 1.6 Ma we can place the draining of Mariovo Lake, and onset of fluvial drainage somewhere between 1.8 and 1.6 Ma.With further incision of Buturica River, cave features (cupolas, pockets, calcite crust) were exposed on surface on the valley slope, due to slope retreat. The low thermal Melnica Spring found below the cave in the river bed is likely the present discharge point of the system.
Considering this, the calcite crust and the cave features covered by it,  which represent  the  first  thermal  carbonic  phase,  formed  before  deposition  of  Mariovo Formation and are probably from Late Pliocene-Early Pleistocene age.
4.1.2. MELNIČKA PEŠTERA 1 & 2Melnička Peštera 1 & 2 are located in a small flat hill called Pešta (meaning cave, or with caves), 1.5 km NW of Provalata (Fig.4.15). The entrance of Melnička Peštera 1 is located in a cliff on the SE side of Pešta hill at 871 m, and the entrance  of Melnička Peštera 2 is located 80 m to the SW at 868 m. Melnička Peštera 1 is more than 600 m long, with depth of 17 m,  and  Melnička  Peštera  2  has  total  length of passages of 97 m with depth of 8 m. They both have SW-NE general direction. The caves were first explored  in  2007  by  caving  clubs  Zlatovrv  –  Prilep and Ursus Speleos – Skopje, exploring and mapping 170 m in Melnička  Peštera 1, and only registering Melnička Peštera 2. In 2012 new passages were discovered in Melnička Peštera 1, of which 600 m were mapped with explored passages approx. close to 700 m.Figure 4.15     Local  geological  setting  of  Melnica,  with  Provalata  Cave,  Melnica Spring, Melnička Peštera 1 & 2, the thermally altered features on surface (Gumnište and Crveno Gumnište), and the inactive Skrka thermal vent.Both are developed in carbonate conglomerates close to the contact with underlying dolomitic marbles. In Melnička Peštera 1 this contact with underlying dolomitic can be seen at two locations.In geologic literature (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976; Dumurdžanov et al., 2003, Dumurdžanov et al., 2004; unpublished geological maps in 1:25000  scale, Geological Survey Skopje) the rocks in which these caves are formed are described
as lacustrine travertine deposit of Pleistocene age, deposited as topmost part of Mariovo Formation in  Mariovo  Basin.  In  fact  in  Pešta  Hill,  travertine  deposits  as described for the big travertine plateau between Manastir and Bešište villages, can be seen only in upper part of the formation. Here this formation is mostly composed of carbonate conglomerates that grade upwards into travertine.Figure 4.16 Carbonate conglomerates from Melnička Peštera 1, with some quartz fragments (right)  protruding  from  the  corroded  carbonate  surfaces.  Photos  by  M. Temovski.These conglomerates can be found all along the Pešta Hill, and also to the north on the small Jančeva Peštera Hill, where a small few meter cave is also found.  They covered far bigger area before erosion cut small valleys and disected the plateau into small hills.The  conglomerates  are  mostly composed  of  marble  pebbles,  cobbles  and  boulders with sizes varying from few cm up to 1 m, usually 5 to 20 cm. Marble fragments are of both dolomitic and calcitic marble. Small percent of non-carbonate rocks such as gneiss, schist and quartz fragments  are  also  present.  They  are  far  less rounded, especially the quartz fragments. Cemented with carbonate matrix the conglomerates act as a solid carbonate rock, although have much higher primary porosity. At places some marly and sandy layers can be found. The thickness of the formation, including the top travertine deposits is 30 to 40 m.Considering  the  location,  deposited  above  the  contact  of  Precambrian  gneiss  and marble,  and  the  surrounding,  the  origin  of  the  conglomerates  is  rather  clear. They were transported from north by a paleo stream and deposited in a fluvial to coastal lacustrine environment. The wide valley of Ramnobor, north from Pešta, is a remnant
of  this  paleo  valley,  with  present  intermittent  Ramnobor  stream  incising  younger valley in it.The conglomerates are  cut  by number  of  fractures  in  several  directions.  Some  are gravitational  and connected  to cliff  retreat;  others  are  probably connected  with the regional  tectonic  movements  at  the  north  margin  of  Mariovo  Basin.  The second group is usually with NE and ENE directions, characteristic of tectonics connected to the Kožuf-Kozjak volcanic centers to the south.MELNIČKA PEŠTERA 1MorphologyIn plan view (Fig. 4.17) passages in Melnička Peštera 1 create a branchwork pattern with loops formed mostly because of collapse. Prominent noted fractures have ENE to NE, and NNW direction. Two were clearly seen (NW and NE), others are presumed  from  breakdown  or  passage  morphology.  Passages  have  irregular  wall morphology.Figure 4.17    Simplified  map  of  Melnička Peštera  1.  For  more  detailed  cave  map see appendix.In vertical dimension, passages are mostly horizontal with three notable levels, although the elevation of the upper one is most affected by collapse. The passages are developed slightly above the contact with the underlying dolomitic marbles, at places at contact with overlying marly layers. In the end of Chandelier Room and
North Passage, the passages are developed at the contact, finishing with small crevices in dolomitic marbles.Figure 4.18 Morphological features of Melnička Peštera 1: A – Chandelier Room with pendants and  cupolas;  B  –  Cupolas  and  pockets  developed  in  conglomerates and calcite vein in the Big Room; C – Spongework morphology at the beginning of Narrow Passage; D – Cupola on the ceiling of Big Room; E – Watertable notch on the wall of Corridor Passage; F – Southern end of Chandelier Room at the contact of conglomerates with underlying dolomitic marbles. Photos by M. Temovski.Passages in cross-section are mostly elongated in width, with vague morphology due to dense network of solution pockets, cupolas, spongework and breakdowns. Some have flat roof at contact with overlaying less permeable marly layers (as in Corridor Passage). At the end of Corridor Passage, as well as in Big Cupolas Room and on the east wall of Big Room, water level notches can be seen. They are best preserved on
the  SE  wall  of  Corridor  Passage,  right  before  “The  Door”.  Water  level  at  same elevation can be determined by a shelfstone deposits in a small niche on the NE wall of Chandelier Room. At the contact of passages some wider rooms are located, such as the Chandelier Room, Low Ceiling Room and Big Room.Figure 4.19  Cave deposits in Melnička Peštera 1: A – Mammillary calcite crust in the Narrow Passage;  B  –  Close  up  view  of  the  calcite  crust  from  a  broken  wall (Narrow Passage); C –  Tube-like  small  conduit  developed  in  the  calcite  crust (Narrow  Passage);  D  –  Shelfstone  in  Chandelier  Room;  E  –  Small  pockets (cups) developed in breakdown affected calcite crust covering walls in Big Cupolas Room; F – Corroded acicular calcite (or aragonite) crust in the North Passage. Photos byM. Temovski.On passage  walls  and  ceilings  numerous  solution  pockets  in  various  sizes  can  be seen. They are carved in carbonate fragments and matrix material with less soluble
non-carbonate  fragments  pointing  outward.  They  are  best  expressed  in  parts  with larger carbonate fragments, more in calcitic marble than dolomitic  marble.  Some pockets are also developed in monocrystalline calcite veins as well in conglomerates. Some of these veins seem connected to fractures; others just fill out space between pebbles, and are older than the cave, probably deposited at same time or soon after deposition  of  the  conglomerates.  In  number  of  places  pockets  are  so dense and interconnected that create  spongework  morphology.  Cupolas  are  found at several places and some have both solutional and breakdown  morphology. They were probably formed by solution and  later  altered  by  breakdown  (ex.  Big  Cupolas Room). Some parts (ex. The Dome) have circular form in plan and have dome-like shaped  ceiling  with  conical  floor.  Their  origin  is likely due to collapse, but some pockets and calcite coatings indicate  also  solutional origin. Pendants are found  at number of places as remnant features between former solutional pockets and cupolas. Best examples are the so called “Chandeliers” in the Chandeliers Room with stacked concave wall morphology.Cave sedimentsThere is  not  much  cave sediments present in the cave. Close to the contact  with dolomitic marble dolomitic sand is found due to weathering of the marble. At most places thin matrix residue clay is covering passages. Some pebbles, found in passage floors, are likely from collapsed conglomerate blocks. Breakdown blocks and debris are widespread throughout the cave, especially in the first part of the cave.Secondary deposits found in the cave are shelfstone crust and calcite  coatings. Calcite coatings are the most intriguing ones. They completely cover the walls and ceiling in the Narrow Passage with needle-like calcite (or maybe aragonite), and are found covering fragments of walls in other locations, where they were either dissolved  or  removed  by  collapse.  In  the  Big  Cupolas  Room,  calcite  coatings  of orange color can be found covering the  lower  to  middle  parts  of  walls.  At  some places small cups or pockets can be seen carved in  them.  In  the  small  “Dome” passage  there  are  two  calcite  coatings,  lower  (older)  yellowish,  covered by white rhomohedral calcite coating. In the middle part of the North Passage, right  after it bends  to  the  east,  on  the  ceiling  there  is  a  thick  deposit  of  coating,  composed  of
converging   fans   of   needle-like   carbonate   mineral   (calcite   or   aragonite),   quite corroded with a spongework morphology.The floor in the entrance part of the cave is covered with fine grain sand and dust of aeolian origin, mostly composed of weathered tuff cover, at places with sheep defecation deposits. Its thickness as registered in two pits digged by treasure hunters is more than 1 m.Fragments of  ceramic  pottery  are  also  seen  at  several  places  in  the  cave,  mostly towards the entrance.Typical vadose cave speleothems can be only seen in parts near the entrance, typically in the Speleothem Passage, covered with stalactites, stalagmites and flowstone. In other parts of the cave such speleothems are absent.MELNIČKA PEŠTERA 2Melnička Peštera 2 is smaller in size, but quite similar in morphology to Melnička Peštera 1. The cave has triangular form in plan, with steep entrance passage leading to  a  “Ring  Road  Passage”,  with  collapse  in  center,  under  which  lies  the  Lower Passage. There are two continuations, one smaller to the west, and bigger one to the south. On the northern wall in the Lower Passage there is a small  passage with vertical development “Raft Passage”. Typical small-scale   morphology   as   in Melnička  Peštera  1  is  found  in  the  Lower  Passage  with  nice  cupolas  and  pockets developed  in  calcitic  marble  conglomerates   with   quartz  fragments  protruding outwards.Figure 4.20 Cave rafts in Raft Passage of Melnička Peštera 2. Photos by M. Temovski.
As it is closer to the surface, vadose speleothems are more common in this cave, with nice stalactites and  curtains  emerging from  a  cupolas  in  the  NW part  of  the  cave, under  which  flowstone  is  deposited.  In  the  Raft  Passage  cave  raft  deposits were found pilled up on floor  and  covering  walls.  This  passage  is  severely affected  by collapse  so  the  original  depositional  environment  of  the  cave  rafts  is  difficult  to reconstruct.On surface, between Melnička  Peštera  1  &  2  there  is  a  small  hole  opened  on  the ceiling of a cupola, suggesting connection of passages between the caves.Speleogenesis of Melnička Peštera 1 & 2On the possibility of thermal originConsideration of thermal origin of Melnička Peštera 1 & 2 is due to the registered thermal activity in the area: Provalata Cave, Melnica Spring; traces of thermal alteration of dolomitic marble 500 m SE from Pešta Hill in Gumnište locality (Fig.4.15, Fig.4.27); as well as the small scale morphology in the caves, the lack of fluvial sediments and the ambiguous origin of calcite and/or aragonite coatings in the cave. The model of origin could have been similar to the thermal carbonic phase in Provalata Cave.Figure 4.21     Cross-section of Pešta Hill with Melnička Peštera 1 & 2.Cave passages may have formed by rising thermal waters with elevation of passages connected to the elevation of the spring determined by the valley of Buturica River. Calcite (or  aragonite)  coatings  were  deposited  after  shifting  in  shallower  settings. Above  water  table,  due  to  condensation  corrosion  small  scale  solutional forms developed (pockets, cupolas), some as daughter pockets on earlier phreatic pockets. At water level corrosion notches developed and shelfstone and cave rafts deposited in small isolated niches. With lowering of water table calcite (or aragonite) was also corroded  by  condensation  corrosion,  with  some  small  pockets  and  cups  carved  in coatings.  Thermal  waters  may  have  been  discharging  along  the  contact  of  less
permeable  dolomitic  marbles  and  more  permeable  carbonate  conglomerates.  With incision of Buturica River, thermal waters started discharging at lower levels, with thermally altered dolomitic marbles suggesting thermal activity in Gumnište locality (500 m SE from Melnička Peštera 1 & 2). Collapse in the cave happened as a result to instability of the host rock, due to dense clusters of pockets, cupolas  and spongework, and the structure of conglomerate host rock.Lack of vadose speleothem deposits in cave passages indicate poor connection with the epikarst zone, which could be partly due to some impermeable marly layers.Possible epigenic origin of the small-scale morphologySmall scale features such as pockets, cupolas and spongework can also develop in an epiphreatic environment, due to fast flowing, aggressive flood waters. Such origin of Melnička Peštera 1 & 2 is possible considering the geological and geomorphological location. Water coming from the Pleistocene Ramnobor valleys to the north of the caves, were sinking at the contact of gneiss and dolomitic marbles with the overlying carbonate  conglomerates,  emerging  to  the  south  in  the  valley  of  Buturica  River, creating  a  pirate  connection.   The   high   matrix   porosity   of   the   carbonate conglomerates influenced the irregular passage morphology, with   small-scale morphology imprinted on the walls.The problematic  part  in this  model  is  the  explanation  of the calcite  crust  covering wall passages as well as small-scale features, found up to  the  highest  levels, with secondary small-scale features imprinted on the crust deposits, and also absence of fluvial sediments. Their mammillary morphology and acicular crystals of calcite (or aragonite) are  unlikely  to  be  possible  in  an  epiphreatic  environment,  as  the  water from  which  they  were  deposited  must  have  been  oversaturated   with calcium carbonate. Their deposition in isolated oversaturated pools is also  questionable, especially regarding the supply of calcium carbonate to the pools,  with no vadose speleothems found in the cave. Also the secondary small-scale  features (pockets, cups) carved in the calcite crust hardly can be explained with epiphreatic dissolution.The development of the caves was surely governed by water table position as a result of base level position of Buturica Valley, and further analysis of the crust deposits
will allow more plausible discrimination between the possibility of epiphreatic and thermal hypogenic origin of the caves.
4.1.3. KARŠI PODOT CAVEKarši  Podot  Cave  is  located  in  Karši  Podot  travertine  terrace  (350  m),  with  the entrance at 335 m, located on the NE edge of the  terrace,  15 m  above  Crna  Reka river bed (Fig.4.4). The entrance part is in tufaceous limestone, where due to collapse of a big block, the cave can  be  entered from two points, above and  below the collapsed block. The cave can  be  entered  also  by  a  narrow  channel  from  a  lower point on the slope, which joins with the Conglomerate Room.Figure 4.22 Extended profile of Karši Podot  Cave  with  geological  and hydrological characteristics.MorphologyKarši Podot Cave has 200 m long passages, with three separate segments based on lithology in which cave  passages  are  developed.  The  Entrance  Room  is  formed in tufaceous limestones; Conglomerate Room, Middle Passage and Collapse Room are formed in clastic sediments; and the Main Room and Southern Passage are formed in dolomitic marble.Entrance Room and Conglomerate Room have E-W orientation. The Conglomerate room  is  circular  in  plan  view  with  nearly  flat  ceiling.  It  is  mostly  developed  in conglomerates  that   grade   upwards   into  silt   and  clay.   The   Middle   passage   is developed mostly in silt and clay, and leads to the Main Room.The Main Room is the most important part of the cave, and it is  completely developed in dolomitic marbles, which are covered by clastic sediments to the N-NE. It is 50 m long, 10 to 20 m wide, with 3 to 6 m high ceiling, completely developed in dolomitic  marbles.  The  floor  is  covered  with  breakdown  material,  clay  and  large guano deposits due to the large bat colony present.
There is a small passage (Southern Passage) continuing to the south from the Main Room. The Southern Passage is a 10 m long passage, with dolomitic sand covering floor  and  half  of  the  east  wall.  At  the  end  of  the  passage  there  is  a  profile  of  the dolomitic sand with visible bedding that continues in the host dolomitic marble rock. The  same  bedding can  be  clearly seen  across  the  eastern  wall  of  the Main Room. Such features are typical of karstification by ghost-weathering  (Bruxelles  et  al., 2009; Quinif, 1999).Figure 4.23 Plan view of Karši Podot Cave with lithology and location of characteristic hydrological and morphological features. For more detailed cave map see appendix.Collapse Room is located to the NE from the Main Room, and it is mostly developed in clay and silt, with large collapsed blocks mostly along or close to the contact with underlying dolomitic marbles. To the north a small passage continues, developed in tufaceous limestones.Micro-morphology of the Main Room and Southern PassageIn the dolomitic marbles in the Main Room and the Southern Passage, characteristic pendant-like  and  spongework  small-scale  morphological  features  are  widespread. They can be well-rounded when developed along the foliation,  or  sharper when developed at cross-points  of  fractures  and  foliation.  Their  size  varies from few centimeters up to 20-30 cm in length. In Southern Passage they are also seen below
the  dolomitic  sand.  Removal  of  softer  parts  of  weathered  walls  in  the  Southern Passage reveals such pendant-like morphologies in dolomitic marble.Figure 4.24     Morphological features  in Karsi  Podot Cave:  A  -  Dolomitic  alterite sand with  preserved  foliation  structure  (Southern  Passage);  B  -  Dolomitic alterite sand  on  the  floor  and  partly  on  the  wall  with  pendants  on  the ceiling and wall revealed after removal of alterite (Southern Passage); C -  Well-rounded pendants (Main Room); D – Pendants on the ceiling in the southern part of the Main Room; E– Ceiling pendants  and  collapsed  blocks covered  with  thick  guano  deposits  in  the Main Room; F – Pendants developed along the bedding (Main Room). Photos by M. Temovski.
Cave sedimentsRed-brown clay deposits are covering floor, roof and walls in the Main Room. At some places these clays have been eroded and only yellow stains on the dolomitic marble is left to testify of their former distribution. X-ray analysis of sample (KP02) above 1st spring determined quartz, goethite, kaolinite, muscovite, talc, vermiculite and dolomite.X-ray analysis of brown silt sample (KP03) from the same location as KP02 determined magnesiohornblende-ferroan, lizardite, goethite, albite, kaolinite, talc, dolomite, muscovite, quartz and vermiculite.Table 4.5        Mineral composition of clay and sand from Karši Podot Cave.sediment (sample)mineral compositionRed brown clay (KP02)quartz, goethite, kaolinite, muscovite, talc, vermiculite, dolomiteBrown silt (KP03)magnesiohornblende-ferroan, lizardite, goethite, albite, kaolinite, talc, dolomite, muscovite, quartz, vermiculiteBrown sand (KP06)fluorapatite, vermiculite, kaolinite, dolomite, magnesiohornblende, talc, muscovite, clinochlore, sepiolite, albite, quartzA  sediment  profile  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Main  Room  reveals  cross-bedded pattern with white to yellow dolomitic sand and brown sand and silt, deposited on top of a white dolomitic sand alterite. X-ray analysis of brown sand sample (KP06) from   this   profile   determined    fluorapatite,    vermiculite,    kaolinite, dolomite, magnesiohornblende, talc, muscovite, clinochlore, sepiolite, albite, quartz.Quartz, muscovite, albite and magnesiohornblende are most likely detrital minerals, coming either from the Precambrian metamorphic and magmatic rocks (gneiss, granodiorite, micashist,  amphibolite)  brought  by  Crna  Reka  with  backflooding,  or from the local terrace clastic deposits that where previously deposited by Crna Reka. Dolomite is found  in  all  samples  and  is  most  likely  coming  from  dolomitic  sand residue. In sample KP06 it is from redeposition of the dolomitic sand, and in samples KP02 and KP03 it is probably from local dolomitic sand residue at the contact with altered bedrock. Clinochlore can also be a detrital mineral as  it  is  found  in  the Precambrian gneiss and micashists.
Goethite and kaolinite are most likely local weathering products. Vermiculite, talc, sepiolite, lizardite and clinochlore can be local hydrothermal weathering products of mica and amphibole minerals. Fluorapatite found in the sediment profile in the Main Room is likely connected to the thick bat guano deposits.Figure 4.25 Cave deposits in Karši Podot Cave: A - Sediment profile with cross- bedded pattern of brown sand and silt with dolomitic sand, deposited on top of white dolomitic sand alterite (southern part of Main Room); B - Cave rafts in a niche in the Collapse  Room;  C  –  Carbonate  blades  crossing  each  other  (Blade  Passage);  D – Partly exposed  carbonate  blade  (Blade  Passage);  E  –  Carbonate  blades  with  the ones  at  the  ceiling  having  more  flat  morphology  (Blade  Passage);  F  – Elongated curvilinear carbonate blades exposed above stacked carbonate   blades   (Blade Passage) Note popcorn speleothems on the tip of the blade. Photos by M. Temovski.
Breakdown material is wide-spread in the cave, with different lithology depending of the lithology in which the passage is formed. In the Main Room, the breakdown material has the same pendant-like morphology.Most of the floor in the Main Room and partly in the Collapse Room is covered by thick guano deposits, due to the large bat colony living in the cave.Stacked piles of cave rafts (Fig.4.25) are found in the Collapse Room (Fig.4.23) in small niches in dolomitic marble or at the contact with clays. Their thickness is from less than mm and up to cm size, with voids between rafts at places filled with silt and clay deposit.Unusual elongated carbonate blades are found in a small side passage (Blade Passage) behind the 1st spring in the Main Room, and also below a collapsed block in the Collapse Room (Fig.4.23, Fig.4.25). Their contact with the bedrock suggests they are of depositional origin, and not a speleogen. They are curvilinear in long direction and platy to round in cross-section.In the end of the Blade Passage they are sub-horizontal and emerging from what it seems like a deposit of stacked blades below and on the ceiling with intercalations of silt and clay between stacked blades; while closer to the connection with the Main Room  they  are  intersecting  each  other  and  are  inclined  at  different  angles  in  an organized fashion, with intersecting blades inclined at similar angles but in opposite direction (60° and 45°; 30° and 15°).The  blades  are  mostly  covered  with  gray  to  brown  silt.  At  places  thin  layers  of flowstone are deposited on  them,  covering  the  silt  deposit,  while  small  popcorn speleothems are also found growing on the tips of the blades.The blades resemble the stacked rafts, with different inclination of blades comparing to differently inclined rafts (intersecting and inclined at high angles filling vertical voids,  while  sub-horizontally  aligned  rafts  are  covering  vertical  voids  previously filled  with  rafts  or   deposited   on   horizontal   surfaces   at   first).   While their organizational structure is similar  to  the  relationship  of  rafts,  they  have more irregular form and are elongated and curvilinear. This can be due to later widening after sinking below water surface (post-depositional). The  sediment  (mostly silt)
between blades, as well as cave rafts is not indurated and it seems it filled voids after deposition of rafts.Based on the observation of morphology and relationship of deposits, it is possible that the  blades  originate  from  previously  deposited  piles  of  cave  rafts,  overgrown after  sinking in  saturated  waters,  with  voids  between  rafts  filled  with  silt  and clay deposits.  After  lowering  of  water  level,  and  removal  of  clastic sediments,  the elongated and curvilinear blades were exposed with intersecting blades formed from rafts deposited in vertical voids (larger inclination angle), while sub-horizontal, more platy, blades formed from rafts deposited on horizontal surfaces.Table 4.6    Some physical and chemical parameters of thermal waters in the 1st spring (Karši Podot Cave): temperature (T) in °C, ion concentrations in  mg/l, specific electric conductivity (EC) in µS/cm and Total Hardness (TH) in dH.DateTpHECTHHCO3CaMgNO3ClFeSO4measured in18/092011237.682029.45/160.1630.3446120/lab23/072012236.9188125634.4126.553.283.170.0270.4lab21/042013236.69934////////fieldHydrological characteristicsTwo springs emerge from the west wall in Main Room (1st spring – the one to the north, and 2nd spring – the one to the south), leading to small streams that join below the breakdown  pile  in the center  of  the room.  Although  not  accessible,  the  stream continues to the north towards Crna Reka.On the right bank of Crna Reka there is no visible discharge spring. In spring season after rising of water level in Crna Reka river bed, there is a rise in water level in the cave, causing backflooding, with a small shallow lake forming at the second spring. The water of the spring is mildly thermal, and with constant temperature of 23 °C.
The thermal waters discharging in the cave have neutral to slightly acidic pH, and have  high  dissolved  carbonate  content,  with  Ca  and  Mg  concentration  reflecting dissolution of dolomitic marbles (Tab.4.6).Figure 4.26 Schematic model of ghost-rock weathering and phantom cave development in Karši Podot Cave.
SpeleogenesisThe Southern Passage with in-situ dolomitic sand alterite residue preserving original rock   structure   indicates   ghost-rock   weathering   in   the   dolomitic   marbles.   The development of cave passages in the dolomitic marbles  is  a  result  of  ghost-rock isovolumetric dissolution of calcite minerals in the dolomitic marble, leaving in-situ dolomitic sand alterite residue.This process has been carried out by slowly moving thermal waters, with insufficient energy to carry the remaining dolomite sand. The removal of the alterite  and exposing (development)  of  phantom  passages  have  been  by  backflooding  of  Crna Reka,  which  eroded  the  dolomitic   sand,   depositing   elsewhere   cross-bedded sediments of dolomitic sand and non-carbonate silt and clay brought by Crna Reka or eroded from the  clay-silt  sediments  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  cave (Fig.4.26). Downward evolution of the cave due to incision of Crna Reka created spongework cave passages with large void volume that became unstable after removal of alterite, which resulted with  collapse  and  led  to  development  of  a  large  room  –  the  Main Room.
4.1.4. INDICATORS OF THERMAL SPELEOGENESIS FOUND ON SURFACEGUMNIŠTEGumnište is an area in Buturica Valley between Provalata Cave and  Melnička Peštera  1  &  2  (Fig.4.15,  Fig.4.27),  developed  in  Precambrian  dolomitic  marbles. Along this area there are several localities where the dolomitic marbles are altered, and highly weathered.  The  alteration  is  the  same  as  in  Karši  Podot  Cave, with dolomitic sand residue formed as a result of incomplete dissolution  (ghost rock weathering).  This  sand  is  later  easily  removed  by  the  meteoric  water, leaving protruding remnant features of dolomitic marble. Artificial carving in patches of in- situ dolomitic sand reveals the protruding remnants of dolomitic marble, indicating the in-situ development of the dolomitic sand. Same features  (dolomitic sand and remnants of dolomitic marble) are seen also in the Ramnobor query, north of Pešta Hill, but unfortunately documenting them was not allowed by the owner.In  the  western  part  of  this  area,  near  the  road  cut,  there  is  a  gradual  change  of alteration from white dolomitic marble, to greyish and reddish altered  dolomitic marble. Some black mineralization is visible in the reddish dolomitic marble. X-ray from a sample (CGUM04) showed composition of calcite, dolomite and goethite.Comparing this  locality with  similar  features  seen  in  Karši  Podot  Cave  where  the ghost rock weathering is due to dissolution by thermal waters, and also considering the  proximity  of  this  area  to  the  Melnica  spring,  Provalata  Cave  and Melnička Peštera 1 & 2, where thermal speleogenesis is also considered, the alteration found in Gumnište area is likely connected to thermal waters.THERMAL VENTSIt was reported from the local population that on the slopes of Pantelejmon (1344) and Gola Skrka (1187), there are small holes from which quite hot air is blowing. Two  such  vents  were  located,  one  on  the  southern  slope  of  Pantelejmon  (1344) – Uškova Koliba vent, and one on the southern slope of Gola Skrka (1187) –  Skrka vent,  both  in  Cambrian  marbles  (Fig.4.2).  Both  are  not  penetrable  with similar diameter sizes of ~20 cm.
The Skrka vent is located 900 m NE from Provalata Cave at 930 m elevation, 210 m above Buturica River. Although this vent was reported to be active in the late 80ties (Micko Derivolski pers. comm.), there vas no hot air blowing noted. The temperature measured in February was 12 °C.Figure 4.27 Ghost rock weathering and thermally altered dolomitic marble at Gumnište locality: A – View of western part of Gumnište locality (Crveno Gumnište - CGUM)  with  Pešta  Hill  in  the  background;  B  –  Protruding  remnants  of  altered dolomitic marble, exposed after erosion of alterite residue produced by ghost-rock weathering (CGUM); C – Iron mineralization at CGUM; D – View of eastern part of Gumnište locality (GUM); E – Protruding remnants of altered  dolomitic  marbles (GUM);  F  –  Protruding  remnants  of  altered  dolomitic  marbles revealed after digging of yellowish dolomitic sand (GUM). Photos by M. Temovski.
Uškova Koliba vent is located on the southern slope of Pantelejmon (1344), at 1040 m  elevation,  ~200  m  above  the  small  Potokot  stream,  tributary  to  Satoka  River (Fig.4.2). The  vent is located 500 m NE from the Čavkarnik locality.  Strong draft was coming from the vent, with measured temperature of 21.2 °C (January).Figure 4.28   Thermal vents on surface: A - Uškova Koliba vent; B - Skrka  vent. Photos by M. Temovski.Skrka vent is probably connected to the thermal karst system in Buturica River, with present thermal spring – Melnica spring located at the river bed at 715 m elevation.Uškova  Koliba  vent  indicates  thermal  karstification  also  in  Pantelejmon  Mt.  The geological situation between Skrka and Pantelejmon (depression filled with deposits of Upper Miocene, Pliocene and Pleistocene age) is replicated between Pantelejmon (1344) and Vrvovite  (1403),  indicating  possible  similar  situation  as  in Buturica Valley. Although caves and thermal springs were not found in the vicinity, nearby Čavkarnik  locality  (Fig.4.29)  has  remnant  cave  features  indicating  similar  cave development as in the first phase of Provalata Cave.ČAVKARNIKČavkarnik is a cliff in Cambrian marbles on the SW foothill of Pantelejmon (1344), 500 m  SW  from  Uškova  Koliba  vent,  and  60  m  above  the  small  stream  Potokot (Fig.4.2). It is a 250 m long erosional cliff developed on the left side of the small stream  Čavkarnikot.  Remnants  of  cave  features  are  exposed  along  the  cliff due to slope retreat (Fig.4.29). These features include various convective  disolutional features  such as pockets and cupolas (Fig.4.29: C, E), some of  them filled with calcite crust  and  clays.  Calcite  crust  is  generally  covering  vertical dissolution features, as well as lining pockets and cupolas (Fig.4.29: C, D). The thickness of the
crust is from several cm up to 0.5 m, with secondary pockets developed in the crust. The clay deposits are mostly filling cupolas and pockets at the foothill of the cliff (Fig.29: E), with clay from upper parts mostly removed, but still some remnants of clay deposits can be found filling cupolas and pockets in the upper parts (Fig.4.29: C).Figure 4.29 Disolutional features and deposits on Čavkarnik cliff: cl – clay, c – calcite crust. Photos by M. Temovski.
4.2. KOŽUF HYDROTHERMAL KARST4.2.1. HYDROTHERMAL ALTERATION OF CARBONATE ROCKS IN ALLCHAR ORE DEPOSITAllchar (Alšar) is a complex, polychrono-polygenetic volcano-hydrothermal Sb-As- Tl-Au deposit, located between the eastern foothill of Mt. Kozjak and  western foothill of Mt. Kožuf. The name Allchar derives from the names of the mine concessioners (English-French Company) at the end of 19th century, Allatini-banker, owner of the concession and Charteau -mining engineer who worked in the mine.Figure 4.30 Geological setting of the Kožuf thermal karst. The close-up of Allchar locality  is  given  in  Fig.4.31.  Geological  data  modified  after  Dumurdžanov  et  al. (1976), Rakićević & Pendžerkovski (1970), Geološki Zavod – Skopje (unpublished).The mine has a long history of exploration dating back to the antiquity. It was mostly explored  for  arsenic  production,  especially  in  the  19th  century,  when  also  first  Tl minerals were found. It received extensive geological investigations after the Second World War, with discovery of 300 000 tons of antimony,  arsenic and thallium ore deposits.  From  the  1980s  thallium  minerals  from  Allchar,  especially  lorandite,
received special research interest as a possible solar neutrino detectors (Boev et al., 2012).Figure 4.31     Geological  map  of  Allchar  locality,  after  Volkov  et  al.  (2006).  1  – Quaternary alluvial sediments; 2 – Quaternary moraine sediments; 3 – limonitized breccia; 4 – tuff; 5 – pyroclastic rocks; 6 – sericite-chlorite schist; 7 – shale; 8 – marbleized  limestoned;  9  –  dolomite;  10  –  hydrothermally  altered  dolomite;  11 – siliceous dolomite; 12 – oxidation zone; 13 – andesitic subvolcanic bodies and lavas; 14 – andesite; 15 – fault; 16 – adit mouth; 17 – central area of the deposit.The  deposit  is  situated  in  the  volcanic  complex  of  Mt.  Kožuf,  an  E-W  oriented complex formed at the on the cross section between the transversal  Kožuf-Kilikis structure (E-W) and the Vardar zone (NW-SE to N-S) structures (Boev et al., 2012).
The local geology is represented with Upper Triassic bedded and massive carbonate rocks (dolomite, marble) underlain by Middle Triassic sandstone and claystone. They are unconformably overlain by Pliocene dolomites and tufaceous dolomites grading to ash, crystal tuffs, tuff breccia and lacustrine tuffaceous sediments. They are covered by Quaternary glacial till (Percival & Radtke, 1994; Boev & Serafimovski, 1996; Boev et al., 2012)The ore deposits are hosted in both Triassic and Tertiary rocks, and  closely connected to the Kozuf volcanism, with two principal volcano-intrusive phases identified (Boev et al., 2012; Boev & Jelenković, 2012): Miocene phase (14.3 - 8.2 Ma); and the most significant Pliocene phase (5.1 - 3.9 Ma).While the origin of the ore deposit, and its evolution connected to the Kozuf volcanism is of complex nature and it was extensively geologically studied  during the last 50 years, the main interest from karst point of view lies in the carbonate host rocks and their susceptibility to karstification. Their characteristic of increasing porosity and permeability as a result of solubility was favorable for the circulation of hydrothermal waters from which the ore minerals were deposited.Percival  &  Radtke  (1994)  described  hydrothermal  alteration  in  each  of  the  rocks throughout the Allchar district, with different intensity varying locally, determining six   types    of    alteration:    decalcification,    silicification,    argillization,    veining, dolomitization and supergene alteration.Decalcification and dolomitization are the two types of hydrothermal alteration that can  be  attributed  to  increasing  porosity  of  carbonate  rocks  at  bigger  depths,  and therefor hypogenic speleogenesis, while later supergene alteration due to oxidation can also have impact on the speleogenetic evolution in shallow depths, or close to the surface.Decalcification is described as a process of removal of calcite and dolomite from the sedimentary host-rocks by weakly acidic solutions (in a pyrite-stable field) resulting in increased porosity and permeability (Percival & Radtke, 1994). This is followed by deposition of  replacement  silica  (silicification)  and  later  argillic  alteration.  The most complete silicification resulted in formation of jasperoids, but much  larger volumes of rocks are only weakly to moderately silicified (Percival & Radtke, 1994).
Decalcification affected both the Triassic carbonate rocks, and the Pliocene tufaceous dolomites.Figure 4.32 North-south longitudinal profile through Allchar locality  with geological, alteration  and  mineralization  relationship  among  the  northern,  central and southern zone of the area, after Percival and Radtke (1994).As second style  of  decalcification,  ‘sanding’,  was described by Percival &  Radtke (1994), where the decalcification is lacking silicification. Here the  intergranular corrosion  by  hydrothermal   fluids   removed   the   fine-grained   matrix, leaving predominantly granular dolomite sand, commonly  preserving   primary textural features. This alteration was attributed as common for the Tertiary dolomite.Weekly  developed   dolomitization   was   described   in   the   Triassic   marble,   with dolomitized rocks typically lighter colored than the host marble, and locally mottled, fine-grained, non-layered, highly jointed, containing manganese and iron oxides, and grading into undolomitized marble (Percival & Radtke, 1994). Hydrothermal origin of the dolomitization is questioned by Percival &  Radtke  (1994), suggesting also possible origin from removal of calcium carbonate from dolomitic rocks by low-pH hydrothermal fluids.Evolution of the hydrothermal system and ore mineral depositionThe evolution of this hydrothermal ore body started with hydrothermal karstification at depth by ore mineral bearing fluids. Water was flowing along high angle faults and favorable bedding planes, dissolving carbonate rocks (decalcification after Percival
and Radtke, 1994) and also producing alteration such as silification (replacement of carbonate  with  silica),  as  well  as  so  called  ‘sanding  decalcification’  of  dolomite rocks,  where  fine  grained  carbonate  matrix  was  dissolved,  leaving  only dolomite grains as dolomitic sand residue (Percival & Radtke, 1994). This increased porosity in the carbonate rocks, which served as a host for ore mineral formation in several phases   of   deposition   due   to   lowering   of   temperature   and   pressure   (Boev   & Serafimovski,  1996):  in  the  first  phase  high  temperature sulfides were deposited, such as  arsenopyrite,  pyrite,  marcasite  etc.;  the second phase deposition was after drop of temperature and pressure, with  formation of stibrite dominated deposits accompanied  by falcmanite,  phizelite,  pyrite  etc.;  the  third  mineralization  phase  is represented   with   massive    separation  of  As-Tl   minerals   such   as   realgar, auripigmentum,  lorandite,  vrbaite, alsharite  etc.;  hydrothermal  phase  ends  with relatively low temperatures by deposition of barite, calcite, native sulfur etc. The ore deposition occurred before  4.31 ± 0.02 Ma, at depth of 200 to 430 m and temperatures of 280 to ~120 °C (Jelenković & Boev, 2011).Oxidation processes on  surface  or  due  to  mixing with shallow oxygen rich  waters influenced supergene alteration of the  ore  bodies  (Percival  &  Radtke,  1994). Oxidation of iron sulfides produced iron oxides and sulfuric acid, which  produced various sulfate minerals.Water in this hydrothermal system is most likely of meteoric origin (Volkov et al., 2006),   with   possible   participation   of   juvenile   and   connate   waters   (Boev   & Serafimovski,  1996),  heated  by  high  geothermal  gradient  due  to  proximity  of shallow-seated intrusive rocks of Kožuf volcanism, with  most  of  the  ore  elements originating from the intrusive igneous rocks  with  smaller  contribution  from the surrounding sedimentary rocks (Percival & Radtke, 1994; Boev &  Serafimovski, 1996).Uplift and  erosion  during Pleistocene  have  exposed  the  ore  mineral  deposits,  with present day low-temperature thermal springs  (Toplek  Spring)  found  nearby  the northern part, at the river bed of Majdanska Reka.
4.2.2. KOZUF THERMAL SPRINGSThermal  waters  in  Kožuf  vicinity  are  found  discharging  at  three  localities:  KiselaVoda, Toplek and Topli Dol (Fig.4.30).TOPLI DOLTopli Dol thermal spring is located at 620 m elevation, in the lower part of Topli Dol River, 1.5 km upstream from the confluence with Blašnica River,  right-hand tributary to Crna Reka and main and largest river draining the area between Kozjak and Kožuf Mt (Fig.4.30). It was first described by Kekik (1972), giving information about the local geology and structure and chemical characteristics of the water.Table 4.7 Geochemical characteristic of Topli Dol thermal waters, after Kekik (1972). Ion concentrations in given in mg/l, hardness in german degrees (dH).HCO3ClSO4CaMgNa+K    Tot. mineralizationpH  Total HardnessCarbonate Hardness774143616438.445.31071.76.538.636.3The spring is located at the contact of Upper Triassic carbonate rocks (marbles and dolomites) and Cretaceous (Turonian) clastic formation. The area is highly faulted, especially   to   the   south   (Ržanovo),   with   numerous   ophiolitic   (Jurassic)   rocks displaced along the faults.The discharge is 2  l/s,  and  it  has  the highest  temperature  of  all thermal  springs  in Kožuf area at 28 °C (Boev & Lepitkova, 2003). The chemistry of water reported by Boev  &  Lepitkova  (2003)  indicates  high  total  dissolved  contents  (884  mg/l), with high carbonate  hardness  (43.2  dH),  with  206.1mg/l  Ca,  62.7  mg/l  Mg, and 53.77 mg/l SO4. The water also have acidic taste which is due to presence of free CO2 (142 mg/l  –  Kekik,  1972;  116  mg/l  –  Boev  &  Lepitkova,  2003).  The high Ca and  Mg content is due to dissolution of the dolomites and marbles, while the sulfate content might be a result of sulfuric acid dissolution operating at shallow depth. On the base of the situation at Allchar locality where there are sulfate minerals formed as a result of oxidation of iron sulfides, the origin of sulfuric acid can be from oxidation of iron sulfides due to mixing with epigenic oxigenated waters.
Table 4.8	Geochemical characteristics of the thermomineral waters near Kožuf volcanic complex, after Boev & Lepitkova (2003).ParametersKisela VodaTopli DolToplekTemperature (°C)212822Tastesour/acidicsour/acidicnemapH6.56.488.3Solids, total (mg/l)912868410Solids, dissolved (mg/l)900884396Solids, suspended (mg/l)121414KMnO4 demand (mg/l)3.63.33.4Specific electric conductivity (µS/cm)11121108324.2M-alcalinity (mg/l)16015830Total hardness (dH)464511.1Carbonate hardness (dH)44.543.28.4CO2 (mg/l)98116/H2S (mg/l)///SiO2 (mg/l)1010119.3Discharge (l/s)0.72.015Ca (mg/l)213.8206.152.3Mg (mg/l)76.762.715.4Na (mg/l)1731.716.4K (mg/l)89.310.1Cl (mg/l)15.115.16SO4 (mg/l)52.653.7725.62Sc (mg/l)18.3113As (mg/l)0.180.240.38Pb (mg/l)0.0360.0400.018Cd (mg/l)0.0010.0010.001Zn (mg/l)0.0280.0300.007Cu (mg/l)0.0070.0070.025Fe (mg/l)0.0250.0380.021Mn (mg/l)0.0030.0560.002Co (mg/l)0.030.030.002
ParametersKisela VodaTopli DolToplekNi (mg/l)0.0100.0060.005Cr (mg/l)0.0040.0020.005Sr (mg/l)1.011.030.032F (mg/l)0.100.100.10NO3 (mg/l)///NO2 (mg/l)///P (mg/l)///KISELA VODAKisela voda is a thermal spring situated 1.5 km southeast from Mrezicko  Village. The spring is located at 690 m elevation, on a NNE oriented fault, at the contact of Cretaceous (Turonian) clastic sediments with the  Upper  Triassic   carbonate formation, and overlying Vitacevo Formation (Pliocene) deposits.It  has  the  lowest  temperature  of  the  Kozuf  thermal  springs,  21  °C,  with  highest dissolved content (900 mg/l). It has acidic taste, with pH at 6.5 and CO2 content of 96 mg/l,  sulfate  content  is  52.6  mg/l  ,  Ca  is  213.8  mg/l  while  Mg  is 76.7 mg/l. The spring has a small discharge of 0.7 l/s (Boev & Lepitkova, 2003).The geochemical  characteristics  are  almost  identical  as  in  Topli  Dol  Spring,  with dissolved Ca and Mg  carbonate  coming  from  the  Upper  Triassic  marbles  and dolomite, while the SO4 as in Topli Dol and Toplek is probably due to sulfuric acid speleogenesis by oxidation of iron sulfides.TOPLEKToplek springs are situated on the northern edge of Allchar locality, on the left bank of    Majdanska    Reka    river    bed    (Fig.4.30;    Fig.4.33).    They   are    located   in hydrothermally altered dolomites, with three detectable discharge locations (Toplek 1, 2, 3) along 50 m long  section  at  elevation  of  730  m.  Most  of  the  water is discharging at Toplek 2 with 15 l/s discharge (Boev & Lepitkova, 2003), making it the biggest thermal  spring  in  Kozuf  area.  On  the  cliff  behing  the  spring there  are number of small (few meters long) cavities, which are not penetrable. Downstream 50 m from Toplek 1 spring, there is a cold water spring, capped for drinking. It is a
normal karst water spring, with temperature of water at 6.5 °C (March 2013), with pH of 8.54 and specific electric conductivity of 162 µS/cm.Figure 4.33 Toplek 2 thermal springs, located on the left side of Majdanska Reka riverbed. Photo by D. Jovanoski.Boev & Lepitkova (2003) report temperature of 22 °C for Toplek spring, with pH at 8.3, specific electric conductivity of 324.2 µS/cm, and total dissolved solids of 324 mg/l. It has much less dissolved content comparing to the other thermal springs in Kozuf area with 52 mg/l of Ca, 15.4 mg/l of Mg and 25.62 mg/l of SO4 but it has the largest SiO2 content with 119.3 mg/l, comparing to the 10 mg/l in both Topli Dol and Kisela Voda springs.Table 4.9         Some physico-chemical parameters of Toplek springs (March 2013)SpringpHSpec. elec. conductivity (µS/cm)Temperature (°C)Toplek 17.7635519Toplek 27.6737021Toplek 37.6839020.4Toplek 4 (Češma)8.541626.5
Considering the nearby cold water karst spring, which has significantly lower temperature and dissolved content, the reason for the intermediate values in Toplek Spring can be due to mixing with cold epigenic waters, which are draining the upper parts of the Triassic carbonate formation. The high SiO2 content is  in  good agreement with the Allchar locality, where hydrothermal waters which produced the ore mineralization had high silica content, which also replaced partly the carbonate rocks.
4.3. DISCUSSIONHypogenic karst in the researched area is generally connected to thermal waters, and found in only three areas (Melnica, Podot and Kožuf; Fig.4.1). The thermal waters are most likely of meteoric origin, and were heated due to deep circulation in an area of high geothermal gradient. The high geothermal gradient is due to Kožuf-Kozjak volcanism which was active from Upper Miocene to Pleistocene (6 – 1.8 Ma, Boev et  al.,  2012),  with  explosive  character  which  produced  large  pyroclastic  material, filling the neighboring basins.Present discharge of thermal waters is connected to base level positions, between 620 and 730 m (Melnica and Kožuf localities), with the lowest thermal spring in the river bed of Crna Reka at 320 m (Podot locality). Caves connected to hypogenic development were only registered in Melnica and Podot localities, while in  Kožuf area such caves were not found. Nevertheless chemical characteristics of  thermal waters in Kožuf area suggest that karst is functioning below.Figure 4.34     Cross-section  of  Buturica  Valley  with  hypogenic  karst  features  and relationship with Mariovo Basin deposits.In Melnica and Podot areas, hypogenic karstification is found in dolomitic marbles (Precambrian) calcitic marbles (Cambrian), and also most likely in Pleistocene carbonate conglomerates. Thermal hypogenic karstification in dolomitic marbles was accompanied by ghost-rock weathering process, which produced incomplete dissolution of the dolomitic marbles, dissolving mostly calcite, and leaving dolomite in-situ  residue.  In  Melnica  area  such  features  are  found  on  surface,  exposed  by erosion  due  to  incision  of  Buturica  Valley,  while  in  Podot  area,   ghost-rock weathering is seen in Karši Podot Cave, where removal of dolomitic alterite residue produced phantom cave. Considering that dolomitic marbles are less susceptible to
karstification, with no  other  caves  found  in  them and their general fluvial  surface morphology, ghost-rock weathering by  slowly  moving  rising  thermal  waters and consequently phantom cave development played important role in karstification. To what extent the area between these localities is affected by  ghost-rock  weathering remains to be seen.In calcitic marbles the influence of thermal karstification is more directly expressed. Provalata Cave is  a  remarkable  example  of  a  thermal  hypogenic  cave,  where  two distinct speleogenetic phases are recognized. The first phase of cave development is due to dissolution by cooling effect of rising carbonated thermal  waters. Meteoric waters were probably circulating deep trough the karst system  increasing their temperature due to high geothermal gradient, and rising along fractures and faults on the margin of Mariovo Basin. Phreatic morphology with cupolas and rising channels was formed in deeper parts, on which thick mammillary calcite crust was deposited after shift (most likely due to tectonic movement in  Pliocene  -  Pleistocene)  to shallower  phreatic  environment.  Continuous  deposition in Mariovo basin in Early Pleistocene covered the whole area with  pyroclastic rocks,  and  pyroclastic  rock- derived clays completely filled the cave. The thermal karst system was probably still functioning during this period,  contributing calcium carbonate for deposition of travertine deposits in Mariovo  Formation. Travertine  layers  are  also  found  in Vitačevo Formation (Pliocene), with the thermal karst system also contributing to the carbonate content of the lake.In Kožuf  area  thermal  karstification can be  determined  on the  base  of  presence  of thermal springs emerging at the contact of carbonate rocks with various schist and clastic rocks, having a high concentration of dissolved calcium carbonate. Kožuf area is more  closely related  to the  source  of  the  geothermal  heat,  considering the  close proximity to intrusions of volcanic rocks (Kožuf volcanic center).Surface remnants of previous hydrothermal karstification are found at several locations in  Melnica  area.  Ghost-rock  alteration  is  seen  in  Gumnište  locality,  and remnants of cupolas and calcite crust are found along the slope of Buturica Valley, just below Provalata  Cave  (above  the  Melnica  Spring).  Similar  assemblage  of phreatic  morphology  covered  by  calcite  crust  and  clay  deposits,  as in the first speleogenetic phase in Provalata Cave, are seen at Čavkarnik erosion exposed cliff.
On the southern slopes of both Pantelejmon (1344) and Gola Skrka (1187) at 1040 m and 930 m elevations, small thermal vents are found with warm air flow (although the Skrka vent is now inactive).Geological and geomorphological control on hypogenic speleogenesisThe hydrothermal karst system is still active in all of the three localities, with low- temperature thermal springs discharging generally small amount of water (up to 15l/s in Toplek).  Water  is  most  likely of  meteoric  origin,  with  possible  participation  of juvenile and connate waters also considered for Kožuf area (Boev & Serafimovski, 1996), with deep circulation which resulted in increased temperatures due to the high geothermal  gradient  as  a  result  of  Kožuf  (and  Kozjak)  volcanism.  In  Melnica  and Podot  areas,  beside  the  thick  marble  massif  on  Gola Skrka –  Cucul  Mt.  segment, deep circulating water contribution maybe coming also from the marble massif south of   Satoka   River   (Vrvovite,   Nidže   Mt.),  with   the   discharge   area   in   Melnica representing  the  local  to  intermediate hydrogeological system,  while  the  regional circulation is directed to the lowest base level position in Crna Reka Valley at Podot locality.Figure 4.35 NNW-SSE cross-section trough Podot (Crna Reka) and Melnica (Buturica River) karst areas with schematic representation of the possible hydrogeological relationships.The hydrothermal flow is directed to and along regional or local tectonic structures (Kožuf area),  on  the  margins  of  Neogene  tectonic  basin  (Mariovo  Basin,  Melnica area), and also to the base level position (Crna Reka Valley, Podot area).Hydrothermal karstification was active since Pliocene in Allchar (Kožuf area), Provalata Cave and Čavkarnik (Melnica area). Late Pliocene and Early Pleistocene deposition  in  both  Mariovo  and  Tikveš  Basins  filled  these  areas  with  sediments (mostly pyroclastic deposits and  travertines),  and  may  have  partly  closed  these
systems, although travertine deposition (in lacustrine environments) in both Mariovo Basin,  Kožuf  area  and  along  Crna  Reka  Valley  may  indicate  that  there  was  still ongoing contribution by the hydrothermal systems.Pleistocene evolution of the hypogenic karstification was generally connected to the draining of Mariovo Lake and Central Macedonian Lake, and incision of valleys of Crna Reka and its tributaries. 40Ar/39Ar dating of speleogenetic alunite and jarosite (products of above watertable sulfuric acid speleogenesis) in Provalata Cave, allowed locating the timing of draining of Mariovo Lake, between 1.8 Ma (corresponding to the youngest  tephra  layers  found  in  the  uppermost  travertine  deposits  of  Mariovo Lake) and 1.6 Ma (the age of speleogenetic alunite and jarosite formed after Buturica River incised through the travertine and pyroclastic deposits to the  underlying Cambrian  marbles).  Pleistocene  valley  incision  lowered  the  base  level position, which shifted the position of the thermal springs to lower elevations, leaving fossilhypogenic caves at higher elevation (Provalata Cave), and denudation exposed hypogenic karst features on surface (near Provalata Cave, Gumnište, Čavkarnik), as well  as  allowing  phantom  cave  development  (Karši  Podot  Cave)  by  removal  of ghost-rock weathering produced dolomitic sand alterite.Recognized speleogenetic mechanismsMain speleogenetic mechanism responsible for hypogenic karstification in  these areas is hydrothermal speleogenesis, where carbonate rocks are dissolved by rising thermal waters due to the inverse relationship of carbonate solubility and temperature (Dublyansky,  2000a).  After  shift  to  a shallower environment, lowering of  pressure allowed release of CO2 from the solution, bringing the waters to  supersaturated condition, forcing deposition of calcium carbonate. This is most  clearly evident in Provalata Cave, where phreatic morphology is covered by thick mammillary calcite crust. The calcite crust in Melnička Peštera 1 & 2 is likely from the same origin. In Allchar locality, the deposition is much more complex due to the proximity of the volcanic intrusions, with much higher temperatures and high content of dissolved ore elements which formed Sb-As-Tl-Au ore mineral deposits.In dolomitic rocks, such as the Precambrian dolomitic marbles in Melnica and Podot localities,   and   the   Upper   Triassic   dolomites   in   Kožuf   locality,   a   ghost-rock weathering (alteration) process was also operating. By this  process  thermal  water
dissolved  the  calcite  matrix,  leaving  dolomite  crystals  as  dolomitic  sand  alterite, which increased the porosity of the rocks, but with the alterite residue remaining in situ, no caves were produced. In Melnica, removal of this alterite exposed remnant non-dissolved pendants on surface, while in Podot locality removal of dolomitic sand by backflooding of Crna Reka formed Karši Podot Cave  (phantomisation  process; Bruxelles et al., 2009; Quinif, 1999).Another hypogenic speleogenetic mechanism recognized is sulfuric acid speleogenesis (Egemeier, 1981; Palmer, 1991, 2007, 2013). Evidence of cave development by sulfuric acid is clearly seen in Provalata Cave. Sulfuric acid phase followed the first thermal carbonic speleogenetic phase, with condensation corrosion dissolving calcite  crust  and marble  host rock,  depositing large  gypsum  deposits  as replacement gypsum and forming alunite, natroalunite and jarosite at the contact with clays. Possible source of H2S can be the coal deposits of Mariovo Basin, considering the close proximity of  the  cave  to  the  deposits,  although  further  sulfur isotope analysis of cave gypsum, coal and sulfate in the Melnica Spring are necessary to test this theory. In Kožuf area, sulfuric acid speleogenesis is considered as a possible late operation mechanism due to the sulfate content in the thermal springs, which based on the situation at Allchar hydrothermal ore deposits are likely due to sulfuric acid formed by oxidation of iron sulfide minerals.
Chapter 5:Epigenic cave development5.1. VITAČEVO KARSTVitačevo karst area is located in the western part of Vitačevo Plateau, where Crna Reka, Kamenica and Blašnica rivers have eroded the cover of Tikveš Basin deposits, exposing underlying Cretaceous limestones (Fig.5.1).Figure 5.1. Location of Vitačevo karst area.There are two karstic areas here, located between the valleys of Crna Reka  and Kamenica. One is to the  south,  mostly  presented  with  more  or  less  continuous plateau-like terrain developed in folded limestones that overlay clastic rocks; and the other is at the confluence of Kamenica and Crna Reka, where a limestone block is delineated by deeply incised valleys of Crna Reka and Kamenica rivers. Beside these
larger outcrops, limestone  can  be  found  also  as  lenses  in  the  clastic  sediments  in Kamenica Valley, but more prominently to the SW, on the right side of Crna Reka Valley.GEOLOGYVitačevo Plateau is part of Tikveš Basin, and belongs to the Vardar tectonic zone. The  area  is  mostly  covered  with  sediments  of  Neogene  Tikveš  Basin,  but  older Cretaceous and  Eocene  rocks  are  exposed  by  erosion  in  the  western  part  of the plateau.Figure 5.2. Panoramic view taken from Sokol (956 m) to the NE of Vitačevo Karst.Cretaceous rocks are presented with Late Cretaceous (Turonian) clastic sediments in the lower part: conglomerates, sandstones and shales, with lenses of limestones; and platy to massive limestones in the upper parts.Conglomerates are heterogeneous, composed of well rounded fragments of quartzite, gneiss, sandstones,  and  shales,  usually  found  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  formation, slowly grading upwards into sandstones. Sandstones are the most  widespread member of the clastic formation, mostly composed of quartz and mica minerals, but also   contain   epidote,   zircon,   tourmaline,   rutile,   garnet,   pyroxene and  titanite (Dumurdžanov  et  al.  1976).  Platy  to  massive  limestones  are  developed  as  the topmost  part  of  the  Turonian  formation.  They  are  micritic,  gray  to  gray-white  in color  with   sandy  to   marly  alternations   at   places, containing numerous fossil fragments (Rakićević & Pendžerkovski, 1970; Dumurdžanov et al. 1976). They are found in two larger outcrops: one in the upper part of Kamenica Valley and the other in the lower part, between the confluence of Kamenica and Crna Reka.The Turonian rocks were deformed in the latest Cretaceous to Paleocene time (Laramide phase), in number of folds and faults with NNW direction (Dumurdžanov et al., 2005), with  Crna  Reka  and  Kamenica  anticlines,  and  Dragožel  syncline  the most prominent ones, and several secondary folds.
To the northeast these Cretaceous rock are covered with Upper Eocene (Priabonian) conglomerates (part of the Paleogene Tikveš Basin), yellow-red in color, with fragment originating from the Turonian sediments (Rakićević & Pendžerkovski, 1970).  They  were  deformed  during  the  Pyrenian  (Lower  Oligocene)  and  Savian (Oligocene-Miocene) orogeny phase (Petrov et al., 2010).Figure 5.3. Geological  map  of  western  part  of  Vitačevo  Plateau.  Geological  data modified after Dumurdžanov et al. 1976; Hristov et al. 1965; Rakićević et al. 1965; Rakićević & Pendžerkovski, 1970; Geološki Zavod – Skopje, unpublished).A  NW-SE  fault  called  Dragožel  Fault  cuts  trough  the  eastern  limb  of  Dragožel syncline. This fault is part of a prominent regional fault zone on the western marginal border  of  the  Eocene  basin  along  the  Vardar  zone,  a  system  of syn-sedimentary faults, west of which the Eocene deposits have smaller  thickness (near Dragožel Village), but to the east (central part of Tikveš Paleogene Basin) they are up to 3000 m thick (Arsovski, 1997).
To the NE, E and SE, these Cretaceous and Eocene rocks are covered with deposits of the Neogene Tikveš Basin (Dumurdžanov et al., 2004): Upper Miocene clays and sandstones   (Nerezi   Formation),   covered   by   Pliocene   tufaceous   deposits   with sandstones and travertine beds (Vitačevo Formation), with tuff agglomerates as the topmost (Mariovo) formation. The upper (Vitačevo and Mariovo) formations  were once covering the whole area,  and  were  later  eroded  after  draining  of  Central Macedonian Lake and development of fluvial drainage, exposing older rocks in the western part of Vitačevo Plateau.Two sets of fault structures are recognized in the vicinity of Kožuf area (Koncheva et al.,  2006;  Boev  &  Jelenković,  2012),  also  connected  to  Vitačevo  plateau:  older (reactivated) Vardar strike faults with NW-SE (older) to N-S (younger) orientation; and NE-SW to E-W strike, younger than the Vardar system, associated with recent seismic activity.GEOMORPHOLOGYVitačevo Plateau is a sedimentary plateau, composed of pyroclastic rocks deposited in lacustrine to fluvial environments. It is well bounded by the valleys of Blašnica to the south west, Crna Reka to the west and north west, Bošava to the east and Vardar to the north and north east.In the western part of this plateau, older Paleogene and Cretaceous rocks are exposed by incision of Kamenica and Blašnica Rivers as well as by incision of Crna Reka. The area between these three valleys is a plateau terrain formed mostly in Cretaceous rocks, with younger pyroclastic rocks still preserved in the higher southern parts. The elevations are between 800 m and 1000 m a.s.l. in the southern parts, with small hills such as Tumba (954 m), Tumbarot (928 m), Golema Tumba (1018 m), Pešta (1039m) and Sokol (956 m) separated by small valleys (“tumba” in Macedonian  means “small hill”). The elevations are decreasing northwards (Plazje, 780 m), down to the larger hill called Tumbata (697 m). Here the  upper  part  of  the  hill  is  covered by sediments of Vitačevo formation. The highest part of the plateau is  developed in limestones  folded  in  several  prominent  folds  with  N  to  NE  oriented axis. Small valleys has developed usually along the top of the anticlines, exposing lower flysch rocks, with low relief karst morphology developed in the small hills between them.
Figure 5.4. Paleo-valleys filled with deposits of Vitačevo Pliocene Formation in the upper part of Kamenica Valley.In the upper part of Kamenica Valley, in its smaller tributary Crkvište, as well as at the confluence of Crkvište and Gaber, where Kamenica actually begins, we can see a peculiar situation where stratified tuff deposits are filling depressions of lower elevation. These depressions are elongated with eastward general direction having a dendritic pattern, representing former valley network (Fig.5.4). Considering the stratified tuff deposits (Pliocene Vitačevo Formation) filling these paleo-valleys, they are older then the latest Quaternary fluvial evolution, either of Pliocene age or even older.  They were  likely formed  by pre-Pleistocene  rivers  flowing to  the  east,  later filled with stratified tuff deposits of Tikveš Basin  (Vitačevo  Pliocene  formation, grading  upward  to  Mariovo  Pleistocene  Formation).  After  draining  of Central Macedonian Lake in Pleistocene, incision of Kamenica River started in sediments of
Mariovo and  Vitačevo  formation,  continuing  to  the  older  Cretaceous  (here  mostly limestone) rocks below, developing the present superimposed valley.Determining  of  the  location  and  direction  of  these  paleo  valleys  is  important  in understanding   possible   past   karst   development   phases,   and   the   inheritance component of the karst, especially since downstream and upstream  parts from the confluence of Gaber and Crkvište are developed in Cretaceous limestones.The river valleys delineating the plateau borders are from Pleistocene developed after draining of Central Macedonian Lake and start of fluvial relief development in the basin. They cut through the Early Pleistocene and Pliocene deposits first and continued   downwards   in   older   rocks   of   mostly   Cretaceous   and   Eocene   age (superimposition).  Considering  the  karst  rock  outcrops  distribution  mostly  in  the western part of the plateau, incision of Kamenica River has played a major role in shaping the relief  of  this  part  of  the  Vitačevo  plateau.  As  Kamenica  River  is  a tributary  to  Crna  Reka,  its  incision  is  guided  by  the  incision  of  Crna Reka, representing its local base level. Crna Reka incision also directly influenced erosion and relief formation in the western end of the plateau.As  this  area  was  filled  with  sediments  (Vitačevo  Formation,  Mariovo  Formation) deposited in  lacustrine  to  fluvial  environment  in  Tikveš  Basin,  part  of the Central Macedonian lake  system,  karst  development  stopped  (was  fossilized)  during  the burial (Pliocene to Early Pleistocene). After the draining of the lake system (as late as Middle Pleistocene; Dumurdžanov et al., 2005) karst development was guided by the removal of overlying Plio-Pleistocene deposits, which in turn was controlled by surface erosion due to incision of Crna Reka and its tributaries.
5.1.1. ARAMISKA PEŠTERAAramiska Peštera is located  in  the  upper  part  of  Kamenica  River  valley,  ~0.5  km south from the confluence of Gaber and Crkvište streams,  where  Kamenica  River actually begins (Fig.5.5). The entrance is at 660 m, on the left side of the stream 4 m above the river bed, located between blocks falling along valley side.Figure 5.5 Location of Aramiska Peštera and other caves in the upstream part of Kamenica Valley. Geological data modified after Rakićević & Pendžerkovski (1970), Geološki Zavod – Skopje (unpublished).The cave is formed in the Cretaceous Turonian limestones of Kamenica Anticline. The axis of this anticline plunges to the NW, were most likely is cut by the Dragožel fault, now covered with pyroclastic rocks of Vitačevo and Mariovo formations (Fig.5.5).Aramiska Peštera was first described by Manakovik (1971), together with some other caves from Kamenica Valley interpreting their evolution with the successive draining of Central Macedonian Lake and incision of Kamenica River in the limestone rocks, with Aramiska  Peštera  considered  as  the  oldest,  located  in  he  upstream  part  with
highest  elevation  of  the  three,  and  Buturica  and  Crkviče  considered  as  younger, located at lower elevations downstream along the valley of Kamenica River.MorphologyThe entrance to the cave is between collapsed blocks, on the left side of the valley about 5 m above the present river bed. This side of the valley is vertical and quite unstable so  the  former  entrance  (which  was  also  between  collapsed  blocks,  but  a little bit lower) is now choked due to movement of the blocks in recent years.Figure 5.6 Simplified cave map of Aramiska Peštera with morphological interpretation of passages:  paragenetic  passages  in  the  higher  parts  and  series  of vadose to epiphreatic passages (a-d) in the lower parts with location of  several vadose-phreatic transitions (V-P). For more detailed cave map see appendix.The cave has northward general direction below Kamenica river valley. Morphologically   we   can   separate   the   passages   at   higher   elevations   including Entrance  Room,  Room  of  Bones  and  Pit  Passage,  from  the  passages  at lower elevations located both in the upper part (Upper Stream Passage) and  lower part (Lower Stream Passage, Flowstone Room and Below Pit Passage).
Figure 5.7       Morphological   features   (1)   in   Aramiska   Peštera:   A   –   Vadose entrenchment in paragenetic passage in  the  Upper  Stream  Passages  (USP); B – Vadose passage in the USP; C – Phreatic passage (upper sump) in the lower end of USP; D – Paragenetic ceiling channel and pendants in the Room of Bones (ROB); E– Paragenetic ceiling channel in the ROB; F – View of the passage leading from the ROB to the Entrance Room. Photos by J-Y. Bigot (A) and M. Temovski (B, C, D, E, F).
Figure 5.8       Morphological features  (2)  in  Aramiska Peštera:  A  – Ceiling  above the collapsed block in the Entrance Room  (ER);  B  –  Paragenetic  morphology of former ceiling (lower part of the collapsed block in A); C – Flat ceiling and ceiling channels in the W  part  of  ER;  D  –  Paragenetic  ceiling  channel and pendants (Passage between ER and ROB); E – Prominent paragenetic watertable notch and flat ceiling  with vadose  stream  incision in  the  Lower  Stream Passages (LSP); F – Vadose channel incised in a phreatic passage in the LSP; G – Water filled phreatic side passage in the  LSP;  H  –  View  of  the  end  sump (Orle Lake) with clay  filled passage above water table.  Photos by M. Temovski.
The passages in the lower elevation have generally smaller dimensions, with vadose canyons leading to sub-horizontal water table (epiphreatic) tube-like passages, which change to phreatic  passages  to  the  N.  The  present  active  passage  is  composed  of vadose canyon passage emerging from the SE end of Room of Bones and continuing to the W at the end of Upper Stream Passages. The passage then turns to the N and continues in the Lower Stream Passage, diminishing in vertical gradient changing to sub-horizontal passage leading to the phreatic passages below Orle Lake.In the vadose section the passages are roughly following dip of strata (dipping to the SW by 60°) but they are also influenced by former phreatic parts developed along strike as in Room of Bones (SW to W direction), while in the lower epiphreatic and phreatic section, passages are developed in northern general direction changing between strike direction (NW) and SW-NE oriented fractures. Change of gradient of passages (steep to sub-horizontal) coincides with change of vadose to phreatic morphology, which indicates former water table position (Palmer, 2007). This organization of passages can be seen in at least four positions in the lower elevations (Fig.5.6), while in the higher elevations in the cave, passages are greatly modified by paragenesis.The  passages  at  higher  elevation  have  larger  dimensions,  are  highly  affected  by collapse processes, with paragenetic morphologies  above  (clay  to  sand)  sediment filled  floors  and  walls.  The  upper  parts  of  Upper  Stream  Passage  have  clear paragenetic  morphology  with  paragenetic  canyon  formed  in  the  ceiling of former tube passage due to sediment (sand) deposition. In plan view this paragenetic passage continues across the Room of Bones, leading to the small passage in the NW end of the room, choked with  sediments.  The  passage  connecting Room of Bones and Entrance Room is also a paragenetic passage with ceiling channels leading to a flat paragenetic ceiling with small ceiling channels in the Entrance Room. Remnants of Paragenetic morphologies are seen also in Pit  Passage. The vertical extent of the paragenetic development (Between the tube in Upper Stream Passages and the flat ceiling  in  the  Entrance  Room)  is  15  m.  These passages are likely  connected  to aggradation  and base level  rise in  the  output part of the karst system (Zelen Izvor locality). The present water table in Aramiska Peštera is at 615 m a.s.l. (Lake Orle), while the location of Zelen Izvor  spring is at 510  m  a.s.l.  If  we  apply  the  same gradient between the Entrance Room (655 m) and the spring area, it corresponds to
the terrace at 550 m and Temna Peštera – Dragožel Cave, which also has abundant clastic deposits and paragenetic morphologies (see section 5.1.5 Caves at Zelen Izvor locality).Small alluvial  paragenetic  notches  can  be  seen  in  the  lower  epiphreatic  passages, which  have  only  widened  the  passages  due  to  lateral  dissolution  along sediments covering floor, but ceiling has retained phreatic morphology with pockets and small cupolas indicative of floodwater dissolution in epiphreatic settings.Cave SedimentsClay sediments are covering room and passage floors mostly in the Room of Bones, Entrance   Room   and   the   Below   Pit   Passage.   They   are   usually   covered   with breakdown material. The x-ray analysis of a sample (AR01) from the western wall of the Room of Bones has mineralogical composition of montmorillonite,  kaolinite, sanidine, muscovite, quartz, fluorapatite  (Tab.5.1).  Fluorapatite  is  deriving from bones found close to the sampling  site,  and  the  clay,  mica,  feldspar  and  quartz minerals  are  likely  from  the  overlying  pyroclastic  formations  (Vitačevo  and\or Mariovo Formation).Table 5.1         Mineralogical composition of clay sediments in Aramiska Peštera.sediment (sample)mineral compositionPale brown clay (AR01)montmorillonite, kaolinite, sanidine, fluorapatite, muscovite, quartz,Sandy layer in AR01 (AR02)muscovite, albite, sanidine, montmorillonite, kaolinite, quartz, cristobalite, fluorapatiteSandier layer from the  AR01  sample  had  the  same  mineral  composition  with  also albite and cristobalite. These clays have similar mineralogical composition to similar clays in the other caves of Vitačevo karst, and were brought by  allogenic  waters draining and eroding the pyroclastic rock covered surfaces.Coarser sediments are found covering vadose parts in the Upper and Lower Stream Passages.  This  includes  brown  sands,  found  covering  floor  in  the  Lower  Stream Passage, and filling the ceiling of  paragenetic  channels  in  the  Upper  Stream Passages.
Figure 5.9  Cave sediments in Aramiska Peštera: A – Brown clay filling passages (and detached from wall) in the USP; B – Clay, sand and gravel with bones filling niche in the USP; C – Andesite cobble, 20 cm in diameter, stacked to the wall by flowstone above the passage floor (USP); D – Coarse fluvial sediments in the channel, with sand and clay in a paragenetic notch, covered with flowstone in the LSP; E- Gravel and pebbles deposited in a stream channel, with sand an clay in a paragenetic notch (LSP); F – Sand and gravel filling ceiling channel and wall niches in a phreatic passage (USP). Photos by M. Temovski.
Cobbles and larger  fluvial clasts  are  found  all  along the  active  stream  passages  as well as in the now inactive passages, as in the Below Pit Passage, where such blocks can be up to 1m in diameter. They are composed of volcanic rock (usually andesite), originating from the pyroclastic rocks, more typical for the Mariovo  Formation. Smaller pebbles are also found all along this vadose stream passages, down  to the Orle Lake.Breakdown material is covering floors at most of the upper parts of the cave, especially  in  the  Entrance  Room,  Room  of  Bones,  as  well  as  in  the  Below  Pit Passage and  Flowstone Room. In the Entrance Room below some of the collapsed blocks paragenetic flat ceiling and small channels can be seen.Typical  vadose  speleothems  (stalactites,  stalagmites,  curtains,  and  flowstone)  are found throughout the cave. Thicker flowstone deposits are covering passage floor in the Flowstone Room, as well as in the Entrance Room and Room of Bones. In the Room of  Bones,  some  human  bones  are also  covered  by flowstone  deposits,  quite destroyed  by  treasure  hunters.  A  skull  was  collected   for   age   determination (Manakovik, 1971), but results were never published.Table 5.2 Field measurements of  pH,  Electronic  conductivity  (EC)  and temperature (t) of stream and drip water in Aramiska Peštera.locationdatepHEC (μs/cm)t (°C)Upper stream (st.104-105)31.03.20138.071266.1Upper stream (st.106)31.03.20137.721496Upper sump (st.106)31.03.20137.851376.7Lower stream (st.11-12)03.03.20137.771566.2Lower sump (Orle Lake)03.03.20137.651638.3Drip water (above Orle Lake)03.03.20137.6270410.2Hydrological characteristicsWater is flowing in the Upper and Lower Stream Passages only in spring and autumn and after heavy rain, and they are dry during summer and winter. The lower sump (Orle Lake) water level oscillates up to 1 m between dry and wet season.
Some field analysis of pH, EC and temperature of the stream, lake and  dripping waters in the cave, show clear difference between the allogenic water in the stream passages  with  low  dissolved  content,  and  slow  moving  autogenic  dripping waters with high dissolved content, forming flowstone and dripstone speleothems (Tab.5.2).Considering the distribution, thickness and structure of limestone rocks in the upper part of Kamenica  Valley,  and  the  only  discharge  point  of  this  karst  system  being Zelen Izvor spring, 2.5 km downstream from the cave at the contact of  limestone with siliciclastic rocks, water of Aramiska Peštera is likely draining to Zelen Izvor. The water level in the Orle Lake is located 45 meters below the cave entrance at 615 m a.s.l., and 105 m above Zelen Izvor, giving a general watertable gradient of 4.2 m/100 m.SpeleogenesisAramiska  Peštera  is a  ponor cave  with  vadose  passages  leading to epiphreatic and phreatic passages formed by sinking waters of Kamenica River. The evolution of the cave is connected to the downward evolution of the karst system due to lowering of base  level  with  incision  of  Kamenica  River.  Lowering  of  base  level,  lowered the position of the spring in the output part of  the  karst  system  (Zelen Izvor locality), which led to vadose incision and development of passages at lower elevation towards the newly formed water table. The upper parts of the cave are paragenetic passages formed by upward dissolution due to increased sediment  deposition.  Applying  the same gradient between the present water table in Aramiska Peštera and Zelen Izvor spring to the paragenetic passages shows  correlation  with  cave  Temna  Peštera  – Dragožel,  which  correlates  with  a  terrace developed at 550 m elevation. This indicates that the  paragenetic  development of passages in the upper parts  may  be connected to general aggradation in the lower part of Kamenica Valley.Considering the geomorphological evolution of Kamenica Valley, formed after the draining of the Central Macedonian Lake (as late as Middle Pleistocene; Dumurdžanov et al., 2004), and first incised in Tikveš Basin deposits (Mariovo and Vitačevo Formations), then superimposed on the Cretaceous limestones and flysch, Aramiska  Peštera  is  likely  as  old  as  Late  Pleistocene,  with  first  development  of phreatic passages due to  seepage  along  the  Kamenica  river  bed,  then  increasing capture combined with lowering  of  spring  position  (Zelen  Izvor  locality)  in  the
downstream parts of the valley leading to vadose development of passages. Period of large aggradation in the spring area forced paragenetic development of passages in Aramiska Peštera, with later downward development of passages due to lowering of spring position with Kamenica River incision. Periods of stable spring position  in between incision  of  Kamenica  River  led  to  development  of  at  least  four  levels of passages below the paragenetic passages. The lowest level is still active  with only small vadose stream in wet season (spring and autumn) leading to  Orle Lake, although during these periods Kamenica River is still flowing on the surface due to sediment in riverbed which prevents complete under capture of surface waters.
5.1.2. AN UNROOFED CAVE IN KAMENICA VALLEYAlong Kamenica  Valley,  downstream  from  the  confluence  of  Gaber  and  Crkvište streams, at two locations close to the present river bed, there are thick exposures of flowstone remnants on surface (Fig.5.5, Fig.5.10).Figure 5.10	Flowstone outcrops in a small gully in the downstream location. Photos by M. Temovski.At the first (downstream) location, on the right side of the river, flowstone deposits cover larger area (~150 m2) and have more preserved morphology, comparing to the second (upstream) location, where flowstone blocks can be found along some collapsed limestone blocks on the left side of the river.The thickness of the  flowstone  in  the  unroofed  cave  is  up  to  1  m  at  places,  with general direction of flow to the SW. The elevation of the outcrop in the downstream part is between 613 m and 618 m (Fig.5.11), with the upstream location in between. The speleothems were deposited in a vadose setting in a cave that was developed in dip direction to the SW.
Figure 5.11     The unroofed cave in Kamenica Valley (downstream location).This cave can be a vadose cave that developed towards the former watertable before the incision of Kamenica reached this elevation. As evident from Aramiska Peštera and Garnikovska Propast, thick flowstone speleothems are deposited at 40 m  and deeper below the bottom of the valley, where there is  still  an  intermittent  surface
flow.  On  the  right  side  of the valley above  the  unroofed cave,  on the  slope  of the gorge there are number of solutionally enlarged fractures, some of them coated with flowstone. They could have been the shafts supplying the cave below.Another possibility  that  has  to  be  considered,  due  to  the  proximity  of  the  nearby paleo valley filled with stratified tuff of Vitačevo (Pliocene) Formation, is that this cave developed in a previous phase towards the NW-SE oriented paleo valley to the west of this location. Incision of Kamenica River later in Pleistocene cut trough this cave, leaving only patches of flowstone in the unroofed cave and exposing the shafts in the upper parts of the gorge slopes. Future dating of speleothems will help answer this question.
5.1.3. DRAGOŽELSKA PROPASTDragoželska Propast (propast meaning pit in Macedonian) is located 1.4 km to the NW  of  Aramiska  Peštera,  near  to  the  road  that  leads  to  Dragožel  village,  with entrance located at 750 m (Fig.5.5).Figure 5.12   Simplified map of Dragoželska Propast. For more detailed cave map see appendix.The cave is formed in Turonian limestones in the western limb of Kamenica Anticline, along a prominent fault line – the Dragožel Fault.
Figure 5.13 Characteristic features in Dragoželska Propast: A – The upper part of the Entrance Shaft, close to the surface; B – The lower part of the Entrance Shaft, view from below (note the pyroclastic cobble in the wall channel); C – Panoramic view of the Big Room (from the eastern part of the room), with Dragožel Fault to the right (circled caver for scale); D – Brown clay covering popcorn  speleothems (Lower Passage); E – Clay filled floor in the lowest part of the cave  (Lower Passage). Photos by J-Y. Bigot (A) and M. Temovski (B, C, D, E).
MorphologyDragoželska Propast is 71 m deep cave with three morphological units: the Entrance Shaft, the Big Room, and the Lower Passage (Fig.5.12).The Entrance Shaft is a 50 m deep dome-like shaft formed along intersection of two fractures with WSW-ENE and NNW-SSE directions, with width from 2 x 1 m at the entrance to 3 x 6 m in the lower parts. In the upper part the shaft is developed more along the ENE fracture, but at 20 m depth, enlarges along the NNW-SSE fracture as well, thus creating a cross-like shape on plan view. In the deeper parts, the passage is more   developed   along   the   NNW-SSE   fracture,   with   the   WSW-ENE   fracture becoming less distinctive.The walls are covered with clay, and also stacked agglomerates from the pyroclastic rocks can be found in some solutional channels along the shaft wall.The  Big  Room  is  the  most  prominent  morphological  feature,  having  a  triangular shape in plan view with dimensions of 38 x 30 x 30 m, and ceiling ranging from 4 to 10 m and up to 18 m along the northern wall. It is formed at the intersection of two faults, one with WSW-ENE direction and the other, more  prominent, in  NW-SE direction. The second fault is actually continuation of Dragožel Fault line, which can be followed  from  Begnište  to  Dragožel  village.  It  is described as syn-sedimentary fault along the Tikveš Paleogene Basin (Arsovski, 1997). Although Dragožel Fault is more prominent, fractures with WSW-ENE  direction are more frequent. They are probably  of  younger  age  than  Dragožel  Fault, connected to Neogene-Quaternary tectonics (Koncheva et al., 2006; Boev & Jelenković, 2012). The same WSW-ENE directed fracture along which the entrance shaft is formed can be clearly seen in the ceiling of the Big Room guiding several  smaller shafts. The Big  Room  is  mostly enlarged by collapse between dense network of shafts that formed along WSW-ENE and NW-SE fractures and faults.  The floor is covered  with  breakdown  material, except close to the Entrance shaft and below some shafts (as the one in the eastern part  of the room),  where  we can see surface sediments such as  tuff, soil and  even some bones deposited. Clay deposits can be seen filling pockets and wall channels mostly along the northern wall.
The third morphological unit is the Lower Passage. It has two small rooms, the first has  dimensions  of  10  x  10  x 7  m,  with morphology controlled  by the  WSW-ENE fault controlling the southern wall of the Big Room and bedding of strata, dipping to SW by 40°. The lowest room has dimension of 10 x 3 m, and is mostly developed along the strike of strata, with beds seen on the SW wall dipping to the SW by 40°. The NW part of this passage is cut by the WSW-ENE fault. The ceiling is 1.5 m high and the floor is covered with dark brown clay. On the SW wall popcorn speleothems are found covered with clay deposits.Most of the morphology seen in the cave is vadose, with shafts the  prominent passage type, with small vadose channels also found on shaft walls. Most of the cave is affected by breakdown processes, removing evidence of former passage morphology. This is typically seen in the ceiling of the Big Room, but also in the Lower Passage.Cave sedimentsDark brown clay is found covering (filling) floor in lower parts of the cave.  Such clay can be also found filling small voids (pockets, fractures) on the walls along the Entrance Shaft and the N  wall  of  the  Big  Room,  and  remnants  of  it  are  found at places on the ceiling in the Big Room as well. X-ray analysis of a sample (DR01) from a small channel on the N wall showed composition of quartz and clay minerals (montmorillonite, halloysite-7Ä, illite), with a yellow layer (sample DR02) found in the same sample having similar composition with goethite, montmorillonite, calcite, muscovite and quartz.Mineral  composition  of  the  brown  clays  indicates  origin  from  weathering  of  the overlying pyroclastic deposits.Coarser allochthonous sediments composed of andesite cobbles originating from the pyroclastic agglomerates of Mariovo Formation are found in small wall channels and below the Entrance Shaft.Breakdown debris and blocks are the most widespread sediments, especially in the Big Room, where they completely cover the floor.
Flowstone speleothems can be found along the N wall in the Big Room, and in the Lower Passage popcorn speleothems are found on the ceiling and wall, some covered with clay, indicating late deposition (or redeposition) of clay by ponding of vadose waters.SpeleogenesisDragoželska Propast is a vertical cave formed by vadose waters along intersection of faults  and  prominent  fractures  in  a  fault  zone.  Due  to  high  fracturing  along  the Dragožel  Fault,  many  shafts  have  developed,  which  later  resulted  in  collapse of highly fractured bedrock and enlargement of the Big Room, with N wall bounded by the Dragožel Fault. This can be seen in the Entrance Shaft and at the ceiling of the Big Room. In the upper parts the control of strata is less prominent, but in the lower parts passages are more controlled by strike and dip of strata.Figure 5.14 Cross-section of Kamenica  Valley  showing  relationship  of Dragoželska Propast to local geological structure and topography.Clay sediments are deposited in ponding waters, choking passages as in the lowest part of Lower Passage.Considering the age of Dragožel Fault, cave development was probably active here prior to the deposition of Vitačevo Formation in Tikveš Basin, although older morphology cannot  be  clearly separated.  Same  brown  clay can  be  found  covering walls  and  filling  small  pockets  also  along  the  N  wall  (Dragožel   Fault). The morphology of the  ceiling  along  the  Dragožel  Fault  also   indicates   phreatic development.Between   Dragoželska   Propast   and   Kamenica   Valley,   sediments   of   Vitačevo Formation can be found filling paleo depressions, interpreted as  paleo-valley with drainage to the SE. It is possible that there was a phase of cave development along
the Dragožel  Fault  connected  with  the  evolution  of  this  paleo-valley,  prior  to  the deposition of Vitačevo Formation, which eventually ceased karstification in this area (Fig.5.14).Most  of  the  cave  passages,  having  vadose  morphology,  are  developed  along  the WSW-ENE fault and fractures, connected with the evolution of Kamenica Valley in Pleistocene, cutting first in the Tikveš Basin deposits, and later into the underlying Cretaceous limestones.
5.1.4. GARNIKOVSKA PROPASTGarnikovska  Propast  is  located  in  Garvanica  River  valley,  a  tributary  stream  to Kamenica River, 400 m east from the confluence (Fig.5.15). The entrance to the cave is on the right side of the valley, 5 m above the river bed, at 625 m elevation.Figure 5.15  Location of Garnikovska Propast and other caves in the downstream part of Upper Kamenica Valley. Geological data modified after Rakićević & Pendžerkovski (1970), Hristov et al. (1965), Geološki Zavod – Skopje (unpublished).The valley has steep longitudinal profile, and is incised below a river terrace that is preserved above the cave  at  660-670  m.  Lower  terrace  is  seen  some 200  m to the NW, located at 630 m elevation.The cave is  developed  in  Turonian  limestones  on  the  right  limb  of  NW  plunging Kamenica Anticline.MorphologyGarnikovska Propast is a 149 m long and 63 m deep ponor cave with steep vadose passages leading to less inclined and sub-horizontal vadose and epiphreatic tube-like passages.  The  cave  is  mainly  developed  in  NW  direction  along  the  strike  of
limestones, dipping to the NE by 60 °, with parts developed along WSW-ENE and SSW-NNE oriented fractures.Figure 5.16   Simplified map of Garnikovska Propast. For more detailed cave map see appendix.The entrance is through collapsed blocks on the right side of Garvanica valley, from where a  small  passage  leads  to  the  Steep  Meander,  a  steeply inclined  meandering vadose passage, developed along a WSW-ENE fracture. The Steep Meander joins the Big  Room,   from   where   the   cave   takes   strike   direction   with   Middle   Passage continuing to the lower still active section.The lower section of  the  cave  (Lower  Waterfall  Passage  and  Stream  Passage)  has NW strike oriented  general  direction  interchanging  with  parts  developed  along WSW-ENE oriented fractures. A small stream is active in wet season, coming from the Upper Waterfall Passage, through the Lower Waterfall Passage down along the Stream Passage, where it has carved a vadose canyon in a small tubular passage.Paragenetic morphologies  are  clearly  seen  in  the  Big  Room  and  Lower  Waterfall Passage. In the Big Room, coarse clastic sediments are covering floor and walls to
the SW and E, with a profile of pebbles and cobbles seen where Steep Meander joins this room, while on the SW end big rounded pyroclastic derived boulders  are choking a tributary passage. Above these deposits, paragenetic wall and ceiling channels are rising in northern direction. The Big Room is the largest passage in the cave with, greatly enlarged by paragenesis due to increase of sediment supply, with northern parts of the room now covered by large dripstone and flowstone deposits. Paragenetic channels rise more than 10 m above the floor of the room.Thick coarse sediments (pebbles, cobbles) are also filling the western wall in  the Lower Waterfall Passage fining up to sand and clay deposits.Paragenetic alluvial notches are also seen on the wall near lowest part of the Stream Passage, with few cobbles stacked by flowstone to the wall, now hanging 1 m above the present sand-covered floor. The cave continues downward with a narrow passage, 63 m below the entrance.Cave sedimentsBrown to grey-brown clay and silt deposits are found through out the cave, filling passage floors, niches, ceiling channels and passages as well. They are  filling passage floor and niches  in  the  Upper  and  Lower  Waterfall  Passage,  and  are  seen deposited above coarser sediments in the NW wall of the Lower Waterfall Passage. Sample (GAR01) from  grey-brown  silt  from  the  Upper  Waterfall  Passage  showed mineral composition of montmorillonite, sanidine, muscovite, quartz, albite-calcian, hematite, and magnesiohornblende-ferroan.  The  composition  is  similar  to  clay and silt deposits in the caves of the Vitačevo karst, originating from weathering of the pyroclastic deposits of Mariovo Formation.Coarse grained deposits (sand, pebbles, cobbles and boulders) of the same origin are found filling passage floors. Cobbles and boulders of andesitic rock are chocking a side passage in the SE end of the Big Room, and pebbles of cobbles are also seen in eroded  profiles  at  the  contact  of  the  Steep  Meander  and  Big  Room,  and  Middle Passage and Lower Waterfall Passage.Breakdown deposits as blocks and breakdown debris are seen in the  Entrance Passage and the Bid Room.
Figure 5.17     Characteristic  features   of   Garnikovska  Propast:   A   –   The   Steep Meander. Caver marks the entrance to the Upper Waterfall Passage (UWP); B – SE part of the Big Room, with an upstream passage filled with pyroclastic  derived cobbles and boulders; C – Corroded surfaces and small vadose channel incised from a stream in the UWP; D – Large dripstone and flowstone  speleothems in the  Big Room; E – Paragenetic features (pendants, ceiling channel) in the eastern part of the Big Room; F – Brown clay covering cobbles in the upper parts of the NW wall in the Lower Waterfall Room. Photos by M. Temovski.
Thick speleothem deposits are deposited in the Big Room, making it the most decorated room in the Vitačevo Karst, with both dripstone and flowstone speleothems.  Flowstone  speleothems  are also  deposited in  the  Stream  Passage  and are coating walls of the Steep Meander.Hydrological characteristicsIntermittent vadose water flow is flowing in the Upper and Lower Stream Passages, with two waterfalls,  one  in each  part.  The  water  flow  is  only active  in  spring and autumn, when surface stream is still active. The water is sinking somewhere in the Garvanica stream, upstream of the  cave  entrance,  with  no  visible  sinkhole.  The sinkhole is not collecting all surface stream water, with more water flowing in the surface  stream  than  in  the  cave.  The  reason  for  this  may  be  the  combination of sediment covered stream bed, and sediment filled cave passages that limit the amount of water able to penetrate in the cave, although the cave passages are large enough to collect all of the surface stream water. The stream in the cave continues in a little less inclined passage from the lowest penetrable position in the Lower Stream Passage, which is at 562 m a.s.l., 52 m above the location of the Zelen Izvor spring.Figure 5.18     Longitudinal  profile  of  Kamenica  and  Garvanica  Rivers  with  caves Garnikovska Propast, Temna Peštera, Zelen Izvor and Nad Zelen Izvor.SpeleogenesisGarnikovska  Propast  is  similar  to Aramiska  Peštera in  morphology,  sediments  and evolution, although with  more  pronounced  vertical  extent.  Cave  passages  were formed mostly in vadose to epiphreatic environment, connected to the lowering of water   table,   with   new   passages   developing  at   lower   elevations   after   drop in watertable position. They are mostly developed in  NW  direction  along  strike  of steeply  dipping  strata,  and  WSW-ENE  to  SSW-NNE  oriented  fractures. General organization of passages includes vadose passages  developed  along WSW-ENE to
SSE-NNE  oriented  fractures  leading  to  epiphreatic  passages  formed  mostly  along NW (strike) direction, with  also  paragenetic  development  modifying  passages  or greatly increasing passage size (as in Big Room).Located below  Garvanica  valley,  a  tributary  to  the  main  Kamenica  Valley  and  at closer distance to Zelen Izvor, the main output  location  of  the  karst  system,  than Aramiska  Peštera,  lowering  of   water   table  produced  greater  gradient   than in Aramiska Peštera, responsible for the greater vertical development of the cave. Rise of watertable due to aggradation in the main (Kamenica) valley led to an increase of sediment deposition, producing paragenetic cave development. While  paragenetic morphologies  are  also  seen  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  cave,  the  large paragenetic channels in  the upper  part in  the Big Room  may correspond  to  the same phase of aggradation (connected to development of Temna Peštera – Dragožel and the terrace at  550  m)  as  the  upper  paragenetic  passages  in  Aramiska  Peštera.  Later  further incision led to removal of sediment and exposing of paragenetic morphology. Present active parts are developing due to sinking of  surface stream in Garvanica valley during wet season or  high  rain,  producing  vadose  passage  morphology.  Surface stream in Garvanica valley is larger than in the cave due to choking of valley floor with sediment allowing only partly sinking of surface water.The evolution of the cave is connected with the evolution of the karst system due to the incision of Kamenica Valley. Kamenica River started its incision, after the draining of Central Macedonian Lake (as late as Middle Pleistocene, Dumurdžanov, 2004), first in the pyroclastic deposits of Mariovo Formation, than in the underlying Cretaceous rocks. Gradual incision shifted the position of the spring of this  karst system, lowering the water  table,  producing  cave  passages  at  lower  level.  As this area is closer to the spring of the karst system, the effect of the lowering of water table has been bigger, creating higher gradient with bigger vadose zone. Base level rise due  to  aggradations  in  the  main  valley  (corresponding  to  terrace  at  550 m in Zelen Izvor locality) led to rise of water table and paragenetic  development  of passages,  with  later  lowering  allowing  removal  of  sediment  and further vadose development. As a result of the high energy of the water due to high gradient, coarser deposits were deposited far below the entrance with andesite boulders of up to 1 m in diameter.
Figure 5.19    Extended  profile  of  Mala  (Ubava)  Peštera  modified  after  PSD  Orle (1967).MALA (UBAVA) PEŠTERAMala Peštera is a small cave, located 40 m to the SW from Garnikovska Propast. The entrance is on the left side of Garvanica Valley, at 650 m a.s.l. It was first explored by cavers from PSD Orle from Kavadarci in the 1960s. It is a vadose cave with parts completely filled with coarse fluvial sediments. General direction of the cave is to  the SW, with steeper upstream parts and sub-horizontal downstream parts. It is probably part of the same cave system as Garnikovska Propast, with cave passages later cut by the valley. Remnants of cave features can be seen in on the right side of the valley opposite of Mala Peštera. The cave was completely filled with sediments, which were  later  eroded  by  vadose  waters.  There  are  numerous  stalactites  on  the ceiling in the downstream part.
5.1.5. CAVES AT ZELEN IZVOR LOCALITYZelen  Izvor  (“Zelen”  meaning  green  and  “Izvor”  meaning  spring)  is  the  largest spring in Vitačevo karst area, draining the karst terrains of the upper Kamenica basin. It is located 1.6 km ESE from Dragožel Village and 1.4 km S of Garnikovo Village. There are three caves in this locality (Fig.5.15), two of which are at the spring: one is the actual spring, called Zelen Izvor Cave (Green Spring Cave), and the other is 15 m above the spring, called Nad Zelen Izvor Cave (Cave Above the Green Spring). The third one, Temna Peštera - Dragožel, is located 200 m to the NE from them at 550 m a.s.l.Figure 5.20     Cross-section  showing  relationship  of  Zelen  Izvor  Cave,  Nad  Zelen Izvor Cave and Kamenica River.The caves and the spring were known to the local population from Garnikovo andDragožel villages (now almost depopulated), and were first registered by cavers from
PD  Orle  from  Kavadarci,  mapping  Nad  Zelen  Izvor  Cave  and  Temna  Peštera  -Dragožel.There are three river terraces in the valley of Kamenica River near the caves, two of which, at 545-550 m a.s.l. and at 495-500 m a.s.l. are best exposed on the right side of the valley, right opposite of Temna Peštera - Dragožel, and the terrace at 530 ma.s.l. is located on the left side below Temna Peštera - Dragožel (Fig.5.25). Remnants of these terraces can be seen also in the canyon to the SE, although they are quite destroyed.These river terraces indicate stable position of valley floor with lateral erosion, which guided the speleogenesis in this area, fixing the spring location at the terrace elevation, and influencing cave development at that elevation. They correspond well to the caves  in  this  vicinity,  with  Temna  Peštera  -  Dragožel  corresponding  to  the highest terrace (545-550 m), Nad Zelen Izvor at 530 m, and the present spring, Zelen Izvor (which is perched 5m above the local river bed) little above the terrace at 495- 500 m a.s.l.ZELEN IZVOR CAVEZelen Izvor Cave is 7 m long, 1-1.5 m wide, mostly water filled passage with NE direction. It is located at 510 m, 5 meters above the river bed of Kamenica Valley, with the spring perched above the river.Zelen Izvor Cave, as well as Nad Zelen Izvor Cave, is developed in Turonian limestones of NW plunging Kamenica Anticline, close to the contact with underlying clastic rocks. The position of Zelen Izvor spring, which is 5 m above Kamenica river bed, is perched probably due to collapse of the left side valley slope. The discharge of  Zelen  Izvor  was  measured  using  the  floating  method,  with  values  of  250  l/s  in April  (2011)  and  190  l/s  in  January  (2013).  The  discharge  in  summer  was not measured, but it was noted to be smaller. The  spring  is  perennial,  comparing to Kamenica River, upstream from the spring, flowing only in spring and autumn.First   dive   attempt   in   the   spring   was   done   by   Bojan   Petkovski   and   Dančo Gjorgjijevski from Cave Diving Club Vrelo from Skopje in September  2012, reaching depth of 6 m.
The  spring  is  developed along a SW-NE fracture, with water rising from a  side passage formed along a fracture with same  direction,  connecting  with  the  upper passage by a SE oriented passage.  This  diversion  is  probably  due  to  choking of previous output location  by  collapse  in  the  valley,  with  the  water  flow rising and discharging through an older passage. Cave floor is covered with breakdown material and clay deposits.Figure 5.21 Location of Zelen Izvor and Nad Zelen Izvor caves and spring (upper left); closer look of Zelen Izvor spring (upper right); and the confluence with Kamenica River (down). Photos by M. Temovski.
Some preliminary field analysis of water from the spring showed pH of 7.23, EC of 456 µS/cm and temperature of 11.6 °C.Figure 5.22     Panoramic view of Nad Zelen Izvor Cave. Photo by M. Temovski.NAD ZELEN IZVOR CAVENad Zelen Izvor is a small 5 m long, 6 m wide cave with ceiling at ~3 m. It is located little to the SE and 15 m above Zelen Izvor,  with the entrance at 525 m elevationa.s.l. The floor is covered with sediments, mostly sand, with some breakdown debris as well. There is  a  small  sediment  filled passage  on  the  southern  wall.  This  small room is little elongated along a fracture oriented SW-NE. On the ceiling, mostly in the eastern part, there are ceiling pockets and channels with sediment seen in some of them. The cave is a fossil part of the same cave system as Zelen Izvor, formed when Kamenica Valley was at higher location, possibly connected with the terrace at 530 m, which is preserved only in small  parts  on  both  sides  of  the  valley,  100  m downstream from the cave.TEMNA PEŠTERA - DRAGOŽELTemna Peštera - Dragožel is located 200 m NE from Zelen Izvor, on the left side of Kamenica Valley, with entrance  at  550  m  a.s.l.,  80  m  above  the  present  riverbed, right opposite of the river terrace at 545-550 m a.s.l.The cave is formed in  a  lens  of  Turonian  limestones  in  the  SW  wing  of  the  NW oriented  plunging  Kamenica  Anticline.  The  situation  here   is   probably   more complicated with some secondary folds in the SW wing, with limestones in the cave dipping to the SE by 50°. They are highly fractured  by SW-NE  to  W-E  oriented fractures.
MorphologyTemna Peštera - Dragožel has 125 m of passages, mostly horizontal, except at the upstream  part  where  there  is  an  8  m  deep  sump.  There  are  two  entrances,  both modified by erosion due to slope retreat.Figure 5.23 Simplified cave map of Temna Peštera - Dragožel. For more detailed cave map see appendix.Although the limestone in which the cave is formed is heavily fractured in several directions,  passages  are  mostly formed  along prominent  fractures  with WSW-ENE direction. The general direction of the cave is to the ENE.Although genetically there is not much difference, due to presence of sediments we can separate two major parts in the cave: the downstream and upstream part.The downstream part is basically one passage with ENE direction, formed along and between several prominent fractures with a small part (a bend towards east near the entrance), that is guided by strike and dip of strata. In profile view this passage is basically horizontal, with floor covered by coarser fluvial sediments and breakdown debris.  The  passage  floor  is  inclined  to  the  middle  part,  due  to  later  flushing  of sediments along a small passage emerging from the north side. On cross-sections we can see several notches in the upper parts, with smaller vadose channel incised in the
passage floor. Right after the small bent there is a paragenetically formed flat ceiling with some pendants and cupolas continuing towards the entrance.The upstream part has two parts formed along fractures with WSW-ENE and W-E direction, connected with a NNW directed passage. This part is cross-cut by number of fractures along  which number of paragenetic channels developed with some  of them still filled with sediment. In the southern passage there is a vertical part, which at 8 m depth turns horizontally towards WSW and ends with a clay choke. This part is a former phreatic sump. Considering small size and direction of poorly preserved scallops on the wall, this sump formed in a shallow phreatic environment by waters that discharged upwards. Later it was completely filled with clay and silt sediments. Above the sump there is also a passage to the WSW, which ends with a clay choke. In the upper parts of these passages there is a false floor of 30-50 cm thick flowstone, which deposited above clays that were later removed. There are number of pendants, solutional pockets, and cupolas on the ceiling above, most of them now covered with speleothems.Cave sedimentsMost  prominent  sediments  in  Temna  Peštera  -  Dragožel  are  brown  silt  and  dark brown clay. They are mostly found covering passages in the upstream part. They are similar to clays in the other caves in Kamenica Valley. X-ray analyses suggest their origin is likely from weathering of pyroclastic deposits from the  Vitačevo  and Mariovo formations (Tab.5.3).Table 5.3         Mineral composition of clay and silt in Temna Peštera - Dragožel.sediment (sample)mineral compositionBrown clay (TEM02)montmorillonite, halloysite-7A, kaolinite, sanidine-potassian, muscovite, quartzBrown silt (TEM01)kaolinite, quartz, sanidine-potassian, albite, clinochlore, muscovite, hematite, magnesiohornblendeIn the downstream part we can also find some pebbles from volcanic agglomerates from   the   same   pyroclastic   deposits,   which   were   probably   deposited   due   to aggradation in Kamenica Valley, connected to the terrace at 545-550 m.
Figure 5.24 Characteristic features of Temna Peštera - Dragožel: A – Pendants, pockets  and  flat  ceiling  on  passage  walls  in  the  downstream  part;  B  –  Passage bellow false floor flowstone deposit, after erosion of sediments, downstream part; C– The main  passage  with  some  wall  notches;  D  –  False  floor  flowstone  deposits, downstream part; E – Lower and upper part of the passage separated by false floor, upstream part; F – Ceiling channels and pockets; G – Septaria boxwork on the lower side of the false floor with remnant clay sediments. Photos by M. Temovski.
Breakdown deposits are found in the downstream part composed of detached limestone blocks, while in the upstream part collapse of the flowstone floor produced flowstone breakdown material.Vadose  flowstone  deposition  is  more  prominent  in  the  upstream  part,  with  thick flowstone deposits, columns, stalactites and stalagmites.SpeleogenesisTemna Peštera -  Dragožel  formed  along  prominent  fractures  in  a  shallow  phreatic and epiphreatic environment. Remnants of this phase can be seen in the upstream sump,  and  in  the  downstream  passages,  where  former  phreatic  passage  floor  is incised by later vadose stream.Figure 5.25    Caves at Zelen Izvor locality and their correlation to river terraces.Due to river aggradation (connected to the river terrace at 545-550 m),  sediments started to  accumulate  first in  the  upstream  sump,  then completely filling the sump and filling lower parts of downstream passage. With sediments covering the lower parts of the passages, dissolution was directed to the ceiling and passages developed paragenetically  in  the  upward  direction.  In  the  upstream  part, bypass passage developed above the sump, which might have started after settling of water table in the cave, but evolved more rapidly after  filling  of  the  sump. This also helped in easier filling of the sump. As passages filled with sediments, channels, pendant and solutional pockets developed in the ceiling. They are best exposed above the sump and the false floor, where most of them are now covered with speleothems.
After lowering of water table, thick flowstone deposited above clay sediments in the upstream part, and vadose waters eroded the clay sediments in the downstream part.As the water table continued to drop, clay sediments were flushed from the upstream passages, creating flowstone covered false floor, and vadose waters incised a channel in the floor of the former phreatic passage, depositing volcanic derived coarser material such as gravel and pebbles.Further vadose development of the cave resulted in exposure of the sump and breakdown of  the  flowstone  false  floor,  as  well  as  breakdown  in  the  downstream passage.
5.1.6. BUDIMIRICA CAVEBudimirica Cave is located in the NW part of the Vitačevo Plateau (western part of the  Tikveš  Basin)  in  the  downstream  part  of  Kamenica  Valley.  The  entrance  is located at 400 m a. s. l., on the right slope of the gorge-like valley (Fig.5.26). It was first described by Manakovik (1971), considered as younger than Aramiska Peštera, as  it  is  located  at  lower  elevation  in  the  downstream  part  of  Kamenica River, interpreting its evolution with the successive draining  of  the  Central  Macedonian Lake and incision of Kamenica River.Figure 5.26 Geological map of the lower Kamenica Valley.  Geological  data modified after  Dumurdžanov  et  al.  (1976),  Hristov  et  al.  (1965),  Rakićević  et  al. (1965), Rakićević & Pendžerkovski (1970), Geološki Zavod – Skopje (unpublished).The cave is  developed  in  the  eastern  part  of  a  tectonic  block  built  of  Cretaceous (Turonian)  massive  limestones  steeply  dipping  to  the  SE  by  50°.  This  block  is
connected  to  the  east  to  the  clastic  Turonian  formation  by  the  regional  NW-SEoriented Dragožel Fault.MorphologyBudimirica Cave is 105 m long consisting of two branching passages (Left and Right passage; Manakovik 1971) with the NE general trend.Figure 5.27  Simplified cave map of Budimirica Cave. For more detailed cave map see appendix.The main (Left) passage is 50 m long, 1 to 10 m high and the 2 to 8 m wide (higher at the entrance).  It  is  sub-horizontal  (slightly inclined  towards  the  entrance)  in  the first 30 m, and much more inclined (~25°) in the second part (Fig.5.27). In between these parts in the Left Passage there is a large pit (5 m long, 1.5 m wide, and 1-1.5 m deep), which was most likely excavated  by  some  treasure  hunters   (common occurrence in the area).  In the second part, the floor is mostly covered with several generations of flowstone (big part of which is eroded) and ceiling  breakdown material. Small scale features are mostly small paragenetic channels,  pendants and various below sediments features (Fig.5.28).
The Right Passage is 45 m long, narrower in the first part and up to 6 m wide in the second part, with ceiling up to 2 m high. There is more ceiling breakdown in this passage. Remnants of the older flowstone deposits can be found on the NW wall, and only  small  patches  of  the  coarser  yellowish  deposit  are  seen,  mostly  covered  by breakdown material. The walls and ceiling are  carved  with  small  below  sediment solution features and paragenetic channels (Fig.5.28). Collapse of the  ceiling has occurred mostly after washing of sediments, when the roof became unstable due to the dense network of paragenetic channels. Example of this can be seen in the middle of the passage, where there is  a  big  collapse  block  with  pendants and solution channel on the lower  side,  but  flat  surface  on  the  upper  side and above it on the ceiling from where it detached.Figure 5.28     Paragenetic   morphology   in   Budimirica   Cave:   A   –   Paragenetic channels in the Right Passage; B – thick flowstone deposits in uppermost part of the Left Passage,  with  paragenetic  wall  and  ceiling  morphology; C  –  the  paragenetic channels and pendants above the sampling profile. Photos by M. Temovski.In the small end in the N side of the Right Passage, there is some dark brown clay, commonly found in other caves of Vitačevo Plateau (Aramiska Peštera, Dragoželska Propast, Garnikovska Propast, Temna Peštera - Dragožel, Čulejca), which originates from weathering of pyroclastic deposits of Vitačevo and Mariovo Formations.
Right opposite of Budimirica, on the other side of Kamenica Valley (Fig.5.30) there is a small remnant of a cave (Karši Budimirica cave). This cave is 11.5 m long, 7 m wide and 12.5 m high, with SW direction and it is located at the same elevation as cave Budimirica. This cave is filled with flowstone, quite similar as the thick flowstone in Budimirica.Figure 5.29 Characteristic features in Budimirica Cave: A – Entrance part of the Budimirica Cave; B – sediment profile sampled for paleomagnetic dating; C – the end of first  part  in  the  Left  Passage  with  a  view  to  the  pit  and  sampling  profile location. Photos by M. Temovski.Cave sedimentsThere is a good view of the cave sediments in the pit located in the Left Passage. In the NE profile they start with flowstone at the bottom of the pit, then 1.5 m thick deposits of yellow to orange silt, clay and sand, covered by 30 cm thick collapsed flowstone block. Above this flowstone block there is yellowish gravel, sand and silt up to 1 m thick (Fig.5.29, 5.31, 5.33). To the SW part of the pit, these sediments are eroded and covered with brownish breccia (Fig.5.32) deposit in which several bones and teeth were found, and one molar determined as Ursus Speleaus (R.  Garevski, pers. comm., 2012). Towards the entrance these sediments are covered with 10-15 cm thick organic deposit (sheep and/or cow defecation deposit).
Breakdown deposits are found throughout the cave, with breakdown  flowstone blocks mostly seen  in  the  Left  Passage,  while  mostly limestone  breakdown  blocks are covering floor in the Right Passage. Younger speleothem flowstone and dripstone deposits are seen in the upper parts of the cave, although they are mostly inactive. The passage walls especially in the Left Passage are covered by a black coating from the frequent fire burning done by shepherds.Figure 5.30   The Karši Budimirica Cave. A – Karši Budimirica Cave viewed from the entrance of  the  Budimirica  Cave;  B  –  the  opposite  view  to  A;  C  –  the  Karši Budimirica entrance with thick flowstone deposits. Photos by M. Temovski.Paleomagnetic dating of the pit sediment profileThe yellow sediments from the NE profile in the pit were sampled for paleomagnetic dating. The profile  is  155  cm  deep,  starting  from  the  upper  flowstone  (collapsed)
plaque to the bottom flowstone. Several principal depositional interruptions are expressed in the profile (Fig.5.33). Bedding planes at 50, 53 and 67 cm are expressed by dark film (most probably Mn compounds) and desiccation cracks filled by overburden sediments. Plane at  53  cm  also  shows  small  neptunian  dykes  resulting from water escaping from water-saturated clayey deposits. Planes at 79, 103 and 123 cm are expressed only by dark (Mn) lamina or band. Desiccation  cracks  are developed  on  plane  at  131  cm.  Plane  at  123  cm  represents  principal lithological boundary with distinct erosional relief and change both of lithology and color.Figure 5.31 Detail of the Left Passage with sediment relationships and location of sampling profile.Paleomagnetic resultsThe yellow sediments in the profile were sampled (from the unconformity at 25.5 cm to the lower  flowstone  at  155  cm)  by high-resolution  method  (Zupan  Hajna  et  al. 2008);  i.e.  samples  located  in   each   2–3   cm.   Paleomagnetic   properties   were investigated in 56 samples (Bosak et al, 2013). The mean  NRM and  MS  moduli values are given in Tab.5.4. The sediments are characterized  by  a  low  scatter of NRM intensities  (3.24–51.2  mA.m-1)  and  MS  values  (101–872  x  10-6   SI units; Fig.5.35). Samples are  characterized  by  low  up  to  intermediate  NRM  and  MS magnetic values.
Table 5.4	Mean  paleomagnetic  values  and  standard  deviations  in  Budimirica CaveBudimirica CaveNRM [mA.m-1]MS x10-6 [SI]Interval [m]*Mean value19.173600.28 – 1.51Standard deviation10.67163Number of samples5656* From top to baseIn the respect  to  unconformity planes,  the  sampled  segment  of  the  profile  may be divided  into  three  parts.  The  sediments  from  the  profile  showed  only  normal polarized magnetization. Mean values of paleomagnetic directions of the  whole profile and its segments are documented in Tab.5.5. The values clearly document two different groups of  samples; the  first one (the upper and middle  parts  with  similar paleomagnetic directions), and the second one (the lower part).Figure 5.32 Relationship of sampled sediments to other cave fills and position of major unconformities (dotted line).Mean values of paleomagnetic directions calculated from the upper and middle parts (rather yellowish) of  the  section  are  very  close  to  the  present  magnetic  field  (the value of mean paleomagnetic declination of 2.6° is close to  the  present  magnetic declination for  the  Macedonian  area  with  value  of  2.7°).  The  deposition  of  this segment  occurred  within  the  Brunhes  chron  and  sediments  are most probably  not older than 780 Ka. The lower (rather reddish) part of the profile shows the value of mean paleomagnetic declination of 7.3°, i.e. different from the overlying sediments. The declination indicates clockwise rotation of  about  5°  and  probably much  older age of this segment.
Figure 5.33	Photo of the sediment profile with position of paleomagnetic sampling boxes and major unconformities.
However, preliminary results of 234U/238U dating of a flowstone sample from below the  yellow  sediments,  carried  by  Helena  Hercman  at  the  Institute  of  Geological Sciences, Polish Academy of Sciences (Bosak, pers. comm., 2013) indicate age of 83 (+16/-14) Ka, which makes the overlaying clastic sediments younger than 83 Ka.Table 5.5      Mean paleomagnetic directions, Budimirica Cave: D, I – declination and  inclination  of  the  NRM;  α95   –  semi-vertical  angle  of  the  cone  of  confidence calculated according to Fischer (1953) at the 95% probability level; k – precision parameter; n – number of analysed samples.Segments (cm)PolarityMean paleomagnetic directionsα95 [°]knD [°]I [°]28–151N2.5945.212.4756.155628–45.5N357.9744.095.385.871156.5–121.5N359.7943.762.9679.828124–151N7.3147.855.4151.4713MineralogyThe X-ray analysis of two samples (BUD01 - between paleomagnetic samples Nos. 67  and  123  and  BUD02  between  Nos.  123  and  131)  was  performed  to  detect  if sediment   contains   volcanic   admixture   or   material   derived   from   weathering volcanic/volcaniclastic  sources.  Orange  sandy  clay  from  upper  part  of the profile (BUD01) contains: quartz, muscovite, kaolinite, goethite,  talc,  dolomite,  smectite (montmorillonite).  Orange  sand  from  lower  part  of  the  profile (BUD02) contains: calcite, muscovite, quartz, goethite, kaolinite, talc,  smectite  (montmorillonite),  and sanidine.Table 5.6         Mineral composition of clay and sand from Budimirica Cave.sediment (sample)mineral compositionOrange sandy clay (BUD01)quartz, muscovite, kaolinite, goethite, talc, dolomite, montmoriloniteOrange sand (BUD02)calcite, muscovite, quartz, goethite, kaolinite, talc, montmorillonite, sanidine-potassianThe presence  of  smectite  (montmorillonite)  and  sanidine  indicates  that  the  source rocks were also composed of volcanic rocks or volcaniclastics. Sanidine is a typical rock-forming mineral of K-rich alkaline volcanic rocks and a principal rock-forming
mineral of Kožuf 6.5-1.8 Ma old volcanic rocks (Boev & Jelenković, 2012). Smectite (montmorillonite) is a layered clay mineral, product of intensive acidic weathering of volcaniclastic  material.  Talc  is  a  product  of  reaction  of  dolomite  or  most  likely is derived from Vardar Ophiolite suite forming also part of the basement of the Tikveš Basin. The X-ray detected mineralogical composition in both samples is very similar, only sanidine is present only in the lower sample.Figure 5.34     Example  of  AF  demagnetization  of  sample  (position  33.5  cm)  with normal  paleomagnetic  polarity  from   the   Budimirica   Cave.   A   stereographic projection  (Upper  left)  of  the  natural  remanent  magnetization  of  a sample in the natural state (cross section) and after progressive AF  demagnetization. Zijderveld diagram (Upper right) – solid circles represent  projection on  the  horizontal plane (XY),  open  circles  represent  projections on  the north–south vertical  plane  (XZ).  A graph (Lower left) of normalized values of the remanent magnetic moments versus demagnetizing fields; M – modulus of the  remanent  magnetic  moment  of  a  sample subjected to AF demagnetization.
Figure 5.35	Basic magnetic properties, Budimirica Cave.
SpeleogenesisPassages in Budimirica Cave are formed along strike direction in phreatic to epiphreatic  environment.  Vadose  flowstone  speleothems  below  the  yellow  clastic sediments in the pit profile in the Left Passage (Fig.5.31, 5.33) indicate lowering of water table in the primary passage, leading to vadose deposition of flowstone. Later deposition of yellow  clastic  sediments  (clay,  silt,  sand  and   gravel)   indicates aggradation  and  base  level  rise.  As  a  result  of  this  aggradation the passages developed in upward direction producing paragenetic morphologies. Later lowering of water table  started  removal  of  yellow  deposits  and  deposition  of  younger flowstone speleothems. The youngest phase is connected to erosion of the flowstone and yellow  clastic  deposits  with  deposition  of local breccia sediments, likely connected with frost shattering due to opening of entrance by slope retreat.Paleomagnetic analysis of the yellow clastic sediment indicates age younger than 780 Ka  (Brunhes  chron).  Preliminary  results  from  234U/238U  dating  of  the  underlying flowstone (83, +16/-14  Ka) refine the age of yellow sediments as younger then 83 Ka, with the cave older than 83 Ka. Correlation between the aggradation in the cave with deposition of yellow sediments and paragenetic development to the remnant of a terrace at the same elevation (395) opposite of the cave, 80 m above the present Kamenica River, indicates paragenetic  development  due  to  base  level  rise  in Kamenica  River.  At  the  same  relative  elevation  (80  m) above Kamenica River, remnant of a terrace is seen in Zelen Izvor locality, with aggradation and parageneticdevelopment connected to it also registered in Temna Peštera – Dragožel, and other upstream caves in Kamenica River. This indicates regional aggradation in Kamenica River, which raise the position of the water table and forced paragenetic cave development at and below water table.Figure 5.36 Cross-section showing the relationships of Budimirica  Cave  and Čulejca Cave to Kamenica and Crna Reka valleys.
The question remains regarding Karši Budimirica Cave, whether it is a cave developed at the same elevation as Budimirica Cave but in opposite direction (along strike) connected  to  the  former  base  level  position  in  Kamenica  River,  or  it  is  a remnant of the same cave system, developed before Kamenica Valley, later cut by Kamenica River with caves afterwards evolving separately.Table 5.7         Speleogenetic    phases    in    Budimirica    Cave,    their    timing    and correlation with regional geological and geomorphological evolution.Speleogenetic phase    geological and geomorphological settingTimingPrimary cave development in phreatic environment along strike in SW directionConnected to Kamenica Valley incision (or connected to Čulejca cave system?)Middle to Late Pleistocene (or pre-Pleistocene?)Shifting of strike-oriented passage formation down dip, and flowstone deposition in vadose environmentLowering of base level - incision of Kamenica Valleyage of flowstone = 83 Ka (+16/-14), Bosak, pers. comm. (2013)Deposition of yellow clastic deposits and paragenetic developmentRise of base level - regional aggradation in Kamenica Valley (terrace at 395 m)Normal polarized magnetization (Brunhes chron), Late Pleistocene (younger than 83 Ka)Removal of sediments, flowstone depositionLowering of base level – incision of Kamenica ValleyLate PleistoceneEnlarging of entrance by slope retreat erosion, deposition of local breccia due to frost shattering (Ursus Speleaus bones)Another peculiar thing is about the general direction of Budimirica Cave. The cave is developed to the south along strike of massive limestones, steeply dipping to the east, with  Kamenica  River  developed  in  ENE  to  NE  direction.  It  is  problematic  why
Budimirica Cave  continued  to  develop  in  the  same  direction,  considering  that  the downstream parts  of  the  valley  (developed  in  the  same  limestone  block)  were  at lower elevation. One possibility is the structural control of favorable bedding planes in   the  massive   limestone,  with   Budimirica  Cave   maintaining  the  same   strike orientation after shifting down dip at lower elevation adjusting to the incision of the valley. Another possibility is that the primary cave development is connected to an earlier phase directed to the  SW,  prior  to  the  incision  of  Kamenica River, maybe connected to Čulejca Cave to the west (Fig.5.36), and later cut by Kamenica River with its consequent evolution connected to the evolution (incision and aggradation) of Kamenica Valley.
5.1.7. ČULEJCA CAVEČulejca Cave is located in Crna Reka Valley, on the NW edge of Vitačevo Plateau, 1 km southward from  the  confluence  of  Crna  Reka and Kamenica River  (Fig.5.26). Čulejca has small entrance located at 390 m a.s.l., 125 m above Tikveš Lake (265 m a.s.l.), 190 m above the former riverbed of Crna Reka (200 m  a.s.l.),  before  the construction of the artificial Tikveš Lake.The  cave  is  formed  in  Turonian  limestones  on  the  northwestern  tip  of  Vitačevo Plateau in a small tectonic block, as part of a NW wing of SW trending anticline, with strata dipping to the NW at ~40°.MorphologyČulejca  Cave  is  ~600  m  long  cave,  with  total  depth  of  ~100  m,  of  which  503  m length  of  cave  passages  are  mapped,  down  to  64  m  of  depth.  The  cave has  large, tube-like phreatic passages rising generally to the south, interchanging between parts developed along fractures and bedding partings.Generally we can separate the lower (northern) section of the cave (Lower Passage, Lower Room, Poolfinger Room, Upper Room), developed in SW-NE direction, mainly along high-angle  fault  structure with  SSW-NNE  orientation;  and  the  upper (southern) section of the cave with SW-NE direction (Guano Room, Left and Right Upper Passage). In between there are passages (Debris Passage, Matarka Passage and New Passage), mainly rising along dip of prominent bedding planes, interchanging with parts formed along SW-NE to S-N oriented fractures (Fig.5.37).The cave has an erosional entrance with small dimensions (0.4 m in diameter), which was opened due to valley slope retreat. The entrance is through a small passage with cupolas, highly affected by condensation corrosion, leading to the Guano Room. The main passage continuation of  the  upper  section  is  to  the  SW  of  the  Guano  Room where the phreatic passage ends with breakdown choke.The upper part, the section between Guano Room, Left and Upper Passage and New Passage,  is  developed  in  or along the contact of  yellow  paleokarst  deposits.  These paleokarst deposits are cut by SW-NE oriented fault, which guided the anastomotic phreatic  passages  developed  within.  The  paleokarst  cave  itself  looks  like  it  was
developed along the same fault structure, which was later reactivated. Displacement of phreatic morphologies along the fault indicates that the fault was active also after formation of the anastomotic passages.Figure 5.37     Simplified  map  of  Čulejca  Cave.  For  more  detailed  cave  map  see appendix.
Figure 5.38 Characteristic morphological features in Čulejca Cave  (1):  A  – Upward   view   from   the  Lower  Room,  with  ceiling  covered  with   mammillary speleothems and clay; B – Poolfinger Room with false ceiling (pool speleothems and flowstone) and breakdown (mostly speleothems);  C  –  Guano  Room, with  Debris Passage rising from right; D – Lower part of Debris Passage with fracture guided phreatic passage leading to Upper Room, and lower passage leading to Poolfinger Room; E – Upper part of Upper Room with ceiling pockets, cupolas; F – Upward view of Debris Passage with general phreatic morphology and paragenetic ceiling. Photos by A. Mihevc (C), J-Y. Bigot (E) and M. Temovski (A, B, D, F).
Figure 5.39 Characteristic morphological features in Čulejca Cave (2): A – Paragenetic  wall  notch  (Lower  Room);  B  –  Clay  covered  flowstone  above  pool deposits (Lower Room); C – Water level mark in mammilary speleothems  (Upper Room); D – Paragenetic wall notch at the same elevation as C (Upper Room); E – Paragenetic  wall  notch  below  false  floor  at  the  same  elevation  as  C and D (Poolfinger Room); F – Corroded lower parts of stacked poolfingers,  at  the  same elevation  as  C  and D  and  E  (Poolfinger Room);  G  –  Closer  view  of the corroded poolfingers  in  F;  H  –  Water  level  mark  at  same  elevation  as  C,  D,  E,  F  (New Passage). Photos by A. Mihevc (C, D), J-Y. Bigot (A, F, G) and M. Temovski (B, E, H).
The lower section, especially Lower Room, Upper Room and Poolfinger Room, has largest  dimensions,  with floors filled with clay sediments, and walls and  ceilings filed  with  pool   speleothems   (mammillary   speleothems   and   poolfingers). Pool speleothems, such as poolfingers and calcite coatings are found also in clay deposits (ex. connection between Poolfinger Room and Debris Passage).These two sections are connected with the Debris Passage, a rising phreatic passage developed along dip of strata, with paragenetic ceiling and debris filled  floor. Matarka Passage and  New  Passage  are  also  connected  to  the  upper  section  to  the north  of  Debris  Passage.  Their  bottom  parts  are  choked  with  debris  (Matarka Passage) and clay sediments (New  Passage)  and  are  likely  connecting  the upper section with the  lower  section  as  well,  with  Matarka  Passage  connecting to  the Poolfinger Room, and New Passage coming from bellow the Lower Passage. They have  rising phreatic morphology,  and  are  developed along dip and strike of strata, with New Passage also influenced by S-N oriented fracture.Left  and  Right  Upper  Passage  are  mostly  developed  along  the  contact  with  and within  paleokarst  deposits  cut  by  SW-NE  fault.  They  have  vadose  to  tubular morphology, with parts connected to paleokarst deposits having anastomotic phreatic morphology (along the contact with paleokarst or along the fault) connecting to the Guano   Room   to   the   SW.   The   NE   parts   are   covered   with   clay   and vadose speleothems, with small vadose incision in the floor, at present  leading  small  and intermittent vadose flow towards the New Passage.Paragenetic morphology is clearly evident in the cave, with both phreatic and vadose paragenetic features registered. Sediment deposition in primary phreatic passages has led to upward paragenetic development, greatly increasing passage size. This is most evident for the northern section of the cave, namely Lower Room, Poolfinger Room, as well as Debris Passage. Paragenetic features (pendants, grooves, ceiling channels) are clearly seen all along the ceiling of Debris Passage. Sediment distribution indicates   that   these   passages   have   been   completely   filled   with   fine   grained sediments. Paragenetic morphology is less evident or absent in passages  (Matarka Passage and New Passage) to the east of the former.Alluvial notches, which are paragenetic features developed along the water table and can represent former  base level  positions  (Farrant  &  Smart,  2011) are  seen  on  the
northern wall in the Upper Room (at 370 m a.s.l.) and Lower Room (353 m a.s.l.), connected with coarser fluvial sediments (Fig.5.39: A, D). The alluvial notch at 370 m  a.s.l.  corresponds  with  small  water  level  corrosion  notch  on  mammillary  pool speleothems in between the Upper Room and Debris Passage (Fig.5.39: C), as well as with water level mark in the New Passage (Fig.5.39: H).Their connection with coarser sediments and development on cave walls in passages which   were   previously   filled   with   fine   grained   sediments   indicates   different paragenetic   developments,   one    connected    with    the    primary   phreatic    cave development, and the other overlain later in a vadose setting.Cave sedimentsPrimary phreatic passages are filled with yellow and brown clay deposits. The yellow deposits probably originate from erosion of the paleokarst deposits, while the brown clay deposits are likely from weathering of pyroclastic deposits from Vitačevo and/or Mariovo Formation. X-Ray analysis of a sample of reddish brown clay from  the Lower Room (Fig.5.37, Tab.5.8) showed composition similar to the clays described in  caves  of  Kamenica  Valley:  montmorillonite,  halloysite-7Ä,  kaolinite,  calcite, muscovite, and quartz.Table 5.8 Mineralogical composition of clay and paleokarst deposits in Čulejca Cave.sediment (sample)mineral compositionReddish-brown clay (CH)montmorillonite, halloysite-7Ä, kaolinite, calcite, muscovite,  quartzPaleokarst filling (CH02)rutile, goethite, clinochlore, muscovitePaleokarst filling (CH03)montmorillonite, kaolinite, goethite, rutile, muscovite, clinochlorePaleokarst deposits are found in the upper section, although their distribution may be larger  but  concealed  by  cave  deposits.  Their  distribution  suggests  that  they  were deposited in  a  cave with SW-NE direction. They are likely originating  from the Cretaceous siliclastic rocks, with mineral composition (Fig.5.37, Tab.5.8) indicating possible pyroclastic contribution as well.
Figure 5.40   Cave  deposits  in  Čulejca  Cave:  A  –  Poolfingers  on  the  SW  wall  in Poolfinger Room; B – Close-up of poolfingers in A; C – Mammillary speleothems on S  wall  in  Poolfinger  Room;  D  –  Pilled  cave  rafts  in  the  Lower  Room;  E  – Small poolfingers in the Poolfinger Room; F – Brown clay deposits covered by redeposited breakdown and  clay  sediments;  G  –  Cross-cut  of  a  poolfinger   sample from Poolfinger Room; H – Septaria  boxwork  with  clacite  deposited  in  clay  fractures (Lower Room). Photos by M. Temovski.
Clinochlore  is  found  in  both  samples  and  might  be  from  ophiolitic  rocks.  Some ophiolitic rocks are seen in the Upper Passages, and ophiolitic rocks are also found along faults in the Cretaceous rocks, as part of the Vardar ophiolitic complex.Pool  speleothems  (Fig.5.40)  are  widespread  in  the  Poolfinger  Room,  the  Lower Room and the Lower Passage. They include mammillary speleothems,  poolfingers and  cave  rafts.  The  poolfingers  are  the  most  fascinating,  with  various sizes  and different  morphologies.  They  are  found  all  along  the  Poolfinger room  and  the passage leading to the Lower Room, at lower  elevations interchanging  with  clay sediments.  At  places  poolfingers  are  stacked  to each other resembling stacked candles.  Clays  found  with  poolfingers  are  covered with aqueous calcite coatings, indicating that the deposition of the pool speleothems happened in a clay filled pool settings. Lower parts of some stacked poolfingers seen at the ceiling of Poolfinger Room have clear dissolution morphology indicating later dissolution.Figure 5.41     Schematic  representation  of  plan  pattern  development  with  phreatic passage formation along faults and bedding  partings  due  to  base  level  rise  and sediment deposition
Pilled cave rafts are also found with other pool deposits below a flowstone plaque in the Lower Room.Pool speleothems change gradually or are covered by thick flowstone speleothems, as seen in ceiling of Poolfinger Room and in the Lower Room. Such situation shows that the deposition of speleothems started in a clay filled pool setting,  which gradually filled  up  and  changed  to  vadose  deposition  of  flowstone.  In  the  Lower Room thick flowstone deposits are covered by re-deposited brown clays and coarser clastic  sediment,  which  correspond  to  the  alluvial  paragenetic  notch  seen  above them, and are likely connected to backflooding from Crna Reka.The older pool and flowstone speleothems, as well as the clastic deposits, and rock morphologies are also covered by younger flowstone and dripstone speleothems.In the Guano Room, as  well  as  in  the  small  side  passage  that  connects  the  Upper Room and the Debris Passage, there are white aragonite stalagmites and stalactites.Condensation corrosion affected curtains are also seen in the Upper Room.SpeleogenesisČulejca  Cave  is  a  phreatic  cave  with  passages  rising  to  the  south  along  SW-NE oriented faults, connected with rising passages formed along prominent  bedding partings dipping to the NW. Two sub-horizontal sections can be seen in the cave: the lower in the  Poolfinger  Room,  and  the  upper  in  the  Guano  Room.  They  are connected  by rising  phreatic  passages  (Debris  Passage,  Matarka  Passage and New Passage) developed generally along dip and strike of prominent bedding partings.Distribution   of   fine   grained   sediments,   passage   organization   and   paragenetic morphology indicates formation of passages towards higher elevation due to rise of base level. This has led to deposition of sediments in less active routes and upward paragenetic enlargement of passages, which were later abandoned, with water flow establishing more efficient routes.The Lower Passage and Lower Room are rising along SSW-NNE fault towards the Poolfinger Room,  which  is  sub-horizontal  and  represents  cave  development  phase toward more stable base level. Rise in base level shifted cave development towards the upper part (Guano Room). The lower passages were filling up with sediments,
and more efficient routes were gradually established toward the upper section. Sediment  deposition  forced  paragenetic  upward  development  in  Poolfinger  Room, Lower  Passage,  Upper  Room,   and   Debris   Passage,   which   gradually   led to development of more efficient routes  through  Matarka  Passage  and  then  New Passage, which is the youngest passage to develop toward the upper section, rising from a different location from below the Lower Passage (Fig.5.41).This interpretation is in agreement with passage size, distribution of phreatic paragenetic morphology and clastic sediments.The Left and Right Upper Passage are likely the youngest passages, with later vadose incision after lowering of base level. The main present vadose flow, although very small and intermittent, is from these passages towards the New Passage.While the main passage formation is connected to per ascensum speleogenesis due to rise of base level, the removal of sediments is after lowering of base level. Continuous incision of Crna Reka lowered the base level, which led to removal of sediments. Periodical aggradation in Crna Reka Valley led to backflooding and deposition of coarser fluvial sediments (or redeposition of clay fragments) and formation of alluvial notches along the water table. These alluvial notches, seen in the Upper Room (at 372 m) and Lower Room (at 353 m), therefore represent positions  of  base  level  in  Crna  Reka  Valley.  These  backflooding  events,  forcing aggressive water from Crna Reka, also led to dissolution of poolfingers as seen on the ceiling in Poolfinger Room (Fig.5.39: F, G).Considering the position  of  Čulejca  Cave  with  regards  to  the  evolution  of  Tikveš Basin in Pliocene and Pleistocene, and distribution of Pliocene (Vitačevo Formation) and Pleistocene deposits (Mariovo Formation), the first phase of cave development (per ascensum) might be connected to deposition of sediments (Vitačevo Formation) in Pliocene-Pleistocene Central Macedonian Lake.   The area of Vitačevo Plateau as part of the Tikveš Basin was covered  by  deposits  of  Vitačevo and Mariovo Formations, deposited in Pliocene and Early Pleistocene respectively. Remnants of deposits of Vitačevo Formation found on Tumbata (697 m) above Čulejca Cave, as well as the distribution of Vitačevo and Mariovo Formations indicates that this whole western  part  of  Vitačevo  Plateau  was  covered  by  Pliocene  and  Early  Pleistocene deposits.
Figure 5.42     Interpreted    evolution    of    Čulejca    Cave    with    regards    to    the geomorphological evolution  of  Tikveš  Basin  and  Crna  Reka  Valley.  A-C:  Per- ascensum formation of  rising  phreatic  passages  with  sediment  deposition  and paragenesis due to base level  rise  (deposition  of  Vitačevo  Formation  in  Tikveš Basin); D: Fossilization of the karst system due to burying of Vitačevo Plateau by deposits of Tikveš Basin (Vitačevo and Mariovo Formation); E-F:  Per-descensum evolution of Čulejca Cave, with removal of sediments, deposition of pool speleothems and paragenetic development due to periodical aggradations in Crna Reka Valley.Development of rising phreatic cave passages can be due to base-level rise as a result of  Pliocene  lacustrine  deposition.  During  late  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  the  cave system would have been closed  due  to  complete  covering  of  the  Plateau  with Vitačevo and Mariovo Formations (Fig.5.42, Fig.5.75). Travertine layers are found
within Vitačevo Formation up to 500 m a.s.l., and might correspond to the closure ofthe karst system.After  draining  of  Central  Macedonian  Lake  and  start  of  incision  of  Crna  Reka, lowering of base level led to removal of sediments and deposition of speleothems in a pool to vadose environment. As  Crna  Reka  incised  faster  than  its tributary Kamenica River, the upper parts of the karst terrain, which were  previously recharging Čulejca Cave, would have stayed covered and there would have been lack of aggressive water recharge in Čulejca Cave. This is in good  agreement with the oversaturated water depositing calcite in a pool environment. Small vadose recharge from  exposed  limestone  due  to  caprock  retreat  close  to  the  Crna  Reka  Valley,  or small   recharge   with   long   residence   time   from   the karst system might have contributed to the oversaturation of the pools with regards to calcite.Table 5.9. Correlation of speleogenetic phases with geomorphologic and  geologic events in Tikveš Basin.period     geological and geomorphological setting    cave developmentcave featuresUpper Miocene5.96 to 5.32 Ma BPEntrenchment of Vardar & Crna Reka due to MSC (?)   per descensumnot seen, hypothesized below the caveLower PliocenePliocene deposition in TikvešBasinper ascensumrising phreatic passagesclay deposition in inactive partsUpper Pliocene– Lower PleistoceneComplete covering of karst areas with deposits of Vitačevo and Mariovo Formationsfossilization of karst systemUpper Early Pleistocene to Late PleistoceneIncision of Crna Reka first in Neogene deposits, then in Cretaceous limestones   per descensumrestricted recharge (covered upstream karst)deposition of flowstone and pool speleothems periodical river aggradation(clay deposition on flowstone, paragenetic wall notches , dissolution of pool speleothems)
Per ascensum phase of cave development due to base-level rise by Pliocene deposition would mean that a previous phase of karstification occurred which lowered the  water  table  before  the  deposition  of  the  Pliocene  sediments.  Possible reason for such base lowering prior to the Pliocene deposition can be the influence of the Messinian  Salinity  Crisis  (MSC).  Based  on  the  evidence  found  in Macedonia (Dračevo), Greece (Thessaloniki) and Niš (Serbia) a marine  gateway (Fig.5.76) which connected the Dacic Basin (Eastern Paratethys) to the Aegean Sea prior and after the MSC was proposed (Clauzon et al., 2008). Although evidence of MSC in Tikveš Basin is not yet registered, the Pliocene deposits found along the Crna Reka Valley between Mariovo and Tikveš Basin  indicate  the  Miocene  age  of  the  paleo Crna  valley,  with  the  Quaternary  Crna  Reka  following  approximately  the  same course.  At  the  confluence  with  Blašnica  River,  Crna  Reka  Valley  is  also  cutting trough Pliocene deposits (Fig.5.59).Based on the  morphological  evidence  some  base  level  markers  can  be  determined from the cave for both per ascensum and per descensum phases of  speleogenesis (Tab.5.9). Sub-horizontal position of phreatic parts considered as formed during the first phases of per ascensum speleogenesis as seen in Poolfinger Room and close to the entrance (Guano Room) give  markers  for  Pliocene  deposition at 365-370 m (Poolfinger Room) and 380-385 m (Guano Room).  Alluvial paragenetic notches connected with coarse fluvial sediments and corroded pool speleothems, attributed to Crna Reka aggradation give markers for Crna Reka base level in Pleistocene at 353 m  (Lower  Room)  and  370  m  (Upper  Room).  The alluvial  notch  at  353  m  may correspond  with  remnant  of  a  terrace  at  350  m located  2  km  to  the  north  at  the confluence of Kamenica River with Crna Reka.Paleokarst  deposits  in  the  upper  section  are  likely  older  than  Pliocene,  and  were probably used as  most  favorable  routes by the  rising waters  due  to  base  level rise which influenced the per ascensum speleogenesis. Their distribution is clearly seen in the upper section, and it is possible that  passages  in  the  lower  section are also partly influenced by paleokarst deposits, with their distribution  hidden  by younger deposits.
5.2. CAVES   IN   THE   WESTERN   PART   OF   DREN   AND   KOZJAK MOUNTAINS5.2.1. PODOT CAVES AND GUGJAKOVSKI IZVORIPodot is a flat surface in the valley of Crna Reka, with one markant terrace at 440 m a.s.l., covered mostly by tufa and tufaceous limestone with some carbonate breccia and   conglomerate   layers   (Fig.5.43,   Fig.5.44).   This   terrace   has   more   broken morphology to the east due to slope retreat and collapses. At the base of the terrace there is a big  spring  discharging  at  4  visible  locations  (Gugjakovski  Izvori)  withapproximate discharge of 0.5 m3s-1  (the approximation was made after measurementat the two confluences  with  Crna  Reka  in  July 2012,  using  the  float  method),  but actual discharge might be  much  bigger.  It  is  the  largest  spring along the  valley of Crna Reka, downstream from the ones in Demir Hisar (Fig.1.1.) spring area.Figure 5.43 Geological characteristic and location of caves and springs in Podot locality. Geological data modified after Dumurdžanov et al. (1976), Geološki Zavod– Skopje (unpublished).There are number of cave entrances in this terrace, several of which with a strong draft, but most of them are penetrable for up to 10 m in a breakdown passage ending with collapse choke. In  two  of  these  entrances  it was possible to penetrate  further inside, leading to caves Podot 1 and Podot 2. Cave entrances with or without draft
are distributed in two localities, one associated with Podot 1 and Podot 2 caves, and the other above Gugjakovski Izvori.Figure 5.44 View of Podot terrace with location of Gugjakovo Springs and caves Podot 1 & 2. White dotted line outlines travertine deposits.CAVES PODOT 1 & PODOT 2MorphologyAs the tufaceous limestones are largely affected by collapse, entrances and entrance parts of the caves are in breakdown deposits, in-between blocks, generally vertical leading to the main cave parts below. The entrance of Podot 1 is merely 40 cm in diameter.In plan view cave passages constitute a network pattern with fissure guided passages developed  along  several  fractures  with  SW-NE,  WSW-ENE,  and  WNW-ESE  to NW-SE general direction. Passages  have  generally  bigger  height  than  width  and appear to have phreatic morphology, although morphology is difficult to observe due to collapse and later coating with pool speleothems.In vertical dimension,  passages  are  mostly  horizontal  with  two  (Podot  2)  to  three notable levels (Podot 1). Their development is likely connected to former positions
of the water table, determined by the position of Crna Reka riverbed. The levels in Podot 1 correspond to the terrace at 350 m (Fig.5.48).Figure 5.45     Simplified  map  of  cave  Podot  1.  For  more  detailed  cave  map  see appendix.Cave sedimentsPassages are affected by collapse processes, with breakdown deposits covering most of passage floors.  In  the  lower  levels,  passage  walls  are  covered  by  coatings  and mammillary speleothems, which  were  likely  deposited  by  oversaturated  waters in ponded environments. The best examples are in cave Podot 2, in a small passage in the northern part of the cave.Table 5.10       Some   physical   and   chemical   parameters   of   Gugjakovski   Izvori; temperature (T) in °C; electronic conductivity (EC) in µS/cm; total Hardness (TH) in dH; concentrations in mg/l.DateTpHECTHHCO3CaMgClFeMnNO3SO4analysis29/042012/7.95702////140/5/lab23/072012177.2674014.5518.527.2350.880.02502.70lab
Gugjakovo springsGugjakovo springs are discharging water in at least 4 different localities. Springs 1, 2 and  3  are  at the contact of  Travertine  with  alluvial  deposits converging in  a  small river connecting with Crna Reka, while Spring 4 is in the alluvial deposits closer to the river connecting to Crna Reka little upstream from the others (Fig.5.43).Opposite of Gugjakovo springs in Karši Podot Cave, there is a thermal spring withtemperature of 23 °C (Chapter 4).Figure 5.46     Simplified  map  of  cave  Podot  2.  For  more  detailed  cave  map  see appendix.Smaller caves, collapsesA number of smaller caves are found in Podot terrace, generally in two localities: in the eastern part in proximity to Podot 1 and Podot 2 caves, and in the middle part above Gugjakovski  Izvori.  They  have  passages  of  less  than  10  m,  generally  with collapsed  morphology  ending  in  a  choke.  Some  of  them,  in  both  localities,  have
strong draft of cool air. They are generally in the lower elevations close to the spring or to the caves. In between these localities there is a rift-like depression 30 m wide with SE-NE direction. It is a collapsed structure with come cavities seen on the SE wall (Fig.5.43).Figure 5.47 Characteristic features of Podot caves: Upper Left – The entrance to Cave Podot 1;  Upper  Right  –  Mammillary  calcite  coated  walls  in  Cave  Podot  2; Down – Closer look of broken mammillary coatings. Photos by M. Temovski.SpeleogenesisThe cave development in the tufaceous limestone deposits of Podot terrace is connected to the evolution of the riverbed of Crna Reka. Periods of stable base level, led  to  development  of  horizontal  passages  corresponding  to  the  spring  position.
Incision of the valley lowered the spring position and water table,  producing passages at lower level. Spring position shifted to the SW as Crna Reka incised it valley, with higher level passages in the NE part.Figure 5.48     Cross-section of Podot locality showing caves, springs and terraces.Podot 1 and 2 caves have been formed in phreatic to epiphreatic environment, with their evolution connected to the lowering of water table due to incision of Crna Reka. Horizontal development of passages was connected to periods of stable base level. With lowering of water table, subaqueous mammillary and coating speleothems have been deposited in oversaturated perched pools.As Crna Reka incised  it  river  bed,  the  spring  shifted  to  lower  position,  with  cave levels development in stable periods.  Slope  retreat  processes  triggered  collapse of cave passages, with numerous, breakdown choked small caves left, as well a large collapse structure between the spring and caves Podot 1 and Podot  2.  Gugjakovo springs are the present discharge points of this system, with active cave passages in the background of the springs, not yet reachable.Temperature of water from Gugjakovo springs (17 °C) is little higher (cf. Zelen Izvor with temperature of 11.3  °C)  which  might  be  due  to  mixing  with  thermal  waters. Thermal waters with temperature of 23 °C are discharging in Karši Podot Cave.
Diffuse vadose recharge is also contributing to dissolution of the porous tufaceous limestones  and might  have  also  contributed  to the  deposition of  pool speleothems, but this is  rather  small  amount  considering  the  small  surface  area  of  tufaceous limestones.Figure 5.49 Extent of karst rocks with Suva Planina as possible recharge area of Gugjakovo Springs (Podot locality).Source of waterThe spring and caves in Podot tufaceous limestones are the output part of the karst system. There are three karstifiable formations underlying the tufaceous limestones: dolomitic marbles (Precambrian), overlain by calcitic marbles (Cambrian) and limestones  (Cretaceous  - Senonian)  separated  from  the  former  by Senonian  clastic rocks (sandstone, shale and conglomerates). The dip of this whole  Pre-Cenozoic section (as part of Veprčani monocline) is to the ENE  by 30-50°.  Water could be supplied from any these karstifiable formations, with the  tufaceous limestones allowing by-passing of the impermeable clastic formation.  Considering the dip of strata water from  the  Cretaceous  limestones  will  more  likely discharge in the downstream part, at the lowest position of contact with  Turonian clastic (~15 m lower than the spring), although  only  one  very  small  spring was found in the downstream part, and the formation is clearly karstified. Water can be supplied from the marble formations, probably more from the  Cambrian calcitic  marble.  This Cambrian  formation  continues  to  the  north  were  it  overlays  Precambrian  calcitic
marbles (which thin out to the south), and recharging may be all along this outcrop up to Suva Planina to the NE, as well as from the dolomitic marble (Fig.5.49). They probably mix with thermal waters coming from south at the spring area.
5.2.2. PEŠTI CAVEPešti Cave is located at 1135 m a.s.l. on the eastern slope of Garvan – Četiri Buki mountain segment in Dren Massif, 900 m south-east of Trite Stragi (1476 m) and 1.4 km from Klen mountain pass, about 3.5 km north from Crna Reka (Fig.5.50, Fig.5.54).Figure 5.50     Geological  setting   between   Živovo   and   Gugjakovo   villages   with locations of Pešti Cave, Živovska Propast, Dupkite and Podot caves. Geological data modified after Dumurdžanov et al. (1976), Geološki Zavod – Skopje (unpublished).MorphologyPešti Cave  is  a  200  m  long,  38  m  deep  cave  composed  mostly  of  one  big  main passage in SE general direction (Fig.5.51). Passage parts are developed along strike of strata (with NNW-SSE direction), with dip  (to  ENE  by  55°)  clearly  visible on passage walls. In the lower parts the passage turns little to the E, partly influenced by
a WNW-ESE oriented fracture. Passages morphology is difficult to observe, mostly obscured by speleothem deposits and breakdown. Vadose canyon morphology can be seen in the middle part, cut down in what appears to be a remnant of phreatic tube in the ceiling.  Small  down-dip  developed  tributary  vadose  passages  appear  from  the southwestern wall. At the end the cave turns to the south ending with a clay filled passage. The passage here has a flat paragenetic ceiling which is partly exposed after removal of sediments.Figure 5.51 Simplified map of Pešti Cave. For more detailed cave  map  see appendix.In the  middle  of  the  cave,  there  is  a  side  passage  below  the  main  passage.  This passage (Lower Passage) has the same slope and direction with upper  parts  filled with clay and paragenetic ceiling morphology.Cave sedimentsRed-brown clay deposits  are  filling  the  lower  part  of  the  cave,  partly  covered  by flowstone,   and   probably  also   filling  other   parts   of   the   cave   but   covered by speleothems or breakdown material. X-ray analysis of a sample  (PES01)  from  the
clay choke at the end of the cave showed composition of calcite, clinochlore, muscovite, quartz, sanidine-potassian, and goethite.Considering   the   location   of   the   cave,   the   surrounding   stratigraphy,   and   the orientation of cave passages, the source of sediments  is  likely  from  the  Senonian clastic rocks (sandstones, shales and conglomerates) underlying the limestones and outcropping to the west at  the  contact  with  underlying Paleozoic  and Precambrian rocks, which themselves originate from the Precambrian  metamorphic  complex  to the west.Figure 5.52 Characteristic features of Pešti Cave: A – View of the entrance part of the cave; B – View of the middle part of the Main Passage, with large flowstone and dripstone speleothems. The Lower Passage is to the lower right part; C – The lowest part of the cave, filled with reddish clay. Photos by M. Temovski.Breakdown processes are clearly very important for present morphology of the cave, with huge collapses of ceiling, mostly along bedding planes, producing breakdown debris and large limestone blocks. Breakdown of flowstone can be seen in the lowest part of the room, due to instability after removal of underlying clay deposits.Passage walls are also covered with thick dripstone and flowstone speleothems throughout the cave.
DUPKITE CAVESThese  are  two  small  caves  located  at  460  m  a.s.l.  (Dupkite  1)  and  490  m  a.s.l. (Dupkite 2) on the left side of Crna Reka Valley in Rekata locality  (Fig.5.50, Fig.5.54), 145 m and 175 m respectively above Crna Reka river bed. Dupkite 1 is larger with 14 m of passage length (Fig.5.53). It has same SSE direction along the strike of thin bedded limestones. Passage morphology was mostly destroyed due to breakdown. Below these caves at the  river  bed  of  Crna  Reka  there  are  two  small karst springs.Figure 5.53     Maps of caves Dupkite 1 and Dupkite 2.SpeleogenesisPassage orientation and remnants of morphology in the cave indicate  primary phreatic passage development in SE direction along the strike, with tributary vadose passages joining from west, developed along dip. Vadose canyon was later incised in the main passage  after  lowering  of  base  level,  with  later  paragenetic  development due to deposition of red clay deposits. The paragenetic development likely started in vadose  environment,  producing  flat  ceiling  in  the  lower  part  after  transition  to phreatic environment due to complete infilling with clay deposits.Sediments were likely brought by vadose streams from passages developed along dip at the contact with the underlying clastic Senonian deposits at higher elevation in the NE dipping Veprčani Monocline.
The development of the cave was most likely controlled by base level changes in the main Crna Reka Valley. Considering the direction of the cave, and the location of small  remnants  of  caves  (Dupkite  1  &  2)  on  the  left  side  of  Crna  Reka  Valley in Rekata locality, as well as small springs bellow them in the river bed of Crna Reka (Fig.5.50), this area may be the output part of the same cave system. Dupkite Caves are located below  the  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  deposits  (Solnje  and Mariovo Formations), and their development is likely connected with evolution of Crna Reka Valley after the draining of the lake system in Pleistocene. It is also possible that this cave  system  was  active  prior  to  the  Pleistocene  incision  of  Crna Reka, with karst waters contributing to the deposition of travertine deposits of Mariovo Formation on Gramos and Milevi Nivi (Fig.5.54).Figure 5.54 Cross-section of Crna Reka Valley with caves and springs and their relationship with Pliocene-Pleistocene sediments and terraces: 1 - Pešti Cave, 2 – Cave Dupkite 2, 3 – Cave Dupkite 1, 4 – small springs bellow Dupkite caves, 5 – Cave Podot 2, 6 – Cave Podot 1, 7 – Gugjakovski Izvori, 8 – Karši Podot Cave and thermal   springs,   9   –   Živovska   Propast,   10   –   Gravel,   sand   and   silt   (Solnje Formation?, Pliocene), 11 – Travertine deposits (Mariovo Formation?, Pleistocene), 12 – Tufaceous limestone, tufa and carbonate conglomerates (Pleistocene?).
5.2.3. ŽIVOVSKA PROPASTŽivovska Propast is located on the mountain ridge of Gola Skrka - Cucul segment (Fig.5.50, Fig.5.54), at 1173 m a.s.l., 800 m south from Cucul (1229). The cave is formed in Senonian limestones, close to the contact with a lens of clastic rocks, part of Veprčani Monocline, dipping to the ENE by 50°.Figure 5.55 Map of Živovska Propast with plan view at different depths, modified from SD Peoni (2005).
It is a 115 m deep cave with a network of shaft passages developed along three sets of fractures with: NNW-SSE, N-S, and WSW-ENE direction. NNW-SSE and WSW-ENE fractures are more prominent ones with deeper shafts developed along them. Passages end with a choke, with passages developed along the N-S oriented fracture having smaller depth. The northern shaft developed along this fracture ends at 60 m, while the southern shaft, which is developed at the cross with the NNE-SSE fracture, ends  at  65  m  depth.  The  deepest  part  is  in  the  northern  shaft  along  the NNW-SSE fracture with passage ending with a choke at 115 m depth, while the only passage developed along the WSW-ENE fracture ends at 100 m depth.Cave walls are covered with popcorn deposits in mostly in the deeper parts of cave passages.Živovska Propast is a complex system of shafts developed along three sets of fracture orientations. Passages end with chokes, so the depth measured is not representative of the cave development. The most prominent fracture direction is the NNW-SSE. As this area has been high above the Crna Reka base level at least since Miocene when the old valley of Crna Reka developed (see section 2.4 General geomorphology), and was  not  covered  with  sediments  of  Mariovo  Basin,  the  cave may have been actively developing for a long period, with different fractures having bigger influence in given periods. If we consider the interpretation of age of fractures by geometry (Koncheva et al., 2006; Boev & Jelenković, 2012) with fractures having Vardar  direction  (NNW-SSE  to  N-S)  being  older  and  WSW-ENE fractures as younger connected with the Neogene and Quaternary tectonics, and the continuous karstification throughout the Neogene and Quaternary, then passages my have been forming first along the fractures with Vardar orientation, with the passage along the WSW-ENE fracture being younger.
5.3. CAVES   IN   THE   EASTERN   PART   OF   DREN   AND   KOZJAK MOUNTAINSThe  eastern  part  of  Dren  Mountain,  especially  the  terrains  developed  in  Triassic rocks, are the least accessible and least explored parts of this area. This is also true for the eastern part of  Kozjak  Mountain,  except  the  southern  part  towards Kožuf Mountain. Triassic limestones and dolomites are  the  most  widespread karst rocks here. The exact relationship of dolomites and limestones  has not been determined, with the whole carbonate formation treated as one unit. They are part of the Rožden Horst with clastic rocks of the Middle Triassic overlain by carbonate series of Upper Triassic  (Dumurdžanov  et  al,   1976;   Arsovski,   1997),  and   possibly   Jurassic (Robertson et al., 2012), highly deformed in a series of isocline folds.In this eastern part of Kozjak and Dren mountains, Cretaceous limestones are outcropping at several locations, mostly to the NE. The Turonian formation lies to the east  of  Rožden  Horst,  with  Triassic  rocks  being  overthrusted  onto  Cretaceous rocks.Several  caves  have  been  reported from this  are, mostly discovered  by cavers  from PSD Orle. Few of them have been studied, mostly in the southern parts.5.3.1. CAVE LEKOVITA VODACave Lekovita Voda is situated on the right side of the valley of Doljani River, a left- hand tributary to Crna Reka, 2.3 km to the WSW of Čulejca Cave (Fig.5.26). The entrance is located in a small (most likely collapse) doline at 730 m elevation.The cave is formed in Turonian limestones, overlaying clastic sediments, part of the Veles-Klepa-Tikveš segment,  which  is  overthrusted  from  the  west  by  the  Triassic rocks  of  Rožden  horst.  The  Cretaceous  series  here  are  folded  in  several  fold structures, with the limestones at the cave dipping by 60° to the SW.The cave consists of a single horizontal passage, formed along the strike of the strata, with a NW orientation (Fig.5.56). It is 90 m long, with quite big dimensions, 5-20 m wide and 6 m high. It is a remnant passage of a larger cave system.
In cross-section  the  passage  has  a  phreatic  elliptical  morphology,  elongated  along bedding  plane,  with  strata  dipping  to  the  SW,  modified  by paragenesis.  At places remnants of clay deposits can be seen on passage walls and ceiling, although most of the cave walls are covered by flowstone deposits, and coated in black due to frequent fire burnings in the entrance part.Figure 5.56     Map of Cave Lekovita Voda.Paragenetic morphology can be best observed in the SW part of the cave, where the passage is  widest.  Here  well  expressed  yellow  stained  pendants,  anastomoses  and channels  can  be  seen  on  ceiling  and  walls,  with  passage  floor  mostly  filled with sediments (Fig.5.57). Some flowstone deposits with gravel on the lower side are seen on the ceiling, exposed after removal of coarse fluvial sediments.To the SW the cave ends with quite large sediment fill, 2 meter thick gravel and sand with flowstone layers, covered by a sloping flowstone deposits up to the ceiling at 6 m height. Quartz and red-violet schist fragments were easily spotted in the  gravel sediments, most likely originating from the Middle Triassic schist rocks found to the west in Rožden horst.
On the southern wall, close to this sediment profile, there are clay, sand and gravel deposits exposed on the wall and in a small side passage or niche. Sample (LEK01) of  yellow  clay  deposits  in  this  location  showed  composition  of  montmorillonite, lizardite, goethite, fluorapatite, titanite and quartz. Presence of  montmorillonite indicates  volcanic/volcaniclastic  source  of  sediments.  Titanite  is  a detrital  mineral likely coming from the Turonian flysch deposits located to west and underlying the limestones, as it is found in the sandstone sediments of this series (Dumurdžanov et al., 1976). Fluorapatite can be from fossil bones in the sediment, while lizardite can be from ophiolitic rocks, commonly found as diapiric bodies along fault structures in the surroundings.Figure 5.57  Characteristic features of Cave Lekovita Voda: A – The entrance with the beds dipping by 60° to the SW; B – Paragenetic morphology on yellow stained ceiling; C – The sediment profile in the southern end of the cave; D – Large column speleothems in the  middle  of  the  passage  with  yellow  stained  paragenetic  ceiling, and beds dipping to the left (SW) by 60° (view from the profile in C). Photos by M. Temovski.The  cave  was  formed  in  a  phreatic  to  epiphreatic  setting,  with  later  paragenetic development of the phreatic passage due to sediment infilling. It is a remnant of a former larger cave system, which to the NW is  cut by the slope retreat of Doljani
valley, while  to  the  SW  is  choked  with  sediments.  The  cave  was  continuing  and developing to the N-NW towards, most likely fed by streams coming from the SW, from the eastern slope of Dren Mountain (Fig.5.26).The   presence   of   volcaniclastic   derived   sediments   in   the   cave   is   unexpected, considering its location, and lack of Vitačevo and Mariovo deposits on the left side of Crna Reka Valley, which are considered as the source for montmorillonite in the cave sediments on  Vitačevo  Plateau.  Most  likely  explanation for the lack of pyroclastic deposits on the left side of Crna Reka is that there were such deposits, but were later eroded by the rivers flowing along the eastern slope of Dren (Orle) Mt. Such situation is also seen on the left side of Crna Reka in Mariovo, 20 km to the SW, where only small patches of the Pliocene deposits are preserved, comparing to the thick Miocene to Early Pleistocene deposits found on the right side (Manakovik& Andonovski, 1984). Nevertheless the origin of the pyroclastic is likely connectedto the Kožuf volcanic complex to the south.Figure 5.58     Cross-section  showing  the  relationship  of  Cave  Lekovita  Voda  and Čulejca Cave to Crna Reka and Doljani River valleys.Cave Lekovita Voda is rather old cave, remnant of a larger cave system,  which evolution is difficult to deduct, based on regional geomorphological and geological evolution. Its development is connected to the evolution of Doljani valley, which in in Quaternary was governed by the evolution of the Crna Reka Valley. As this part of Doljani River is quite close (1.6 km) to the main valley, changes in the Crna Reka Valley (incision, aggradation) have relatively quickly affected Doljani valley as well. The paragenetic development in the cave is connected to base-level rise in Doljani valley, which in turn should reflect base level rise in the Crna Reka Valley.The cave is located quite high above the present river beds of Doljani River and Crna Reka  (Fig.5.58):  300  m  above  Doljani  River  (at  430  m  a.s.l.,  1.7  km  before  the confluence with Crna Reka) and 530 above Crna Reka (200 m a.s.l. at the confluence with Doljani River).
Considering its elevation and location with regards to Doljani and Crna  Reka Valleys, the aggradation that influenced the filling of the cave and paragenetic development, can be connected to the Late Pliocene – Early Pleistocene deposition (aggradation) in Tikveš Basin, or it can correspond to the early periods of Pleistocene incision of Crna Reka, after the draining of Central Macedonian Lake (which happened as late as Middle Pleistocene; Dumurdžanov et al., 2004).
5.3.2. CAVE VODNA PEŠCave Vodna Peš is situated  on  the  right  side  of  Crna  Reka  Valley,  1.6  km  WSW from the confluence with Blašnica River, located at 740 m a.s.l., just below Vodena Peš  (807)  summit,  and  475  m  above  Tikveš  Lake  (Fig.5.59).  The  depth of Tikveš Lake here is ~25 m so the cave is located 500 m above Crna Reka riverbed.Figure 5.59     Geological   setting   of   Cave   Vodna   Peš.   Geological   data   after Dumurdžanov et al. (1976), Geološki Zavod – Skopje (unpublished).It is formed in Upper Triassic limestones which are part of the Rožden Horst. The limestones are highly folded to isocline folds, with underlying Middle Triassic clastic rocks exposed to the NW from the cave. The cave is developed in the western limb of an anticline with strata dipping to the NW by 60°.MorphologyCave Vodna Peš is a more than 230 m long cave with NE general direction  and biggest depth at 25 m (Fig.5.61). It has a branchwork pattern in plan view with three passages (West Passage, South Passage and East Passage - an unmapped passage east from the South Passage), joining in a collapse room (Big Room). In profile it has at
least  three  horizontal  levels,  with  passages  rising  in  the  NE  part,  which  is  most influenced by collapse. The entrance is erosional, opened due to slope retreat erosion.Figure 5.60   Geological cross-section through the NE part of Kozjak Mt., showing the relationship of Cave Vodna Peš to Crna Reka and Sušica River valleys.The Big Room has a triangular form in plan with large size, connecting to the west with the West Passage. The northern part has more or less horizontal floor, mostly covered  with  collapsed  blocks  and  debris,  with  clay  deposits  seen  in  small  side passages along the northern wall. To the south the floor is steeply inclined, covered with debris material, with several passages connecting with the room. In the lowest part  of  this  southern  side  the  Big  Room  continues  to  the  South  and  East Passage. There are several fractures along which there is collapsing, one  prominent  having WNW-ESE direction.The West Passage is ~65 m long, with a SW-NE direction in the lower part, developed along the strike of strata, and in the upper parts turning to the ENE. The floor is  covered  by  breakdown  material  and  flowstone  deposits,  with  remnants  of clay-covered   phreatic   morphology    indicating    paragenetic    development    well preserved in the upper part close to the Big Room, although most of it is covered by dripstone  and  flowstone  speleothems.  The  passage  is  generally  rising  to  the  NE towards the Big Room.The  South  Passage  is  ~60  m  long,  in  the  lower  section  mostly developed  along  a NNE-SSW oriented fracture, with some parts having NE direction developed along the strike of strata. In the upper part, the passage continues to the E, joining with the East  Passage  and connecting to  the  north  with  the  Big Room.  The lower parts are covered with clay and flowstone deposits, with big flowstone collapsed blocks after removal  of  sediments,  while  in  the  upper  parts   the  passage is covered with breakdown debris and younger speleothem deposits. Paragenetic morphology, with
pendants and ceiling channels is seen at several places, mostly covered with speleothems. The passage is generally rising to the NE towards the Big Room.The East Passage (not mapped), located to the east of the South Passage, is similar in morphology, direction and size to the South Passage, having a little higher elevation.Figure 5.61 Simplified map of Cave Vodna Peš. For more detailed cave map see appendix.Cave sedimentsThe cave passages are mostly covered by breakdown deposits, with large collapsed blocks along  bedding  and  fractures,  as  well  as  breakdown  debris  material.  In  the lower parts of the cave, especially in the South and East Passage, breakdown material is  composed  of  thick flowstone deposits, which collapsed  after   removal of underlying clay deposits. Later they were covered with coralloid  speleothems. Dripstone speleothems, mostly inactive, are found in the both the lower parts and in the Big Room where they are affected by cold temperatures in winter due to large entrance opening. Brown clay deposits are covering the lower parts of the cave, and are difficult to observe, being mostly covered by  flowstone   speleothems   or breakdown debris.
Figure 5.62     Characteristic features of Cave Vodna Peš: A – View of the entrance; B – View of the Big Room towards the entrance; View of the Big Room towards the South Passage  (C)  and  West  Passage  (D)  with  paragenetic  morphology  (pendant, channels)  with  some  remnant  sediment  deposits  on  the  ceiling.  Photos  by  M. Temovski.SpeleogenesisBased on orientation and morphology of passages, as well as geological and geomorphological setting, Cave Vodna Peš is likely a remnant of the output part of a former  cave  system  discharging  towards  Crna  Reka  Valley.  The  pattern  of  Cave Vodna Peš is  similar  to  Čulejca  Cave  in  a  way  that  the  passages  are  rising and joining in the downstream part. The primary phreatic and paragenetic morphology is largely modified and masked by  later  breakdown  processes.   Passages were developed mainly towards NE along strike of strata, with NNE-SSW and WNW-ESE oriented fractures having minor primary importance with bigger influence to the later collapse evolution. Passages developed upwardly due to   base-level rise,  with deposition of sediments in the lower parts and later abandonment with development of passage at higher elevation.  Continuous    deposition forced paragenetic development in the previously formed phreatic passages. After base-level lowering, in vadose settings, sediments were removed and flowstone was deposited. Continued
lowering of base-level, further removed sediments and reused former phreatic passages, triggering collapse of bedrock and flowstone after removal of underlying sediments. Located high above the water table, the cave is now mostly affected by collapse processes, and small vadose percolation depositing dripstone and flowstone speleothems.Cave Vodna Peš is now located high (~500 m) above riverbeds of present Crna Reka or Sušica River (Fig.5.60). Its development was governed by base-level positions in Crna Reka Valley,  which  has  later  incised  further  by 500  m,  down  to  the  present position. Considering its location and the geomorphological and geological situation, the waters forming the  cave  were  most  likely  coming  from  the  upstream  area  of Sušica River.The aggradation in Crna Reka Valley influencing upward cave development might be  connected  to  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  deposition  in  paleo  Crna  Reka  Valley. Vertical distribution of the Pliocene deposits (Solnje Formation and up to Vitačevo Formation) is from ~250 m (in the river bed of Crna Reka and below) up to 800 m in Sušica  Valley  and  Blašnica  Valley  (Fig.5.59).  To  the  west  (~3  km)  of  the  cave, remnants of Pliocene deposits (Solnje Formation) are found up to 670 m elevation. In Blašnica  Valley  Pliocene  deposits  grade  upwards  into  deposits  of Mariovo Fm. (Early Pleistocene). Although this whole area was uplifted in Pleistocene, differential uplift in Crna Reka, Sušica and lower part of Blašnica is unlikely, with them being part of the same Mariovo neotectonic block (Arsovski & Petkovski, 1975).Distribution of Pliocene deposits in Crna Reka, Sušica and Blašnica valleys, which are  delineating  Starec  Mt.  (Fig.5.59),  suggest  that there was an incision of  these valleys prior to Pliocene deposition. As was suggested on the case of Čulejca Cave, they might have  been  formed  during the Messinian  Salinity Crisis  event,  and  later filled with deposits due to Pliocene transgression. Later Pleistocene incision eroded these sediments, at places developed superimposed valleys (as in the lower part of Blašnica), with remnants of this deposits still filling parts in riverbeds of Crna Reka, Sušica and Blašnica Rivers. The deep  incision  of  pre-Pliocene  valleys have most likely also influenced karst evolution, with deep vadose  development prior to Pliocene deposition and base level rise that led to  per-ascensum  speleogenesis  in Cave Vodna Peš.
5.3.3. TEMNA PEŠTERA - MrežičkoTemna Peštera  -  Mrežičko  is  situated  on  the  right  side  of  Mrežička  Reka  valley, about 500 m upstream from Mrežičko village (Fig.5.63). The entrance is located at 600  m  a.s.l.,  15  m  above  the  riverbed  of  Mrežička  Reka  (Fig.5.64).  It is named Temna Peštera - Mrežičko to differentiate it from the Temna Peštera - Dragožel in Kamenica Valley.Figure 5.63 Geological map of the area between Temna Peštera – Mrežičko and Pešterski Kamen caves, on the NW foothill of Kožuf Mt. Geological data modified after  Dumurdžanov  et  al.  (1976),  Rakićević  and  Pendžerkovski  (1970),  Geološki Zavod – Skopje (unpublished).The cave is developed in Triassic limestones, part of a stack of thrust sheets  with several structural levels of ophilitic rocks (Robertson et al., 2012). The  sheet of Triassic limestones in which Temna Peštera - Mrežičko is located, overthrusts Upper Cretaceous   (Turonian)   siliclastic   rocks   and   is   overthusted   by   Upper   Jurassic (Tithonian)  ophiolite-related  rocks  (serpentinites,  grabro).  This  Pre-Cenozoic  rocks are covered with pyroclastic deposits of Mariovo formation, with source volcanoes located 4 km to the SE.
Mrežička  Reka  has  cut  trough  the  Pleistocene  pyroclastic  rocks  forming  a  deep valley, with gorge-like characteristic  of  the  part  developed  in  limestones.  The limestones  here  are  dipping  by  40°  to  E-NE,  with  the  valley  floor  exposing  the contact with the Cretaceous rocks just below the cave (Fig.5.64).Figure 5.64 Geological setting of Temna Peštera - Mrežičko in the valley  of Mrežička Reka. Regional geological cross-section after Robertson et al. (2012).Some 60 m above the cave, on the gorge slope there are several small cave entrances with few meters long passages. They correspond to a former base level position, with remnants of a terrace also seen on the left side of the valley.In the riverbed below Temna Peštera - Mrežičko, there is a small spring close to the contact  with  the  underlying  impermeable  rocks.  In  high  water,  an  overflow  2  m above the spring is also active. Field measurments of water showed pH of  7.81, Electronic conductivity of 368 µS/cm and temperature of  8.5 °C.MorphologyTemna Peštera - Mrežičko consists of a single horizontal passage with ENE general direction with meandering parts in plan view (Fig.5.65). It is developed mostly along fractures with WSW-ENE to W-E direction.Paragenetic morphologies are seen throughout the cave, with pendants, channels, flat ceilings and alluvial notches (Fig.5.66).Paraganetic morphology is most evident in the upstream parts, where the passage has E direction, with ceiling channel seen above a floor filled with clay sediment, and
pendants partly covered with clay sediments. Little downstream from this part, the passage has a clear flat ceiling. In the middle part of the cave the passage is narrower and meandering in  plan  view,  with  several  well  preserved  alluvial  notches  on  the wall.  There  are  at  least  4  alluvial  notches  with  the  lowest  being  widest  and best preserved. This paragenetic notches in the downstream part are  preserved only at several places, due to breakdown processes. Above the meander a ceiling channel is rising in the downstream direction. Below the lowest notch in the meander, a vadose canyon is incised with  well  rounded  pebbles  and  cobbles  mostly  composed  of pyroclastic derived agglomerates, filling the floor.Figure 5.65 Simplified map of Cave Temna Peštera – Mrežičko. For more detailed cave map see appendix.In the upstream part sediments completely filled the passage, with dissolution producing flat ceiling,  while  in  the  middle  part  at  same  elevation  alluvial  notches were produced with free surface water table, indicating phreatic development in the upstream part, and vadose development in the middle to downstram part, prior and during the paragenetic development.The cave continues to the east above a rimstone dam with a clay filled passage along which a small vadose stream is flowing during high waters (spring and autumn). This stream continues downstream from this rimstone dam, through a series of small clay
filled rimestone pools, sinking in a small ponor where this E directed passage parts ends.Figure 5.66 Characteristic features of Temna Peštera – Mrežičko: A – Breakdown affected passage with debris and clay filled floor; B – Pyroclastic derived cobbles; C–  Remnants   of   paragenetic   notches   in   a   breakdwon   modified   passage;   D   – Paragenetic notches; E – Small pockets with clay vermiculations; F – Paragenetic pendants on contact with clay filled floor. Photos by M. Temovski.
Cave sedimentsBrown clay, similar to clays in Vitačevo caves is covering passage floors mostly in the upstream part.   Clay deposits are also found filling floor and niches in a small side passage above the main passage in the upstream part. In this passage cave walls of  pockets  and cupolas  are covered  with clay vermiculations.  In  the  upstream  part clay to silt deposits are filling rimestone pools. Above them younger generation of flowstone crust is deposited.Volcanic clasts of  pebble  to  cobble  size  are  also  seen  filling  passage  floor  in  the middle to downstream part of the cave.Breakdown deposits include collapsed limestone blocks and small breakdown debris, mostly found in the middle to downstream part of the cave.Dripstone and flowstone speleothems are found at various places in the cave, mostly in  the  upstream  part.  In  the  upstream  part  four  rimestone  dams  are  found  with rimestone pools inbetween filled with clay deposits. Small intermittent vadose stream is flowing above them, with flowstone crust being deposited on clay before sinking in a small ponor.SpeleogenesisTemna Peštera – Mrežičko is a water-table cave, developed during a stable base level in Mrežička Reka. Sediment aggradation in the river triggered sediments deposition in  the  cave,  that  lead  to  rise  of  water  table,  and  paragenetic  cave  development. Paragenetic morphology can be seen throughout the cave with  upstream parts  still filled  with  sediments.  The  evolution  of  this  cave  is  connected with the base level lowering due to incision of Mrežička Reka. Above Temna Peštera - Mrežičko on the same side of the valley, there are small cave enrances with few meter long passages that are remnants of water table cave development during previous stable base level in the valley (Fig.5.64). The present location of the water table is at the river bed, where  water  discharges   from   a   spring  close  to  the  contact   with   underlying impermeable clastic rocks. The clastic sediments in the cave indicate that the source of sediments are the pyroclastic rocks, which are covering large areas in the vicinity. Pliocene to Pleistocene volcanic activity in the Kožuf volcanoes, located less than 5 km to the SE produced huge  amount  of  pyroclastic  deposits,  which  in  Upper
Pliocene to  Early  Pleistocene  completely  covered  this  area.  As  the  present  fluvial incision is connected to the Pleistocene uplift, which is  also  partly responsible for draining of Central Macedonian and Mariovo Lakes, the incision of Mrežička Reka started first in Pleistocene deposits of Mariovo Formation, with earliest possible time for Temna Peštera – Mrežičko development in Early  Pleistocene. Considering the allogenic sediments in the cave, the input area is probably in the upstream parts of Mrežička Reka.
5.3.4. CAVE PEŠTERSKI KAMENCave Pešterski Kamen is located on the right side of Kozarnik River valley, on the NW foothill of Kožuf  Mt.,  3  km  SW of  Temna  Peštera  –  Mrežičko  with  entrance located at 947 m elevation, just below the ridge that separates Kozarnik Valley with Topli Dol Valley (Fig.5.63).Figure 5.67 Geological cross-section showing Cave Pešterski Kamen Cave and its relationship with Kozarnik and Blašnica valleys, as well as Mariovo and Vitačevo Formations  around  Rožden.  The  regional  geological  cross-section  in  top  right  is after Robertson et al. (2012).The cave is developed in Upper Triassic limestones, part of the carbonate (limestone and dolomite) formation of  Rožden  Horst,  which are highly folded up to  isocline folds. At the cave the beds are dipping by 60-70° to the SW as a part of a SW wing of  an  NW-SE  oriented  anticline.  The  Upper  Triassic  limestones  overlie Middle Triassic siliclastic rocks, and to the east they are overthrusted by Upper Cretaceous (Turonian) siliclastic rocks.MorphologyCave Pešterski Kamen is more than 170 m long cave with more than 60 m vertical development, consisting of three segments (Fig.5.68): the upper part (Upper Passage, Upper Room), the lower part (Big Passage) and the middle part (Steep Passage, Clay Passage).The lower part (Big Passage) and upper part (Upper Room, Upper Passage), are sub- horizontal  and  developed  in  strike  (NW-SE)  direction,  with  phreatic  paragenetic morphology and sediment filled floors.
They  are  connected  by  a  steeply  inclined  passage  (Steep  Passage),  developed  in WNW-ESE direction between strike and dip direction of steeply (70°) dipping strata. It  is  a  vadose  passage,  with  the  upper  part  covered  by flowstone  deposits and the lower part having paragenetic ceiling morphology with sediment filled floor.Figure 5.68 Simplified map of Cave Pešterski Kamen with distribution of paragenetic morphologies in sub-horizontal paragenetic phreatic passages (1) and direction  of  later  vadose  passage  development  with  excavation  of  sediments  and deposition of speleothems (2). For more detailed cave map see appendix.The morphology of the Big Passage is greatly masked by collapse processes, but the passage is developed along strike with clay and breakdown deposits filled floor. Four small  passages  are  seen  joining  in  the  ceiling  from  the  SE,  developed  in  similar direction as the Steep Passage, with paragenetic morphology and some  remnant pockets of sediments. To the north of the Big Passage, just after the entrance of the cave, a passage of similar size continues, with the same direction as the Big Passage, filled with sediment and flowstone deposits. It is the normal continuation of the Big Passage, while the entrance is opened by slope retreat erosion.The  Upper  Passage  consists  of  four  parallel  passage  parts  strongly  controlled  by strike of steeply dipping strata, with paragenetic features such as ceiling channels and pendants. These passage  parts  are  consecutively  rising  in  elevation  to  the  NE, indicating NE shift of strike oriented phreatic passage development due to sediment deposition and paragenesis. The floors are filled with sand and clay deposits, once completely filling passages, later eroded and covered by flowstone speleothems.
The Upper Room is also developed along strike, having clay filled floor, and paragenetic ceiling features. To  the  SE  this  passage  is  choked  with  sediments  and flowstone deposits, while to the N it is connected with the Upper Passage by vadose passage developed in coarser clastic deposits. From the southern part of the Upper Room a small vadose passage (Clay Passage) is developed at the contact with and within clastic deposits, connecting  with  the  Steep  Passage  at  several  locations, continuing to the west with a  small  vadose  passage.  Also  a  small  vadose passage, which can be climbed to the surface, is joining the Upper Passage from N.Paragenetic  morphology  is  seen  throughout  the  cave  (especially  in  the  lower  and upper part) connected with fine to coarse grained sediments, with coarser sediments located in the upper parts of the cave. Paragenetic features such as ceiling channels and pendants on passage ceilings (in the lower and upper part) indicate upward cave development in phreatic settings.SedimentsFluvial sediments are found throughout the cave, previously filling most of the cave passages.In the Upper Passage,  orange  to  orange-brown  sands  and  clays  are  filling passage floor, covered by flowstone speleothems. Erosion of these sediments led to collapse of flowstone plaques. At places removal of sediments between successive layers of flowstone left multiple levels of false floors.Below the flowstone deposits, beside sand and clay, well cemented breccias can be seen (ex. passage connecting Upper Room and Upper Passage). Fragments are angular,  indicating  short  traveling  distances,  and  mostly  composed  of  schists  and sandstones,  originating  either  from  the  Upper  Cretaceous   or   Middle   Triassic siliclastic formations.Based on the location of the cave and distribution of deposits of Mariovo and Vitačevo Formation in the vicinity, macroscopically visible pyroclastic derived sediments (as in Temna Peštera – Mrežičko and Vitačevo caves) were expected to be found in the coarser deposits where fragments of sizes up to 10 cm can be seen (as in the  connection  between  the  Upper  Room  and  Upper  Passage);  nevertheless  such
sediments were not found, although contribution from pyroclastic rocks to the fine grained sediments is still possible.Figure 5.69 Characteristic features of Cave Pešterski Kamen: A – View of the Big Passage towards the entrance; B – View of the connection between the Big Passage and the Steep Passage, with strong bedding influence on paragenetic morphology; C– The Upper Room with clay filled floor and paragenetic ceiling morphology; D – Vadose   passage   development   in   previously   deposited   cave   sediments   (Upper Passage); E – False floor flowstone speleothems after removal of sediments (Upper Passage); F – Eroded sand and  clay  sediments  and  breakdown  of  overlying flowstone deposits (Upper Passage). Photos by M. Temovski and D. Nedanoski.Speleothem deposits can be seen throughout the cave, but mostly in the upper and middle part. In the upper part flowstone deposits cover clay, sand and breccia sediments, and are  also  covered  by  younger  flowstone  and  dripstone  speleothems.
Thick flowstone deposits can be seen also in the Upper Room continuing down to the Steep Passage. Coralloid speleothems are also covering walls and ceiling in the upper part of the cave.SpeleogenesisBased on the passage morphology and pattern, small scale paragenetic morphology and  sediments  present  in  the  cave,  we  can  separate  three  different  speleogenetic phases.Orientation and morphology of passages indicates passage formation by paragenesis due  to  base  level  rise,  which  led  to  sediment  deposition  and  upward  paragenetic development in phreatic settings. Paragenetic morphology associated with clay and sand deposits, can be seen on the walls and ceiling of the Big Passage and lower part of Steep Meander, as well as in the upper part in Upper Room and Upper Passage where continuous sediment deposition and phreatic paragenesis led to gradual shift of development of consecutive strike (NW-SE) oriented paragenetic passages to the NE.Prior to the base level rise and paragenetic development, the cave was likely developed  in  vadose  to  epiphreatic  environment,  with  vadose  passages  developed along steeply dipping limestones (ex. Steep Passage and small passages joining at the ceiling  of  Big  Passage),  leading  to  epiphreatic  or  phreatic  passages  (Big  Passage) developed along strike in NW-SE direction.The recharge area was likely to the SE from the Upper Cretaceous siliclastic rocks, which also supplied the cave sediment material, as evident from the coarser clastic deposits filling passages between the Upper Room and Upper Passage.The latest phase is connected with vadose excavation of sediments, vadose passage developments   at   contact  with  or  within  sediments  and  deposition  of   vadose speleothems at places  in combination with  redeposition  of  sediments.  In  the upper parts, this vadose  development  is  directed  in  SE  direction,  with  younger vadose passage connecting Upper Passage and Upper Room, then turning to the NW along the Steep Passage and the younger vadose Clay Passage, which exits in the southern wall of the cave. The general direction of flow is in NW direction, likely connected with incision of Kozarnik and/or Blašnica river valleys.
Figure 5.70 Schematic representation of the interpreted evolution of Cave Pešterski Kamen.Water was likely coming from the Upper Cretaceous siliclastic formation and sinking in the Upper Triassic limestones, developing vadose passages along dip, and epiphreatic to phreatic passages along strike of steeply dipping strata in NW direction. Rise in base level, likely connected to deposition of Vitačevo and Mariovo Formation deposits in Rožden area to the north filling paleo valleys, led to paragenetic  development  and  shift  of  passage  development  in  upper  level  due  to paragenesis in phreatic settings. Remnants of Pliocene Vitačevo deposits can be seen to the north of the cave up to elevation of 900 m, while to the west between Rožden
and Arničko village they are rising up to 1150 m (Fig.5.63, 5.67). They are followed by Early Pleistocene deposits of Mariovo Formation, which covered most of the area between Kožuf  and  Kozjak  Mt.  Pleistocene  incision  removed  most  of  the  Tikveš Basin deposits, uncovering the underlying pre-Cenozoic rocks. The karst  system during this phase may have contributed  to  the  deposition  of  travertine  layers in Vitačevo Formation with two notable travertine layers near Rožden to  the  north, found  at  820-830  m  and  860-870  m  and  the  lower  part  (Big  Passage) of  the  cave located at 950 m. No clear terraces at the elevation of lower part and upper part of Cave Pešterski Kamen are found in the Pliocene and  Pleistocene  deposits  to  the north, though.Kozarnik and Blašnica  river  valleys  are  cutting  first  in  the  Mariovo  and  Vitačevo formation and then in the older Triassic rocks, which indicates their  formation in Quaternary. They incised to more than 300 meters below the cave, starting vadose excavation of sediments  and  development  of  small  vadose  passages at the contact with or within cave sediments, as well as flowstone deposition. This younger fluvial drainage after Pleistocene incision likely cut allogenic input in the cave leading to mostly autogenic vadose flow.Considering the registered speleogenetic phases and geomorphological  and geological evolution of  the  area,  the  cave  development  is  likely connected  first  to Pliocene  per-descensum  speleogenesis  toward  a  NE  oriented  paleo-valley,  then Pliocene-Pleistocene   per-ascensum   speleogenesis   connected   with   Pliocene and Pleistocene deposition (Vitačevo and Mariovo  Formations)  in  lacustrine  to  fluvial settings  filling  paleo-valleys,  and  later  vadose  per-descensum  evolution  due  to Pleistocene  incision  and  development   of   younger   superimposed   fluvial   valley network (Fig.5.70).
5.3.5. OTHER CAVESOther caves reported from this area have not been studied, mostly due to the inaccessibility of the area, or due to inability to locate them. They have been reported by cavers from PSD Orle from Kavadarci, with some of them mapped as a part of a military project  in the 1970s,  registering caves  for  possible  war use.  This  includes Gališka  Peštera, Vodena Peštera, Marina and Radina Dupka,  Manastirska Peštera, Kaštanik, Kalina Dupka, Markova Crkva, Boševa Peštera,  Ratovica and  Stankova Peštera.  Mostly  they  are  quite  small  caves,  although  some  (Gališka  Peštera)  have some significant length. Most of them are developed in Triassic limestones, Ratovica is in Turonian limestone, and Marina and Radina Dupka are in Senonian limestones of the Galište-Arničko graben.
5.4. DISCUSSIONMost  of  the   karst   terrains   in   the   studied   area   have   “normal”   epigenic   karst development, receiving allogenic or autogenic recharge from the adjacent surface. As the oldest carbonate rock were exposed to meteoric waters for a long geological time (before Cenozoic), we  can  assume  continuous  karst  development  in the area, with some terminations due to transgression and burial. The present geomorphology in the area is mostly  affected  by  the  tectonic  and  geomorphological evolution since Neogene, as part  of  the  South  Balkan  extensional system; consequently this has played major role in controlling karst development.The major controls  on  the  epigenic  speleogenesis  in  the  area  are  the  evolution  of Crna   Reka   Valley   (incision   and   aggradation),   and   the   Pliocene-Pleistocene deposition in Tikveš and Mariovo Basins.Figure 5.71 Schematic reconstruction of Neogene-Quaternary evolution and events along Crna Reka Valley (Mariovo and Tikveš Basins).Quaternary valley incision and epigenic cave developmentMost of the present geomorphology in this area is a result of the erosion that followed the draining of Central Macedonian and Mariovo Lakes, as a result of the subsidence in the Aegean Sea, and general uplift in the Balkan Peninsula. The draining in Mariovo Lake started between 1.8 and 1.6 Ma (see section 4.1.1 Provalata  Cave),  while  the  draining  of  Central  Macedonian  Lake  was  as  late  as Middle Pleistocene (Dumurdžanov et al., 2004). The draining of the lakes has started
the incision of Quaternary Crna Reka, and its tributaries, which first incised in the deposits of Mariovo and Tikveš Basin, then in the Pre-Neogene basement (Fig.5.71). Between Mariovo and Tikveš Basin, Crna Reka also incised in Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits filling an older (Miocene) paleo Crna Reka Valley. While the higher karst areas were not covered by Neogene and Quaternary sediments and had continuous karst development, in the lower areas as in Crna Reka Valley, Mariovo and Vitačevo, karst development was reactivated and governed by the incision  of Crna Reka and its tributaries.Figure 5.72 Plot showing elevations of caves against long profiles of Crna Reka Valley and its major tributaries. Crna Reka (black): 1 – Čulejca Cave, 2 – Lekovita Voda, 3 – Vodna Peš, 4 – Dupkite 1, 5 – Dupkite 2, 6 – Pešti Cave, 7 – Podot 1, 8 – Podot 2, 9 – Živovska Propast; Kamenica River (red): 10 – Budimirica Cave, 11 – Temna Peštera – Dragožel; 12 – Zelen Izvor, 13 – Nad Zelen Izvor, 14  – Garnikovska Propast, 15 – Mala Peštera, 16 – Dragoželska Propast, 17 – Aramiska Peštera; Blašnica (orange):  18  –  Temna  Peštera  –  Mrežičko,  19  – Cave Pešterski Kamen.In Vitačevo  plateau,  especially  in  the  Upper  Kamenica  Valley  where  most  of  the karst areas are located, the evolution of karst was controlled by the rate of incision of Kamenica River and the retreat of the pyroclastic caprock of Mariovo and Vitačevo Formations of Tikveš Basin (Fig.5.74: B). The output of this karst system is at Zelen Izvor  locality,  at  the  contact  of  Upper  Cretaceous  (Turonian)  limestones and underlying flysch rocks. As the rocks here are folded in a NW  plunging anticline (Kamenica  Anticline),  the  position  of  the  spring  was  controlled by both of the incision of Kamenica River (vertical control) and  the  contact  of  limestones  and flysch  (horizontal  control).  The  three  caves  found  here  are  phreatic  to  water  table caves, and their development is connected to stable base level position. The present location of the spring cave Zelen Izvor is little higher (5 m) above the river bed of
Kamenica  River,  due  to  collapse  of  the  valley  slope,  while  Nad  Zelen  Izvor  andTemna Peštera correspond to river terraces at 530 m and 550 m (Fig.5.25).In the upstream part, allogenic input to the karst system is found in the main Kamenica Valley (Aramiska Peštera) and in the right-hand tributary Garvanica (Garnikovska Propast).  Both  caves  are  ponor  caves,  with  small  perennial  streams, developing in vadose to epiphreatic environment. The evolution  of  the  caves is connected to the incision of the valleys and erosion of the overlying  pyroclastic deposits, and upstream shift of the ponors. High sediment load in the caves forced paragenetic  development,  with  passage  levels  connected  to  the  stable base level positions and aggradations in Kamenica Valley, reflecting the  situation from  the output part in Zelen Izvor locality. Regional aggradation connected to the terrace at Zelen Izvor at 550 m is reflected with paragenetic passages found in both Aramiska Peštera and Garnikovska Propast (Fig.5.73).  Dragoželska Propast is another cave located in the upstream part. It is developed at the contact of two faults, the regional NW-SE oriented Dragozel Fault, and WSW-ENE oriented fault, with mostly vadose (shaft) morphology, and a large collapse room. Considering its location to the nearby paleo valley filled with Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits of Vitačevo and Mariovo Formations,  parts  of  the cave (connected to the Dragozel Fault) may have formed before Pleistocene, governed by the paleo-valley evolution. Flowstone deposits from an unroofed cave found close to the present riverbed of Kamenica Valley can be also from a former phase of karstification, connected to the paleo-valleys to the SE, or they can be  formed in the same phase, when Kamenica  Valley  was  at  higher elevation, and were later cut by the incision in the valley. Thick flowstone deposits are found in both Aramiska Peštera and Garnikovska Propast 40 m and deeper below the present riverbeds of Kamenica and Garvanica Rivers.In the  downstream  part  of  Kamenica  River,  Budimirica  Cave  is  developed  in  the limestone block situated between Kamenica and Crna Reka Valleys. While the cave may have  formed  prior  to  the  Kamenica  River  incision,  it  has  a  paragenetic development connected to aggradation in Kamenica Valley,  corresponding with a terrace at 390 m, which likely corresponds with the terrace at 550 m at Zelen Izvor locality  (same   relative   elevation   above   present   Kamenica   River),   representing regional aggradation in Kamenica Valley (Fig.5.73).
Figure 5.73	Location of caves along Kamenica Valley and correlation of former Kamenica base level to caves (Temna Peštera – Dragožel, Budimirica Cave) and paragenetic passages (Aramiska Peštera, Garnikovska Propast).
The  sediments  in  Budimirica  Cave  connected  with  this  aggradation  are  covering flowstone deposits with Late Pleistocene age (83 Ka), which places this aggradation and cave development as  younger  than  83  Ka.  As  a  result  of  a  stable base level position after this aggradation, water table caves developed in the output positions (Budimirica Cave, Temna Peštera- Mrežičko) with  Aramiska   Peštera and Garnikovska Propast developing epiphreatic sub-horizontal passages  connected to the base  level  position.  The  lower  passages  in  Aramiska  Peštera  and  Garnikovska Propast,  as  well  as  Nad  Zelen  Izvor  and  Zelen  Izvor  developed after  incision  of Kamenica River, connected to periods of stable base level and are younger than 83 Ka.Pleistocene incision of valleys also influenced evolution of caves in the SE parts of Kozjak Mountain and the NW parts of Kožuf Mountain. Temna Peštera – Mrežičko is another example (Fig.5.74: B) of the evolution of the cave system as a result of the Pleistocene evolution of river valleys (valley of Mrežička Reka). The present spring is located in the riverbed, at the contact with underlying flysch rocks, while Temna Peštera  –  Mrežičko,  a  horizontal  cave,  is  located  15  m  above,  with  small  cave entrances also found 60 m higher. The cave elevations correspond to former stable base levels, with paragenetic morphologies in Temna Peštera – Mrežičko (markant alluvial notches, flat ceiling, channels etc.) indicating aggradation in the valley.Continuous  cave  evolution  is  evident  for  the  Živovska  Propast,  a  network  shaft developed along a set of NNW-SSE to WSW-ENE fractures, considering its location high above the highest elevations of Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits  (Fig.5.50, Fig.5.54).In  the  main  valley  of  Crna  Reka,  epigenic  cave  development  is  found  at  Podot locality,  connected  to  the  output  system  of  Gugjakovo  Springs.  Numerous cave entrances in travertine are choked due to collapse, two of which lead to Podot 1 and Podot 2 caves, having a fracture guided network passages with  passage levels corresponding to former river position (Fig.5.48, Fig.5.54). The  travertine deposits found in this area, as  well  as  at  higher  elevation  are  most  likely connected to the former positions of the springs, with karst waters supplying high calcium carbonate content. The water in the springs is most likely originating from the Precambrian and Cambrian marble formations which are continuing to the north (Fig.5.49), although
contribution from the Turonian limestones is also possible. Considering the location of a thermal spring in Karši Podot Cave, in the opposite terrace of Karši Podot, and little higher  temperature  of  the  Gugjakovo  Springs,  there  is  probably mixing  with thermal  waters  converging  at  the  lowest  output  position  of  the  Precambrian  and Cambrian marbles in Crna Reka Valley.Cave development connected to Pliocene-Early Pleistocene deposition in Mariovo and Tikveš BasinAt higher elevations in Crna Reka Valley are located Pešti Cave, Pešterski Kamen, Vodna  Peš,  Cave  Lekovita  Voda  and  Čulejca  Cave,  which  development  is  most likely older than the Pleistocene incision of Crna Reka, and/or correspond either to the  Pliocene  and/or  Early  Pleistocene  deposition  in  Mariovo  and  Tikveš  Basin (Fig.5.74: A).Čulejca  Cave,  Cave  Vodna  Peš  and  Cave  Pešterski  Kamen  have  rising  phreatic passages connected with  sediment  deposition  and  paragenetic  development and/or are located in higher elevations, while Cave Lekovita Voda is sub-horizontal phreatic cave with paragenetically developed passage  due  to  sediment  deposition  and  is located   above   Quaternary   Crna   Reka   Valley.   Their  location   correlates   with distribution of Pliocene-Early Pleistocene deposits in Tikveš Basin and paleo Crna Reka Valley,  with  only Čulejca  Cave  located below 400 m elevation and is likely older than the others. Deposits of Vitačevo  Formation are found up to elevation of 750 m in Vitačevo Plateau, and filling  paleo  valleys  to  the  west  up  to  800  m  in Sušica  Valley  and  1150  m  in  Rožden  area  (Kozjak  Mountain),  with  Mariovo Formation  sediments  starting from 750 m  in  the  northern  parts  of  Vitačevo,  up  to more  than  1000  m  elevation to  the  south  close  to  the  Kožuf  volcanic  centers. Quaternary incision led to per-descensum speleogenesis in these caves, mainly with removal  of  sediments and  deposition  of  speleothems,  as  well  as  development  of small vadose passages (ex. Cave Pešterski Kamen).
Figure 5.74 Simplified cross-section showing cave relationships to Pliocene –Early Pleistocene deposits and Quaternary valleys. A:  Caves  with development connected to Pliocene –  Early Pleistocene  deposition (1  –  Pešterski  Kamen  Cave,  2  – Vodna Peš Cave, 3 – Lekovita Voda Cave, 4 – Čulejca Cave); B: Caves developed below Pliocene – Early Pleistocene deposits, connected to incision of Quaternary valleys (1 – Temna Peštera – Mrežičko, 2 – Dragoželska Propast, 3 – Temna Peštera – Dragožel, 4 – Zelen Izvor and Nad Zelen Izvor, 5 – Garnikovska Propast and Aramiska Peštera).
Possible influence of Messinian Salinity Crisis on epigenic cave developmentThe morphological interpretation and cave deposits in Čulejca Cave, as well as the correlation  with  the  surrounding geological  and  geomorphological  setting,  indicate formation of cave passages by rising waters due to aggradation  in  the  surface depressions (Tikveš Basin, paleo Crna Reka Valley), likely as a result of the Pliocene deposition of Vitačevo Formation (Fig.5.75). In Late Pliocene and Early Pleistocene this area was completely covered with deposits of Vitačevo and Mariovo Formations, which ultimately closed the karst systems in Vitačevo Plateau. After the draining of Central Macedonian Lake (as late as Middle Pleistocene; Dumurdžanov et al. 2004), incision of Crna Reka influenced per-descensum development in Čulejca Cave, with deposition of thick pool and flowstone speleothems corresponding to  stable base level positions, and later their dissolution and deposition of fluvial  sediments  as a result of aggradation.Figure 5.75 Timeline of events (incision and deposition) in Crna  Reka  Valley (Tikveš Basin), and  supposed  timing  of  Čulejca  Cave  evolution  connected  to  base level changes. Miocene incision connected to the Messinian Salinity Crisis (MSC) or tectonic uplift.Per-ascensum phase  of  cave  development  in  Čulejca  Cave  connected to  base-level rise   by   Pliocene   deposition   would   indicate   previous   per-descensum   phase   of karstification. Considering the proposed marine  gateway connecting Dacic Basin
(Eastern  Paratethys)  to  the  Aegean  Sea  (Fig.5.76)  prior  and  after  the  Messinian Salinity  Crisis  (MSC)  in  the  Mediterranean,  based  on  the  discovery  of Pliocene Gilbert-type fan delta (the postponed signature of the MSC) in Dračevo, near Skopje (Clauzon et al., 2008), as well as near Thessaloniki (Greece) and Niš (Serbia), the lowering of base level can be due to entrenchment of valleys due to desiccation of the Mediterranean  Sea  during  the  MSC  in  Upper  Miocene.  Pliocene deposits of Vitačevo and/or  Solnje  Formations  are  filling  paleo  valleys  on Vitačevo  Plateau (Fig.5.4), Kozjak Mountain (Sušica and Blašnica Valleys), and in Crna Reka Valley where Pliocene deposits can be found along the valley between Tikveš Basin, with Quaternary Crna Reka developed  partly  in  Pliocene  deposits  (ex.  confluence  of Blašnica River to Crna Reka, Fig.5.59)Figure 5.76     Early  Pliocene  paleogeography  of  the  Mediterranean  and  Eastern Paratethys with the proposed  marine  gateway  between  the Aegean  Sea  and Dacic Basin and location of lower part of Crna Reka  river  basin  (6).    Localities:  1  – Trilophos, 2 – Gilbert-type fan delta of Turnu Severin, 3 – Prosilio, 4 – Ptolemais, 5– Niš (modified from Clauzon et al., 2008).Other caves which might also correlate with MSC influenced karst evolution include Vodna Peš, Cave Lekovita Voda and Cave Pešterski Kamen. They are all located at higher elevations in Crna Reka and Blašnica Valleys (Fig.5.74: A), with Cave Pešterski  Kamen  located  at  higher  elevation  than  the  others,  most  likely  due  to
Kozjak Mountain having higher uplift rate as part of the Mariovo neotectonic block (Arsovski & Petkovski, 1975) during the general uplifting in Pleistocene.Table 5.11	Clastic cave sediments found in epigenic caves and their source.CAVEdescription of clastic cave sedimentsSource of clastic cave sediments (based on macroscopic observations, mineral composition and geological setting)Pyroclastic rocks (Mariovo and/or Vitačevo Fm)Sandstones, shales and conglomerates (Cretaceous, Triassic)no clastic cave sedimentsAramiskaPešterapale brown clay, brown sand, gravel, cobble and rounded bouldersDragoželskaPropastdark brown clay, cobblesGarnikovska Propastbrown to grey-brown clay and silt, sand, gravel, cobble and rounded bouldersMala Pešterasand, gravel, cobbleTemna Peštera– Dragoželbrown silt, dark brown clay, gravelZelen Izvorclay, sandNad Zelen IzvorsandBudimiricayellow sand, silt and gravel, brown clayČulejcabrown clay, yellow clay, yellow paleokarst deposits, sand, gravelpaleokarstLekovita Vodayellow clay, sand and gravel?Vodna Pešbrown clayPešterskiKamenorange-brown sand and clay, gravelTemna Peštera– Mrežičkobrown clay, gravel, cobblePeštired-brown clayŽivovskaPropast/Podot 1/Podot 2/
Geological and geomorphological controls on epigenic cave developmentMain controls on epigenic cave development are the Pliocene and Pleistocene sediment deposition in  Tikveš  and  Mariovo  Basins,  and  the incision  of Crna Reka and its tributaries in Miocene and Pleistocene (Fig.5.71). The Pliocene deposition of Vitačevo Formation in Tikveš Basin influenced per-ascensum  development of Čulejca Cave, Vodna Peš and Pešterski Kamen, continuing with  covering of karst areas by lacustrine deposits and later deposits of Mariovo  Formation, resulting in closing of karst systems in lower areas (below 1000 m). The upper parts, which were not covered by the basin deposits, remained active  throughout the Pliocene and Pleistocene, supplying carbonate content for the  lacustrine to paludal travertine deposits in Vitačevo and Mariovo Formations in both Tikveš and Mariovo Basins.Incision of Crna Reka drainage system was and still is the main controlling factor in cave development  by  lowering  of  the  base  level  of  karst  terrains  and  removal  of overlying caprock deposits covering karst. The influence of caprock retreat is most evident in Vitačevo Plateau, especially in the Upper Kamenica Karst where removal of overlying pyroclastic deposits led to increase of karst surface and upstream shift of ponors in Kamenica and Garvanica valley (Fig.5.73, Fig.5.74: B). Deposits of Vitačevo and  Mariovo  Formation  have  played  important  part  in cave  development also by supplying the sediment material which after accumulation in cave passages (connected to either local or regional aggradation in river valleys) forced paragenetic development.In most of the  studied  caves,  clastic  cave  deposits  are  composed  of  clay,  silt  and sand, as well  as  gravel,  cobble  and  boulder  size  deposits  originating  from  the pyroclastic   rocks   of   Mariovo   and/or   Vitačevo   Formation   (Tab.5.11).   This   is especially evident  in  caves  located  in  Kamenica  Valley.  Siliclastic  rocks of Upper Cretaceous age were source of clastic cave deposits in Pešti Cave, while in Pešterski Kamen, Lekovita and Budimirica Cave the sediments were  originating from both (Upper Cretaceous and/or Middle Triassic) siliclastic and  (Pliocene-Pleistocene) pyroclastic rocks. The source of clastic rocks correlates well with location of caves and distribution of non-carbonate rocks (Fig.5.77). In karst areas which were covered by deposits of Vitačevo and Mariovo Formation (ex. Vitačevo caves, Temna Peštera
-  Mrežičko),  or  cave  development  is  connected  to  deposition  of  this  formations (Čulejca Cave, Vodna Peš) pyroclastic rocks are the source of cave sediments.Figure 5.77     Map  of  epigenic  caves  by  source of clastic cave sediments.  1- Pešti Cave, 2 – Podot 1, 3 – Podot 2, 4 – Živovska Propast, 5 – Vodna Peš, 6 – Pešterski Kamen, 7 – Temna Peštera – Mrežičko, 8 – Lekovita Voda, 9 – Čulejca Cave, 10 – Budimirica Cave, 11 – Temna Peštera – Dragožel, 12 – Zelen Izvor, 13 – Nad Zelen Izvor, 14 – Garnikovska Propast, 15 – Mala Peštera, 16 – Dragoželska Propast, 17 – Aramiska Peštera.
In karst areas shielded from these deposits (ex. along paleo Crna Reka Valley), caves are either lacking clastic cave sediments (ex. caves in Podot locality, Živovska Propast) or they originate from the Upper Cretaceous siliclastic rocks (ex  Pešti Cave). Caves located on the border of Tikveš Basin deposits are having mixture of both pyroclastic and older siliclastic derived sediments (ex. Lekovita Voda, Pešterski Kamen).  Paleokarst  deposits  in  Čulejca  Cave  are  also  likely  originating  from  the Upper Cretaceous siliclastic rocks.Table 5.12 Epigenic cave types, their position within the karst system and type of recharge.CAVECave typeKarst system functionRecharge typeshaftvadose canyon to epiphreatic tubephreatic cavewater-table caveinputthroughputoutputallogenicautogenic diffuse (caprock)ponorŽivovska PropastDragoželska PropastAramiska PešteraGarnikovska PropastMala PešteraPešti?Lekovita VodaPešterski Kamen?Budimirica??Zelen IzvorNad Zelen IzvorPodot 1Podot 2ČulejcaVodna PešTemna Peštera – DragoželTemna Peštera – Mrežičko??Most  of  the  studied  epigenic  caves  are  phreatic  caves,  located  in  the  output  (and throughput) part of the karst system they are/were draining (Tab.5.12).  Some are
having sub-horizontal phreatic passages connected to base level position (Lekovita Voda, Budimirica, Podot 1, and Podot 2), with others having rising  phreatic passages, connected to base level rise (Čulejca Cave, Vodna Peš, Pešterski Kamen, Zelen  Izvor,  Nad  Zelen  Izvor).  Temna  Peštera  –  Mrežičko  and  Temna  Peštera  – Dragožel are output water-table caves controlled by base level position. Input caves are either shafts developed along faults and prominent fractures (Živovska Propast, Dragoželska   Propast)   or   vadose   canyons   leading  to  epiphreatic  tube   passages (Aramiska Peštera, Garnikovska Propast, Mala Peštera and Pešti Cave).Most of the caves are having allogenic or mixed allogenic/autogenic recharge (Tab.5.12). Allogenic recharge in most of the karst areas is focused (ponors), although in Upper Kamenica Karst, diffuse allogenic recharge from pyroclastic caprock is also contributing to cave development, where caprock sediments are thinner due to surface erosion (ex. Dragoželska Propast). Only autogenic recharge is characteristic for higher karst areas, which were not covered by Pliocene/Pleistocene deposits.Base level position given by Crna Reka Valley and its tributaries is the main boundary control on epigenic karst development. Incision in Crna Reka Valley led to lowering of water table and adjusting of passage development (vadose incision leading  to  epiphreatic  and  phreatic  passages)  near  the  new  water  table  position. Aggradations in Crna Reka Valley and its tributaries on the other hand led to rise of water table, deposition of sediments and paragenetic development of rising phreatic passages, or development of alluvial notches in water table caves. The effect of one major Late Pleistocene aggradation in Kamenica River is seen in Budimirica Cave and  Temna  Peštera  –  Dragožel,  corresponding  with  fluvial  terrace  (550  m a.s.l. at Zelen  Izvor  locality,  390  m  a.s.l.  near  Budimirica  Cave),  which  is  also evidenced with paragenetic passage development in the input parts of Upper Kamenica Karst in Aramiska Peštera and Garnikovska Propast (Fig.5.73).

Chapter 6:Characteristics of karst surfaceThe main characteristic of the karst surface in the study area is lack of dolines and larger karst surface forms, and presence of mostly fluviokarst surface morphology.In karst rocks, the absence of dolines, which are generally considered as the diagnostic karst landform, does not mean that karst is not developed (Ford & Williams, 2007). The studied caves presented in the previous chapters clearly indicated that karst was/is functioning in these terrains beside the lack of typical karst surface morphology found.Although there  are  some  differences  between  different  karst  areas  and  lithologies, generally  karst  surface  in  the  area  shares  similar  characteristics.   The   main morphological features seen on karst surface are the fluvial valleys of Crna Reka and its largest tributaries Buturica, Blašnica and Kamenica rivers coming from the right side, and Drenovica River from the left side. All of these rivers are allogenic rivers coming from non-karstic areas, and cutting through karst areas  forming  through valleys.Crna Reka has the biggest discharge and represents the regional base level guiding the incision of the tributary rivers as well as karst development. Crna Reka valley is cutting through karst terrains in three segments separated by non-karstic rocks: 1) in the  eastern  edge  of  the  Pelagonian  Massif,  cutting  through  the  stacked  series  of dolomitic  and  calcitic  marbles  (Precambrian   and   Cambrian)   and   limestones (Senonian) separated by clastic rocks (Senonian); 2) then in the Triassic carbonate series  (limestones and  dolomites)  of  the Rožden  horst;  3)  and last in  the Turonian limestones of Vitačevo Plateau. In the first two segments the valley is much deeper (up to 1000 m), comparing to the third segment cutting through the Vitačevo Plateau. As was discussed before, the evolution of the Crna Reka valley is connected to two main phases of incision, one in Pleistocene following the draining of Mariovo and Central Macedonian Lake, and the other in Miocene before the Pliocene deposition.
Figure 6.1 The allogenic through valleys of: A – Crna Reka in the western part between Vrpsko and Gugjakovo villages; B – Kamenica River in the upper part at the confluence of Gaber (left) and Crkvište (right) rivers; C – Blašnica River at the confluence with Mrežička Reka. Photos by M. Temovski.Considering the  distribution  of  Pliocene  deposits  along  the  valley,  the  valley  was already deeply incised  during  the  Miocene  incision,  with  the  later  Pleistocene development eroding the Pliocene deposits, and at places further incising the valley. This has had a major influence on karst development with fast lowering of the water table  and  development   of   thick   vadose   zone.   Although   its   discharge   varies
significantly between wet and dry season, Crna Reka is a perennial allogenic river, which combined with the small difference in elevation between the input and output boundaries of the karst terrains through which it flows, allows the continuous development of the through valley.Figure 6.2       Distribution of slopes in karst terrains.It’s tributaries have similar characteristics, but with much more inclined longitudinal profiles which  allow  for  bigger  differences  between  upper  and  lower  parts  of  the valleys in the karst areas, leading to losing water in cave systems. This is best seen in Kamenica valley, where Kamenica River flows on surface only in the wet period and after strong storms, while in the other periods the water is sinking in the upstream
parts flowing underground to the output location in Zelen Izvor at the contact with the underlying impermeable clastic rocks. Their development is connected with the main Crna Reka valley serving as their base level.The deep incision  influenced  development  of  steep  slopes  on  valleys  sides,  where also smaller tributary valleys developed. They are quite steep dry valleys, active only during strong storms.Thus karst terrains have fluviokarst surface morphology consisting of dry valleys and deep allogenic valleys.In the travertine deposits of Manastir-Bešište Plateau and in Crna Reka valley, and in interfluves,  especially  on  mountain  ridges,  the  topographic  slope  is  significantly lower. Dry valleys are not  found  here,  with  karst  terrains  having  more leveled surfaces, although no dolines are found.The low  topographic  slope  in  travertine  deposits  is  connected  to  the  low  primary (sedimentary) slope, as these rocks were not later deformed.In  the  mountain  ridges,  these  semi-flat  or  flat  areas  are  most  likely  remnants  of former erosional surfaces, developed before the deep valley incision.Although these areas are more or less horizontal no dolines or bigger karst depressions  are  developed  or  developing  in  them.  Although  they  share  the  same morphological characteristic (lack of dolines), the karst terrains on mountain ridges are developed in older karst rocks (Precambrian and Cambrian marbles,  Triassic limestones and dolomites, and Senonian limestones), while the travertine deposits are part  of  the  big  Manastir-Bešište  Plateau,  or  in  smaller  areas  in  Crna Reka valley. Further, the older rocks have been subdued to karstification in a much longer period being also affected by the deep incision of valleys in Miocene, while the travertines are  much  younger  (Pleistocene)  and  have  been  affected  only  by  the  base  level lowering in Pleistocene.Ford & Williams (2007) indicate three main factors preventing doline development:1) very high vertical conductivity through-out the vadose zone; 2) spatially uniform and dense vertical permeability; and 3) steep (>20°) hillsides.
Figure 6.3 Stacked distribution of areas with slopes smaller or bigger than 20° in elevation classes of 100 m.The main factor influencing the lack of dolines here are the steep slopes on valley sides. As Ford & Williams (2007) point out, on slopes higher than 20° the dominant epikarst hydraulic gradient is sub-parallel to the topographic slope, which  will prevent development of depression in the epikarst water table, and focused flow and dissolution for development of dolines. On steep slopes also mechanical weathering can be more significant than chemical weathering, leading to mass movement (Stepisnik & Kosec, 2011).Morphometric analysis of terrain slope gave average slope value of 24.2° for karst rocks in the study area. Differential analysis of terrain slope was done for different lithologies, and  a distribution of  slopes in  5°  classes  was  compared against  100 m elevation classes. Slopes of less than 20° cover 33 % of karst areas, with flat areas (<5°) mostly found in travertine deposits (69 %). In vertical distribution, most of the small  slopes  (<20°),  and  also  flat  areas  (<5°)  are  located  between  900  and  1000 elevation. This is due to the distribution of travertine deposits on Manastir-Bešište Plateau; mountain ridges in the western part between Melnica  and Gugjakovo developed  in  (Precambrian  and  Cambrian)  marbles  and  (Senonian) limestones; as well as the (Turonian) limestones in the highest parts of Vitačevo Plateau. The small slopes in lower elevation classes are connected to the travertine deposits, while in the higher elevation classes (1000-1100, 1100-1200,  1200-1300  and  1300-1400)  are
attributed to the mountain ridges in the western part: developed mostly in (Senonian) limestone, and eastern part: developed in Triassic limestones and dolomites. Small slopes, mostly flat areas are also found on travertine deposits in Crna Reka valley. The  highest  slopes  as  expected  are  along  the  valley  sides  of  Crna  Reka  and  its tributaries.Figure 6.4    Distribution of surface area of slope classes by different karst rocks: Pcm Md – dolomitic marbles (Precambrian); Pcm M – calcitic marbles (Precambrian); Cm M –calcitic marbles (Cambrian); T – limestones and dolomites (Triassic); K1 –limestones (Turonian); K2 – limestone (Senonian); Q – travertines (Pleistocene).On mountain ridges,  the  topographic  slopes  are  much  lower  than  on  valley  sides, which should allow development  of  dolines.  The  reason  why  dolines  are  not developing here may be the  high  conductivity  in  the  epikarst  due  to  thick  well developed vadose zone as a result of a long period of vadose development due to the incision of the valleys. Even if the Pliocene deposition filled the lower part of Crna Reka valley, and some of the tributaries, the mountain ridges were not covered by sediments, and maintained continuous  vadose  development.  In  Kamenica  valley, which developed in Pleistocene incising first in the Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits then in the older  carbonate  rocks,  such  thick  vadose  development  was  not  present (although previous karstification phase was present), except maybe in the hilly area in the higher part of Vitačevo, where this may be the reason for lack of dolines.
In the large travertine deposits on Manastir-Bešište Plateau, which yields the largest flat areas,  as  small  slopes  were  present  since  the exposure of the rocks after  the draining  of  the  Mariovo  Lake  (primary  depositional  low  slopes),  development of dolines would be expected. Nevertheless this is not the case,  with  only (spatially) large and very shallow, hardly detectable, depressions developed on them. Although slopes are favorable for doline development,  the  reason  for  the  lack  of  doline development   may   be   the   high   primary   porosity, which created  high vertical conductivity in the vadose zone, which probably formed very fast with the incision of Bututica and Crna Reka valleys.The main drainage in the travertines (although small) now is located at the contact with  the  underlying  impermeable  sediments,  with  the  main  spring  located  on  the lowest point to the west in Crna Reka valley in Manastir village.Figure 6.5    Karst  surface  on  low  slope  terrains:  A  –  View  to  the  north  of  Trite Stragi-Četiri Buki mountain ridge; B – view to the south of the same ridge on A; C – view to the south of Gola Skrka – Cucul mountain ridge; D – view to the northwest of Manastir – Bešište Plateau  from Pantelejmon. Photos by M. Temovski.
Although karst depressions are lacking on the dominantly fluviokarstic surface morphology, small scale karst forms such as karren are developing. Some of them are merely surface sculpturing features, while others have also hydrological function in the epikarst system.
Chapter 7:General conclusionsKarst in  the  research area  is  characterized  by fluviokarst  surface  morphology with developed underground karst. Karstification here has  been  active  for  quite  long period, with the geological and geomorphological evolution of the area in Neogene and Quaternary having biggest influence on its intensity and   distribution. Underground karst has been developed by epigenic speleogenesis  receiving water recharge and CO2 from the  adjacent  surface,  and  also  by hypogenic speleogenesis from  deep circulating thermal  waters  with  meteoric origin, with cave development due to cooling of CO2 rich thermal waters, as well as by sulfuric acid dissolution and also ghost rock weathering in dolomite and/or dolomitic marbles.As the main  geomorphological  features  represented  in  the  terrain  are  result  of  the geological evolution in Neogene and Quaternary,  connected  to  the  South  Balkan Extensional System, karst evolution prior to these periods is difficult to determine, although  karst  rocks  (with  Precambrian, Cambrian  and  Cretaceous  age) have been exposed at least  since  the  beginning  of  Cenozoic,  some  karst  rocks (Precambrian) even earlier, and karst was most likely developing in them. All of the studied caves in the area have most likely formed in Quaternary and Pliocene.The main controls on karst development in the area have been the evolution of Crna Reka  Valley  as  a  base  level  controlling  factor;  the  evolution  of  the  Tikveš  and Mariovo  Basins,  especially  thickness  and  distribution  of  their   deposits   which controlled base level position and karst exposure in the areas west and east of Kozjak Mountain; and the Kožuf-Kozjak volcanism, increasing the geothermal gradient as well as supplying most of the material for the basin deposits in Pliocene and Early Pleistocene.
7.1. EVOLUTION OF CRNA REKA VALLEY AND KARST DEVELOPMENTThe  study area  is  cut  by allogenic  valleys  of  Crna  Reka  and its   tributaries representing the erosional base level position. Where these valleys cut through karst terrains they represent the base level  of  the  karst  systems  developed  in  them,  and therefor  their  position  or  evolution  controls  the  evolution  of  the  karst  in  the  study area.In the evolution of the valley network in Crna Reka basin there are two main phases of valley incision, separated by a long period of aggradation and deposition of thick sediment  sections  connected  to  the  basin  deposits  of  Tikveš  and  Mariovo  basins. The older phase of valley incision is predating the Pliocene deposition in Mariovo and Tikveš basins which also filled up these valleys, and is likely of Miocene age. The most clear proof of this phase are the remnants of Pliocene deposits seen in the lowest parts of Crna Reka Valley between Mariovo and Tikveš Basin, as well as the paleo valleys on Vitačevo Plateau filled with deposits of  Vitačevo  Formation (Pliocene).  The  main  Crna  Reka  Valley  during  this  incision phase  was  more  than 1000  m  deep.  Pliocene  transgression  in  Tikveš  and  Mariovo  Basins  also  filled  up these   valleys.   The   latest   phase   of   incision  is  connected   to   the   general geomorphological  evolution  in  the  area  due  to  the  draining  of  the  Macedonian Pliocene-Pleistocene lakes as a result of the subsidence in Aegean Sea where these rivers drain (as part of Vardar river system), and also the general uplift of the Balkan Peninsula in Quaternary.These evolution from incision of deep valleys, to their thick aggradation and  later again incision has  had  a  great  impact  on  karst  development  in  the  area.  The river valleys represent the low surface topography and their position/elevation influenced both the epigenic cave development and the direction of hypogenic flow (hypogenic cave formation).The  karst  development  during  the  Miocene  incision  of  Crna  Reka  is  difficult  to assess, with no clear proof found. Such deep incision in the karst terrains would have nevertheless lowered the base level and influenced development  of  thick  vadose zone.  Its  indirect  detection  is  based  on  karstification  preceding  the  rising phreatic development in Čulejca Cave (which is attributed to the Pliocene deposition). While
no definitive proof is presented for the karst underground, karst surface morphology is  clearly  influenced  by  this  incision,  developing  fluviokarst  surface  morphology with deep allogenic through valleys.The Pleistocene incision, which followed the draining of Mariovo and Central Macedonian lakes, reactivated the old valleys (mostly in Crna Reka), forming also new  (superimposed)  valleys  cutting  first  in  the  Pliocene-Pleistocene  (Tikveš  and Mariovo Basin) lacustrine to fluvial  deposits,  then  in  the  basement  karst  rocks. It allowed removal of the basin deposits covering karst areas, and their  reactivation, and/or development of new karst features. Most of the studied caves are connected with the Pleistocene evolution of Crna Reka and its tributaries.The best expressed example of the Pleistocene evolution of karst with valley incision is in the Upper Kamenica valley, where Kamenica River incision exposed karst rocks beneath  the  Pleistocene  (Mariovo  Formation)  and  Pliocene  (Vitačevo  Formation) deposits, and guided karst development with lowering of karst output position (Zelen Izvor, Nad Zelen Izvor, Temna Peštera – Dragožel), which also influenced lowering and shifting of cave development in the input  position   (Aramiska   Peštera, Garnikovska Propast, Dragoželska Propast) while still developing its through valley due to allogenic  recharge.  In  Mrežička  Reka,  tributary to  Blašnica  River,  cave development is also connected with the Pleistocene incision of the allogenic through valley, with water table caves (Temna Peštera – Mrežičko) developing during stable base level position, and subsequent  incision  lowering  cave  development  at  lower position.In Buturica  valley and  in  Podot  locality in  Crna  Reka  Valley,  Pleistocene  incision also guided hypogenic cave  development.  Incision  of  Buturica  valley,  after the draining of  Mariovo  Lake,  allowed  removal  of  clay  deposits  in  Provalata  Cave, lowering  of  water   table,   and   due   to   the   introduction   of   H2S, sulfuric acid speleogenesis. This second phase speleogenetic development in Provalata Cave was guided by the lowering of water table with valley incision, with cave development above water table by condensation-corrosion. Incision of Buturica valley also guided the evolution of Melnička Peštera 1  and  2,  which  were  developed in  carbonate conglomerates  at  the  water  table  close  to  the  contact  with underlying dolomitic marbles, most likely by thermal waters. In Podot locality, Crna Reka incision in the
travertine  and  terrace  deposits,  allowed  removal  (by  Crna  Reka  backflooding)  of dolomitic  alterite formed by ghost-rock weathering  of  Precambrian   dolomitic marbles  by rising thermal  waters.  This  created  Karši  Podot  Cave  partly developed also in the terrace deposits (clastic and travertines) with  low-temperature  thermal waters still discharging.Cave  development  in  the  travertine  deposits  on  Podot  terrace,  opposite  of  Karši Podot  Cave,  was  also  guided  by  the  evolution  of  Crna  Reka  Valley,  with the development of the two accessible caves  (Podot  1  and  Podot  2)  connected to the former river positions, while further  incision  of  Crna  Reka  lowered  the  spring (Gugjakovski Izvori) position close to the present riverbed.Paragenesis played important role in cave evolution, creating paragenetic morphologies in both phreatic and vadose environments. The paragenetic development suggest aggradation in river valleys, and is best expressed in the caves on Vitačevo  Karst,  connected  to  Kamenica  River  (Aramiska  Peštera,  Garnikovska Propast, Temna Peštera – Dragozel) and Crna Reka (Čulejca Cave, Vodna Peš), as well as in Blašnica River and its tributaries (Temna Peštera –  Mrežičko, Pešterski Kamen). In Čulejca Cave, two different phases of paragenetic development can be separated, one connected with the development of rising phreatic passages (attributed to Pliocene deposition in Tikveš Basin), and the other connected dissolution of thick pool   speleothem   deposits   and   paragenetic   notches   (attributed   to   Pleistocene aggradation of Crna Reka).The Pleistocene incision of river valleys also influenced the surface karst morphology. Allogenic rivers crossing the karst terrains developed through valleys, or reactivated the previously formed (and filled with Pliocene-Pleistocene deposits) valleys. This further influenced the fluviokarst surface development, with deep incision influencing steep  slopes  on  karst  terrains,  and  continuous  development  of vadose karst zone, preventing development of karst depressions.
7.2. INFLUENCE OF TIKVEŠ AND MARIOVO BASIN EVOLUTION ON KARST DEVELOPMENTThe influence of Tikveš and Mariovo Basin on karst evolution is mainly connected with the Pliocene and Pleistocene deposition. After the hiatus at the end of Miocene (Dumurdžanov et al, 2004), Pliocene deposition gradually filled both basins. In Tikveš Basin, Pliocene deposits spread further to the west in Kožuf area, and also filled older  valleys  as  well  as  the  paleo  Crna  Reka  Valley  between  Mariovo  and Tikveš Basin. This resulted with rise of base level, influencing also  karst  terrains. The rising phreatic passages in Čulejca Cave, and also the  rising  morphology in Vodna Peš and Cave Pešterski Kamen are likely connected to this deposition.Filling   of   low   topography   (basin   and   valleys)   continued   in   Pleistocene   with deposition of Mariovo Formation in lacustrine to fluvial environment, composed of pyroclastic rocks and travertine deposits (Mariovo Basin). While  the  previous Pliocene deposits only partly covered karst terrains, Pleistocene deposits completely covered karst areas in lower elevations as in Vitačevo Plateau, in the foothill between Kožuf  and  Kozjak  mountains  and  on  the  borders  of  Mariovo Basin. Previously formed caves were completely filled with clays derived from the pyroclastic rocks. This is most evident in Čulejca Cave, and especially in Provalata Cave where grey clays completely filled cave passages, and were later altered during the sulfuric acid speleogenesis connected with  the  Pleistocene  incision of Buturica valley. The Pleistocene deposits almost completely covered Vitačevo karst, with only small areas of the highest hilly parts maybe lying above them. This completely closed the karst system on Vitačevo, until the removal of the caprock with the Pleistocene incision of Kamenica and Crna Reka. Only the upper parts of karst terrains (higher parts of river valleys,  mountain  ridges)  remained  above  this  deposits,  and  retained  continuous development throughout this periods.While the Mariovo and Tikveš Basin deposition acted as prohibitor on karst development in the lower elevations, it also formed large younger carbonate deposits (carbonate conglomerates, travertines), in which karst started developing after  the draining of the Pleistocene lakes.
7.3. INFLUENCE OF KOŽUF/KOZJAK VOLCANISM ON KARST DEVELOPMENTKožuf (and Kozjak)  volcanism  is  connected  to  the  evolution  of  the  South  Balkan Extensional System. The volcanic activity was dated at 6.5-1.8 Ma for Kožuf (Boev&  Jelenković,  2012);  and  4.5-1.8  Ma  for  Kozjak  (Kolios  et  al.,  1999)  volcaniccomplexes which are located at the southern borders of Tikveš and Mariovo Basins.The influence of  volcanic  evolution  on  karst  development  in  the  area  is  generally indirect and two fold.As the volcanism was explosive, it produced high amount of volcaniclastic material which was deposited as part of Tikveš and Mariovo Basin deposits. This speed up the filling of the basins and closing of karst systems in lower elevations, with Vitačevo and Mariovo Formations in both basins consisting mostly of volcaniclastic material. These deposits also played important role in the later Pleistocene karst development in these areas, supplying most of the material of the clastic cave deposits.The other influence of the volcanism is connected with the increase of geothermal gradient, as a  result  of  which  deep  circulating  meteoric  karst  waters  were  heated, producing hydrothermal hypogenic karst due to cooling of rising thermal waters. At places other geochemical processes were also involved in  the   hydrothermal karstification, with increased mineralization and ore deposition in  Allchar locality closely connected with the volcanic intrusions. In Provalata Cave, later introduction of H2S in the hydrothermal karst system started sulfuric acid  speleogenesis  by condensation-corrosion  connected  with  water  table  lowering  due  to  incision  of Buturica  river   valley.   In   dolomitic   marbles   in   Melnica   and Podot localities, hydrothermal karstification increased porosity by ghost rock weathering, with ghost- rock  weathering  in  Triassic  dolomites  also  playing  role  in  the  evolution  of  the Allchar ore deposit.
7.4. MAIN SPELEOGENETIC MECHANISMSAs was  demonstrated  in  the  previous  chapters,  both  epigenic  and  hypogenic  cave development was present in the studied area. Epigenic speleogenesis was and is more widespread in the area, and formed caves in various settings and by  several mechanisms. Hypogenic speleogenesis, while more localized, it was also important in cave development yielding several different speleogenetic mechanisms.Hydrothermal  speleogenesis  is  the  main  hypogenic  mechanism,  connected  to  the increased  geothermal  gradient  due   to   the   Pliocene-Pleistocene   Kožuf-Kozjak volcanic  complex.  While  the  cooling  of  carbonated  thermal  waters  is  the  most widespread mechanism in the studied hypogenic caves, there was convergence with other processes/mechanisms connected to local geological or lithological control.Sulfuric acid speleogenesis  is  determined  in  Provalata  Cave  as  a  second  phase  of cave development in previously formed cave due to cooling of thermal waters, and also is most likely an active process in the Kožuf area, with thermal springs discharging sulfate ions. While in Provalata Cave, the source of sulfuric acid might be connected to the Mariovo coal deposits, in Kožuf thermal karst, it is connected to the  oxidation  of  sulfide  minerals  deposited  previously  in  the  same  hydrothermal system, closely connected to the Kožuf volcanism, as seen in Allchar locality.In the Precambrian dolomitic marbles between Melnica and Podot areas, ghost-rock weathering  process  is  connected  to  the  hydrothermal  speleogenesis.  Slow  moving thermal waters increase porosity by selective dissolution, leaving in-situ  alterite residue, which if later introduced to a higher energy water flow will be removed and a phantom cave will develop. This process has been first described in Belgium, and well studied in France in mostly epigenic environments, while here is connected to hypogenic dissolution by upward slowly moving thermal waters which provide the ghost-rock weathering and later surface  erosion  or  backflooding  of  Crna  Reka eroding the alterite residue.The  epigenic   cave   development   is   in   phreatic   to   vadose   conditions,   strongly connected to base level oscillations. Ponor caves are developed at  the  contact of impermeable cover and underlying karst rocks in Vitačevo, with water table caves developed in the output part of the same system, connected to base level positions.
Deep phreatic caves (now fossil) are connected to base level rise, and per-ascensum speleogenesis. Paragenesis played an important role in cave development in the area. Paragenetic modification, or cave passages development is connected to base level rise due to river and/or basin aggradation. It is seen in both phreatic and epiphreatic environments.7.5. DRAINING OF MARIOVO LAKE – Contribution to the understanding of the evolution of Macedonian Neogene-Quaternary lake systemThe  draining  of  the  Central  Macedonian  Lake  in Pleistocene is connected to  the subsidence in Aegean Sea, as well as to the general uplift of the Balkan Peninsula. This event is very important to understanding the geomorphological  evolution in Macedonia, as  it  led  to  the  onset  of  fluvial  development  and  incision of valleys, shaping most  of  the  present  morphology  in  Macedonia,  as  well as controlling the base level  position  of  karst  systems.  Beside  this,  the  timing of the draining of the Central Macedonian Lake is still not precisely known. Dumurdžanov et al. (2004) suggest that  the  limestone  dam  in  Demir  Kapija was breached as late as Middle Pleistocene, and as  this  lake  was  the southern end-member of other lakes, such as Mariovo Lake, Pelagonian Lake,  Skopje  Lake,  Polog  Lake  etc.,  controlled  their evolution as well.The sulfuric speleogenetic phase in Provalata Cave gives the possibility to constrain the timing of the draining of Mariovo Pleistocene Lake, and with that to help understand the evolution of the draining of the lakes in Macedonia.The two time markers which give a possible time range of the draining of Mariovo Lake are the topmost travertine deposits in Mariovo Basin, and the alunite/jarosite minerals formed in Provalata Cave. The travertine deposits belong to Mariovo Formation, which age was determined as Pleistocene, based on the pyroclastic deposits in the formation and the dated Kozjak/Kožuf volcanism (Kožuf 6.5-1.8 Ma, Boev & Jelenković, 2012; Kozjak: 4.5-1.8 Ma, Kolios et al., 1999) which supplied the material. Tephra layers are found in the topmost 20 m thick travertine deposit, therefor  constraining the  earliest  possible time  of  Mariovo  Lake  draining after  1.8 Ma.
Alunite and jarosite are minerals found in the pale yellow deposit in Provalata Cave. Their formation is due to sulfuric acid alteration of the clay deposits filling the cave. Their formations  is  connected  to  the  vadose  zone,  as  the  necessary conditions  for their development in cave environment requires low pH sulfuric acid (Palmer, 2007, 2013) and such pH levels can be achieved in droplets falling on clay deposits. Thesampled  alunite  and  jarosite,  from  the  First  Room  in  Provalata  Cave  were  dated using 40Ar/39Ar dating to  1.6  and  1.46  Ma,  which  indicates  that  the  draining of Mariovo Lake occurred before this time, as it requires the incision of Buturica Valley to lower the water table in the cave. This puts the draining of  Mariovo Lake, sometime between 1.8 and 1.6 Ma earlier than Central Macedonian Lake, to which Mariovo Lake was likely an upstream continuation.7.6. SOME CONSIDERATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCHThis  work  represents  first  attempt  to  systematically  describe,  study  and  interpret karst development and evolution in the lower part of  Crna  Reka  river  basin,  and combined  with  the  fact  that  this  area  is  quite  large,  depopulated  and hardly accessible, it is reasonably expected that this work will raise more  questions than answer. As a result of that  some  considerations  and  recommendations  for  future research will be given.Most of the studied caves are located in Vitačevo Plateau and along Crna  Reka valley and its main tributaries, leaving the Triassic limestones and dolomites on Dren Mountain  (mainly Orle  Mountain)  and Kozjak  Mountain  as  the  least  studied karst areas. Some caves are already known in these parts, and as these areas are the least accessible part of the river basin, future efforts should be made to  document  and study karst and caves in the Triassic carbonate sections.Dating of caves has been done in only two studied caves: in Provalata Cave using 40Ar/39Ar method on speleogenetic alunite and jarosite, and in Budimirica Cave on clastic sediments using paleomagnetic method, with also preliminary 234U/238U dating  on  flowstone  speleothems.  They  represent  the  first  cave  dating  efforts  in Republic of Macedonia. In all other caves chronological interpretations were made based   on   speleogenetic   evolution   and   correlation   with   geomorphological   and
geological   evolution.   Future   dating   of   other   caves   will   greatly   increase   the understanding of the rate of karst development and pinpoint some geomorphological markers especially connected to the Quaternary incision.Considering the possibility of Messinian Salinity Crisis (MSC) influenced karst development as suggested in this study, expanding research to caves connected  to Pliocene deposition  in  the  neighboring  basins  to  the  north  and  south  along  the supposed  marine  gateway  between  the  Aegean  and  Eastern  Paratethys  can  be a reasonable step as such event would have regional influence on karst development.Beside epigenic  karst  development,  on  which  more  work  may  be  done  in  future, interesting subject may be more detail study of the hypogenic karst development in the area. Especially interesting question remains the extent of ghost-rock weathering driven hypogenic  karstification  in  the  Precambrian  dolomitic marbles between Melnica and Podot localities, and to which extent it influences karst development in these  rocks,  considering  that  no  epigenic  caves  are  found  in  the  Precambrian dolomitic  marbles.  Another  interesting  question  to  be  studied  in  future  is  the possibility of the coal deposit supplying sulfur for the sulfuric acid speleogenesis in Provalata Cave.


References1. ARSOVSKI M. (1997): Tektonika na Makedonija.  Rudarsko-geološki fakultet, Štip, 306 pp.2. ARSOVSKI M., PETKOVSKI (1975): Neotektonika na SR Makedonija. Publ. 49, IZIIS, Skopje, 100 pp.3. AUDRA  P.  (1994):  Karsts  Alpins.  Genese  de  Grands  Reseaux  Souterrains. Exemples: le Tennengebirge (Autriche), l’Ile de Cremieu, la Chartreuse et le Vercors (France). Karstologia Memoires, 5, 280 pp.4. AUDRA  P.  (2007):  Karst  et  spéléogenèse  épigènes,  hypogènes,  recherches appliquées et valorisation (Epigene and hypogene karst and  speleogenesis. Operative research and valorization). Habilitation Thesis,  University of  Nice Sophia-Antipolis, 278 pp.5. AUDRA  P.,  BIGOT  J.-Y.,  MOCOCHAIN  L.,  (2002):  Hypogenic  caves  in Provence (France). Specific features and sediments. Acta Carsologica, 31 (3), 33-50.6. AUDRA P., HOBLEA F., BIGOT J.-Y., NOBECOURT J.-C. (2007): The role of condensation-corrosion in thermal speleogenesis. Study of a hypogenic sulfidic cave in Aixles-Bains, France. Acta Carsologica, 37 (2), 185-194.7. AUDRA P., MOCOCHAIN L., BIGOT J.-Y., (2009a): Base level rise and per ascensum  model  of  speleogenesis  (PAMS):  Interpretation  of  deep  phreatic karsts,    vauclusian    springs    and    chimney-shafts.    Proceedings    of 15th International  Congress  of  Speleology,  National  Speleological   Society, Huntsville, Kerrville, Texas, vol. 2, 788–794.
8. AUDRA P.,  MOCOCHAIN  L.,  BIGOT  J.-Y.,  NOBECOURT  J.-C.  (2009b): The  association  between bubble trails and  folia:  a   morphological and sedimentary indicator of hypogenic speleogenesis by degassing, example from Adaouste Cave (Provence, France). International  Journal of Speleology, 38 (2), 93-102.9. AUDRA P.,  MOCOCHAIN  L.,  BIGOT  J.-Y.,  NOBECOURT  J.-C.  (2009c): Hypogene cave patterns. In: Klimchouk A. and Ford D.C. (Eds.).  Hypogene Speleogenesis and Karst Hydrogeology of Artesian Basins. Ukrainian Institute of Speleology and Karstology, Simferopol, Special Paper 1, 17-22.10. AUDRA P.,  MOCOCHAIN  L.,  BIGOT  J.-Y.,  NOBECOURT  J.-C.  (2009d): Morphological  indicators   of   speleogenesis:   hypogenic    speleogens. In: Klimchouk A. and  Ford  D.C.  (Eds.).  Hypogene  Speleogenesis and Karst Hydrogeology of Artesian  Basins.  Ukrainian  Institute  of  Speleology  and Karstology, Simferopol, Special Paper 1, 23-32.11. AUDRA P., MOCOCHAIN L., CAMUS H., GILLI E., CLAUZON G., BIGOT J.-Y. (2004): The effect of the Messinian deep stage on karst development around the Mediterranean Sea. Examples from southern France. Geodinamica Acta, 17/6, 27–38.12. AUDRA  P.,   PALMER   A.N.   (2013):   The   Vertical   Dimension   of   Karst: Controls of Vertical  Cave  Pattern.  In:  John F. Shroder, (Ed):  Treatise on Geomorphology, Volume 6: Karst Geomorphology, Academic  Press,  San Diego, 186-206.13. BELLA P., BOSAK  P.  (2012):  Speleogenesis  along  deep  regional  faults  by ascending waters:  Case  studies  from  Slovakia  and  Czech  Republic.  Acta Carsologica, 42 (2), 169-192.14. BERGADA M.M., CERVELLO J.M., SERRAT D. (1997): Karst in conglomerates in Catalonia (Spain): morphological forms and sedimentary sequence types recorded on archaeological sites. Quaternaire, 8, 267–277.
15. BOEV   B.,   JELENKOVIĆ   R.   (2012):   Allchar   Deposit   in   Republic   of Macedonia –  Petrology  and  Age  Determination.  In:  Al-Juboury  A.  (Ed.): Petrology – New Perspectives and Applications, InTech, 131-168.16. BOEV B., JOVANOVSKI G., MAKRESKI P. (2012): Geology and mineralogy of Allchar Sb-As-Tl-Au deposit. II Congress of geologists of Republic  of  Macedonia,  Geologica  Macedonica,  Special  publication  3,  215- 232.17. BOEV B., LEPITKOVA S. (2003): Geohemiski karakteristiki na termomineralnite void na planinata Kožuf. Vtoro sovetuvanje za geotermalna energija vo Republika Makedonija, 61-64.18. BOEV B., SERAFIMOVSKI T. (1996): General Genetic Model of the Alshar Deposit.  In:  Proceeding  of  the  Annual  Meeting  on  the  IGCP  Project  356, Sofia, Vol. 1, 75-8419. BOSAK P., PRUNER P., TEMOVSKI M. (Eds., 2013): Palaeomagnetic research of cave fill in the Budimirica Cave, Macedonia. Progress Report. Inst. Geol. AS CR, Praha, v. v. i.: 1–27.20. BRUXELLES L., WIENIN M. (2009): Les fantômes de roche de la mine de la Grande  Vernissière  (Fressac,  Gard).  Premières  observations  sur  l’origine  de certains  karsts  de  la  bordure  cévenole  (The  ghost  rocks  of  the  mine  of La Grande Vernissière (Fressac,  Gard).  First  observations  about  the  origin of some karsts of the bordure cévenole). Karstologia Mémoires, 17, 192-200.21. BUDAJ M., MUDRAK S. (2008): Therion – Digital Cave Maps. Proceedings of the IV European Speleological Congress, Lans-en-Vercors, France. Spelunca Memoires, 33, 138-141.22. CASTIGLIONI B., Ed. (2005): Montello. Paesaggi carsici: architettura di una relazione unica tra uomo e ambiente, Museo di Storia Naturale e Archeologia, Montebelluna, 181 pp.23. CLAUZON G., SUC J-P., DUMURDŽANOV N., MELINTE-DOBRINESCU M., ZAGORCHEV, I., (2008): The Pliocene Gilbert-type fan delta of Dračevo (Skopje area, Republic of Macedonia), Geologica Macedonica, 2, 21-28.
24. DUBLYANSKY Y.V. (2000a): Dissolution of carbonates by geothermal waters. In:  Klimchouk  A.,  Ford  D.C.,  Palmer  A.N.  &  Dreybrodt  W.  (Eds). Speleogenesis: evolution of karst aquifers. Huntsville: National Speleological Society, 158-159.25. DUBLYANSKY Y.V. (2000b): Hydrothermal speleogenesis – its settings and peculiar features. In: Klimchouk A., Ford D.C., Palmer A.N. & Dreybrodt W., (Eds). Speleogenesis: evolution of karst aquifers. Huntsville: National Speleological Society, 292-297.26. DUBLYANSKY Y.V. (2012): Design of two crushing devices for release of the fluid inclusion volatiles. Central European Journal of Geosciences, 4: 219- 22427. DUBLYANSKY Y.V. (2013): Karstification by Geothermal Waters. In: JohnF.	Shroder,	(Ed):	Treatise	on	Geomorphology,	Volume	6:	Karst Geomorphology, Academic Press, San Diego, 57-71.28. DUBLYANSKY  Y.,  SPÖTL  C.  (2009):  Hydrogen  and  oxygen  isotopes  of water from inclusions in minerals: design of a new crushing system and on- line  CF-IRMS  analysis.  Rapid  Communications  in  Mass  Spectrometry,  23: 2605-261329. DUMURDŽANOV   N.,   HRISTOV   S.,   PAVLOVSKI   B.,   IVANOVA   V. (1976): Explanatory notes for the General  Geological  map  of  Vitolište  and Kajmakčalan (1:100 000). Federal Geological Survey, Beograd, 1-61.30. DUMURDŽANOV   N.,   KRSTIĆ   N.,   MIHAJLOVIĆ   D.   OGNJANOVA- RUMENOVA N., PETROV G. (2003): New Data on  stratigraphy of  the Neogene and Pleistocene in Mariovo, Macedonia. Geologica Macedonica, 17, 43-5231. DUMURDŽANOV N., SERAFIMOVSKI T., BURCHFIEL B.C. (2004): Evolution   of   the   Neogene-Pleistocene   Basins   of   Macedonia.   Geological Society of America, Digital Map and Chart Series, 1, 1-20.
32. DUMURDŽANOV N., SERAFIMOVSKI T., BURCHFIEL B.C. (2005): Cenozoic  tectonics   of   Macedonia   and   its   relation   to   the   South   Balkan extensional regime. Geosphere, 1, 1-22.33. EGEMEIER   S.J.   (1981):   Cavern   development   by   thermal   waters.   NSS Bulletin, 43, 31–51.34. FARRANT   A.,   SMART   P.   (2011):  Role   of   sediment   in   speleogenesis; sedimentation and paragenesis. Geomorphology, 134, 79-93.35. FINCH  R.,  PISTOLE  N.  (2011):  Honduras:  Caving  in  Conglomerate.  NSS News, 1-9.36. FISHER R. (1953): Dispersion on a sphere. Proceedings of the Royal Society, A 217, 295-305.37. FORD D.C., EWERS R.O. (1978): The development of limestone cave systems  in  the  dimensions  of  length  and  depth.  Canadian  Journal  of  Earth Sciences, 15, 1783–1798.38. FORD  D.,  WILLIAMS  P.  (2007):  Karst  hydrogeology  and  geomorphology. Wiley, Chichester, 562 pp.39. GABROVŠEK   F.   (2005):  Caves   in   conglomerate:  Case   of   Udin   Boršt,Slovenia. Acta Carsologica, 34 (2), 507-520.40. GALDENZI S., MARUOKA T. (2003): Gypsum deposits in the Frasassi caves, Central Italy. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 65, 111–125.41. GALDENZI S., MENICHETTI M. (1995): Occurrence of hypogenic caves in a karst region: examples from central Italy. Environmental Geology, 26, 39– 47.42. GAMS	I.	(1973):	Slovenian	karst	terminology.	Kraška	terminologijaJugoslovenskih narodov, Ljubljana, 1, 1-35.43. GAŠEVSKI M. (1984): Hidrografski osobenosti vo Mariovo, In: Mariovo  - kopleksni geografski proučuvanja. Geografski fakultet, Skopje, 107-132.
44. GEOLOŠKI ZAVOD – SKOPJE (GEOLOGICAL SURVEY - SKOPJE): Geological   map   1:25000,   sheets:   Begnište,   Bešište,   Bošava,   Gugjakovo, Kozjak, Pološko, Rožden, Šeškovo, Sokol, Vitolište, unpublished.45. GOEPPERT N., GOLSCHEIDER N., SCHOLZ H. (2011): Karst geomorphology of  carbonatic  conglomerates  in  the  Folded  Molasse  zone  of the Northern Alps (Austria/Germany), Geomorphology, 130, 289-298.46. GUNN J.  (2004):  Fluviokarst.  In:  Gunn  J.  (Ed.): Encyclopedia  of  Cave  and Karst Science. Fitzroy Dearborn, London, 751–753.47. HILL C.A (2000): Overview of geological history of cave development in the Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 62(2), 60-71.48. HOSE L.D., PISAROWICZ J.A. (1999): Cueva de Villa Luz, Tabasco, Mexico: reconnaissance study of an active sulfur spring cave and ecosystem. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 61, 13–21.49. HRISTOV S., KARAJOVANOVIĆ M., STRAČKOV M. (1965): Explanatory notes for the General Geological map of Kavadarci (1:100 000). Federal Geological Survey, Beograd, 1-62.50. JELENKOVIĆ R., BOEV B. (2011): Vertical mineralization interval and forecast of the position of an ore-body in the Alšar Sb–As–Tl deposit, Macedonia. Annales Geologiques de la Peninsule Balkanique, 72, 119-12951. JELÍNEK   V.   (1966):   A   high   sensitivity   spinner   magnetometer.   Studia Geophysica et Geodaetica, 10, 58-78.52. JELÍNEK V. (1973): Precision A.C. bridge set for measuring magnetic susceptibility and its anisotropy. Studia Geophysica et Geodaetica, 17, 36-48.53. KEKIK  A.  (1972):  Termomineralni  vodi  na  padinite  na  Kožuf  (Ržanovo)  i geološko  tektonski  odliki  na  okolniot  teren.  Trudovi  na  geološkiot  zavod  na SR Makedonija, 15, 141-151.
54. KIRSCHVINK J. L. (1980): The least-squares line and plane and the analysis of palaeomagnetic data. Geophysical Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 62, 699-718.55. KLIMCHOUK A.B. (2004): Russia and Ukraine. In: Gunn J. (Ed.): Encyclopedia  of  Cave  and  Karst  Science.  Fitzroy  Dearborn,  London,  1340- 1344.56. KLIMCHOUK  A.B.,  (2007): Hypogene  Speleogenesis: Hydrogeological  and Morphogenetic  Perspective.  National  Cave  and  Karst  Research   Institute Special Paper 1, Carlsbad, 106 pp.57. KLIMCHOUK     A.B     (2009):     Morphogenesis     of     hypogenic     caves. Geomorphology, 106, 100–117.58. KLIMCHOUK  A.B.  (2013):  Hypogene  Speleogenesis.  In:  John  F.  Shroder, (Ed): Treatise on Geomorphology, Volume  6:  Karst   Geomorphology, Academic Press, San Diego, 220-240.59. KLIMCHOUK, A.B., FORD, D.C. (2000) Types of Karst and Evolution  of Hydrogeologic  Settings.  In:  Klimchouk  A.B,  Ford  D.C.,  Palmer  A.N.  & Dreybrodt W., (Eds). Speleogenesis: evolution of karst aquifers.  Huntsville: National Speleological Society, 45–53.60. KOCHNEVA   N.T.,   VOLKOV   A.V.,   SERAFIMOVSKI   T.,   TASEV   G., TOMSON I.N. (2006): Tectonic Position of the Alshar Au–As–Sb–Tl Deposit, Macedonia. Doklady Earth Sciences, 407 (2), 175-178.61. KOLIOS N., INNOCENTI F., MANETI P., POCCERILO O., GUILIANI O. (1980): The Pliocene Volcanism of the Voras Mts (Central Macedonia, Greece). Bulletin of Volcanology, 43(3), 553-568.62. KOLČAKOVSKI D. (1989): Istoriski pregled na speleološkite proučuvanja na teritorijata od SR Makedonija so bibliografski prikaz (An historical review of the speleological studies on the territory of SR Macedonia with a bibliographic presentation), Geografski razgledi, Skopje, 27, 133-144.
63. KOLČAKOVSKI D. (2005): 80 godini speleološki istražuvanja vo Republika Makedonija (1925-2005) (80 years of speleological researches in the Republic of Macedonia (1925-2005)). Bilten za fizička geografija, PMF, Skopje, 2, 125- 131.64. KOLČAKOVSKI  D.,  BOEV  B.,  HRISTOVSKI  S.,  PETRESKA  B.  (2004): Peštera  Gulabinka  –  Mariovo,  preliminarni  speleološki  proučuvanja (Cave Gulabinka – Mariovo, preliminary speleological exploration). Bilten za fizička geografija, PMF, Skopje, 1, 35-43.65. KRANJC  A.,  Ed.  (2005): Udin  Boršt.  Kraške  kulturne  pokrajine: edinstveni odnos med človekom in kraškim  svetom,  Museo  di  Storia   Naturale   e Archeologia, Montebelluna, 102 pp.66. LAURITZEN S-E., LUNDBERG J. (2000): Meso and micromorphology  of caves. In: Klimchouk A., Ford D.C., Palmer A.N. & Dreybrodt W.  (Eds). Speleogenesis: evolution of karst aquifers. Huntsville: National Speleological Society, 407–426.67. LEROUGE C., GOUIN J., DESCHAMPS Y., WIORY D., LAGGOUN- DEFARGE  F.,  TASEV  G.,  SERAFIMOVSKI  T.,  YOSSIFOVA  M.  (2007): Characterization of coal from the Mariovo basin,  Macedonia - Insights from organic geochemical and  sulphur  isotopic  data.  In:  Andrew,  C.  J., Borg, G. (Eds.). Digging Deeper, 9th  Biennial SGA Meeting,  August  20-23,  2007, Dublin, Ireland, vol. II, 901-904.68. MANAKOVIK D. (1971): Podzemni karstni oblici vo porečieto na Kamenica so karsna hidrografija. Godišen Zbornik, Geografski Institut, Skopje, 19, 41- 59.69. MANAKOVIK D. (1980): Oazni tip karstne hidrografije Makedonije. Sedmi Jugoslovenski speleološki kongres, Titograd, 293-309.70. MANAKOVIK D., ANDONOVSKI T. (1984): Geomorfologija. In: Mariovo - kopleksni geografski proučuvanja. Geografski fakultet, Skopje, 41-81.
71. MEYER D. J., TACHIKAWA T., ABRAMS M., CRIPPEN R., KRIEGER T., GESCH D., CARABAJAL C. (2012): Summary of the validation of  the second version of the ASTER GDEM. International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XXXIX-B4, 291-29372. MIHEVC A. (2001): Speleogeneza Divaškega krasa. Zbirka ZRC, 27, 180 pp.73. MIHEVC   A.   (2007):   The   age   of   karst   relief   in   West   Slovenia.   Acta Carsologica, 36 (1), 35-44.74. MIHEVC A., SLABE T., ŠEBELA S. (1998): Denuded caves – an inherited element in the karst morphology; the case from Kras. Acta Carsologica, 27 (1), 165-174.75. MOCOCHAIN L.,  AUDRA P.,  CLAUZON  G.,  BELLIER  O.,  BIGOT  J-Y., PARIZE O., MONTEIL P.  (2009): The effect of  river  dynamics  induced by the Messinian Salinity Crisis on karst landscape and caves:  Example of the Lower Ardèche river (mid Rhône valley), Geomorphology, 106, 1–2, 46-61.76. ONAC  B.,  WYNN  J.,  SUMRALL  J.  (2011):  Tracing  the  sources  of  cave sulfates: a unique case from Cerna Valley, Romania. Chemical Geology, 288, 105-11477. PALMER A.N.  (1975):  The  origin  of  maze  caves.  Bulletin  of  the  National Speleological Society, 37(3), 56–76.78. PALMER A.N.  (1987):  Cave  levels  and  their  interpretation.  Bulletin  of  the National Speleological Society, 49(2), 50–66.79. PALMER A.N. (1991): Origin and morphology of limestone  caves. Geological Society of America Bulletin, 103 (1), 1-21.80. PALMER A.N. (2007): Cave Geology. Cave Books, Dayton, Ohio, 454 pp.81. PALMER  A.N.  (2011):  Distinction  between  epigenic  and  hypogenic  maze caves, Geomorphology, 134, 9–22.
82. PALMER  A.N.  (2013):  Sulfuric  acid  caves:  morphology  and  evolution.  In: John  F. Shroder, (Ed): Treatise on  Geomorphology,  Volume  6:   Karst Geomorphology, Academic Press, San Diego, 241-257.83. PALMER  A.N.,  AUDRA  P.  (2004):  Patterns  of  caves.  In:  Gunn  J.  (Ed.): Encyclopedia of Cave and Karst Science. Fitzroy Dearborn, London, 573–574.84. PALMER A.N., PALMER M.V. (2000): Hydrochemical interpretation of cave patterns in the Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 62, 91–108.85. PERCIVAL     J.C.,     RADTKE,     A.S.     (1994):     Sedimentary-rock-hosted disseminated gold mineralization in the Alsar  District, Macedonia. Canad. Mineralogist 32, 649-66586. PETROV  G.,  STOJANOVA  V.,  MIRČOVSKI  V.,  ŠMUC  A.,  DIMOV  Ð. (2010):   Tectonic   evolution   of   the   Palaeogene   basins   in   Republic   of Macedonia. Geologica Macedonica, 24, 1, 31-37.87. PLAN  L.,  TSCHEGG  C.,  DE  WAELLE  J.,  SPOTL  C.  (2012):  Corrosion morphology  and  cave  wall  alteration  in   an   Alpine   sulfuric   acid   cave (Kraushöhle, Austria). Geomorphology, 169–170, 45-54.88. POLYAK V.J., PROVENCIO P. (2001): By-product materials related to H2S- H2SO4 influenced speleogenesis of Carlsbad, Lechuguilla, and other caves of the Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico. Journal of Caves and Karst Science, 63(1), 23–32.89. QUINIF Y. (1999): Fantômisation, cryptoaltération et altération sur roche nue, le triptyque de la karstification, Actes du colloque européen Karst 99, 159-164.90. RAKIĆEVIĆ  T.,  PENDŽERKOVSKI  J.  (1970):  Explanatory  notes  for  the General Geological map of Kožuf (1:100 000).  Federal  Geological  Survey, Beograd, 1-47.91. RAKIĆEVIĆ T., STOJANOV R., ARSOVSKI M. (1965): Explanatory notes for  the  General  Geological  map  of  Prilep  (1:100  000).  Federal  Geological Survey, Beograd, 1-65.
92. RALEVA E., ILIJOVSKI Z., TODOROVA D. (2012): Jaglenovo naogjalište “Mariovo”, presmetka na kvalitet i rezervi. II Congress of geologists of Republic  of  Macedonia,  Geologica  Macedonica,  Special  publication  3,  131- 13893. RENAULT P. (1968): Contribution a l'etude des actions mecaniques et sedimentologiques  dans  la  speleogenese.  Annales  de  Speleologie,  23,  529– 596.94. ROBERTSON A., TRIVIĆ B., ĐERIĆ N., BUCUR I. (2012): Tectonic development of the Vardar ocean and its margins: Evidence from the Republic of Macedonia and Greek Macedonia, Tectonophysics, Volumes 595–596, 25- 54.95. SLABE T. (1995): Cave Rocky Relief and its Speleological Significance. Znanstveno raziskovalni Center SAZU, Lubljana, 128 pp.96. STANKOSKI S. (1984): Klimata vo Mariovo. In: Mariovo - kopleksni geografski proučuvanja. Geografski fakultet, Skopje, 83-93.97. STEPIŠNIK U., KOSEC G. (2011): Modeling of slope processes on  karst. Acta Carsologica, 40 (2), 267-273.98. STOJANOV    R.    (1974):    Petrološki    karakteristiki    na    magmatskite    i metamorfnite steni od poširokata okolina na Prilep. Geološki Zavod – Skopje, Posebni izdanija, 4, 116 pp.99. TEMOVSKI  M.  (2008):  History  of  Speleology  in  Republic  of  Macedonia. Proceedings of the IV European Speleological Congress,  Lans-en-Vercors, France. Spelunca Memoires, 33, 193-195.100. TEMOVSKI M. (2012): Površinska rasprostranetost na karstnite karpi vo Republika Makedonija (Extension of karst rock outcrops in Republic of Macedonia). Geografski razgledi, Skopje, 46, 21-35.101. TOTH, J. (1963): A theoretical analysis of groundwater flow in small drainage basins. Journal of Geophysical Research, 68(16), 4795–4812.
102. VOLKOV  A.V.,  SERAFIMOVSKI  T.,  KOCHNEVA  N.T.,  TOMSON  I.N., TASEV G. (2006): The Alshar epithermal  Au-As-Sb-Tl  deposit,  southern Macedonia. Geology of Ore Deposits,  48, 175-192103. WYNN J., SUMRALL J., ONAC B. (2010): Sulfur isotopic composition and the source of dissolved sulfur species in thermo-mineral springs of the Cerna Valley, Romania. Chemical Geology, 271, 31-43104. ZUPAN   HAJNA   N.,   MIHEVC   A.,   PRUNER   P.,   BOSÁK   P.   (2008): Palaeomagnetism and Magnetostratigraphy of Karst Sediments in  Slovenia. Carsologica, 8, Založba ZRC SAZU, 266 pp
APPENDIX A:Cave maps

Temovski M. Evolution of karst in the lower part of Crna Reka river basin.Dissertation. University of Nova Gorica, 2014.	Appendix AA.1.1. Aramiska Peštera – planA.1.2. Aramiska Peštera – extended profileA.2.1. Budimirica Cave – planA.2.2. Budimirica Cave – extended profileA.3.1. Čulejca Cave – planA.3.2. Čulejca Cave – extended profileA.4.1. Dragoželska Propast – planA.4.2. Dragoželska Propast – extended profileA.5.	Garnikovska Propast – plan & extended profileA.6.1. Karši Podot Cave – planA.6.2. Karši Podot Cave – extended profileA.7.1. Melnička Peštera 1 – planA.7.2. Melnička Peštera 1 – extended profileA.8.1. Melnička Peštera 2 – planA.8.2. Melnička Peštera 2 – extended profileA.9.	Nad Zelen Izvor – plan & extended profileA.10.1. Pešterski Kamen – planA.10.2. Pešterski Kamen – extended profileA.11.1. Pešti Cave – planA.11.2. Pešti Cave – extended profileA.12. Podot 1 – plan & extended profileA.13. Podot 2 – plan & extended profileA.14.1. Provalata Cave – planA.14.2. Provalata Cave – extended profileA.15.1. Temna Peštera, Dragožel – planA.15.2. Temna Peštera, Dragožel – extended profileA.16.1. Temna Peštera, Mrežičko – planA.16.2. Temna Peštera, Mrežičko – extended profileA.17.1. Vodna Peš – planA.17.2. Vodna Peš – extended profileA.18.	Zelen Izvor – plan & extended profileA.19.1	Živovska Propast – planA.19.2.	Živovska Propast – extended profile





































APPENDIX B:XRD graphics of sampled sediments

List of sediment samples used for x-ray analysisNo.1Cave/LocalityProvalata CaveSampleYellow-orange sandSample codePR012Provalata CaveCorroded yellow stained calcitePR023Provalata Cavecrust Grey clayPR044Provalata CaveGypsum crustPR055Provalata CavePink clayPR086Provalata CaveCorroded calcite crustPR097Provalata CavePale yellow sandPR108Provalata CaveBlack corroded calcite crustPR219Provalata CaveRed colored calcite crustPR2310Sadevite localityTuffT0111Crveno GumništeBlack crustCGUM0412localityKarši Podot CaveRed-brown clayKP0213Karši Podot CaveBrown siltKP0314Karši Podot CaveBrown sandKP0615Pešti CaveRed-brown clayPES0116Aramiska PešteraPale brown clayAR0117Aramiska PešteraSandy layer in sample AR01AR0218Dragoželska PropastDark brown clayDR0119Dragoželska PropastYellow layer in sample DR01DR0220Budimirica CaveOrange sandy clayBUD0121Budimirica CaveOrange sandBUD02

22 Temna Peštera –Dragožel23 Temna Peštera –Dragožel
Brown silt	TEM01Brown clay	TEM02
24 Garnikovska Propast	Grey-brown silt	GAR0125 Čuleca Cave	Reddish-brown clay	CH26 Čulejca Cave	Paleokarst filling	CH0227 Čulejca Cave	Paleokarst filling	CH0328 Cave Lekovita Voda	Yellow clay	LEK01
CavesamplelocationProvalataYellow-orange	sand (PR01)from  a  ceiling  channel  between st.A21-A25 (Lower Passage)CavesamplelocationProvalataCorroded yellow stained calcite crust (PR02)On a wall near st.A21 (Lower Passage)
CavesamplelocationProvalataGrey clay  (PR04)From the floor at st.A21 (Lower Passage)CavesamplelocationProvalataGypsum crust (PR05)From the floor near st.A18 (Lower Passage)
CavesamplelocationProvalataPink clay (PR08)On   the Passage)wallatst.A16(LowerCavesamplelocationProvalataCorroded   calcite   crust (PR09)On the ceiling near st.20  (Second Room)
CavesamplelocationProvalataPale (PR10)yellowsandFrom   the   N   wall   at   st.11   (First Room)CavesamplelocationProvalataBlack,   corroded   calcite crust (PR21)On  the  NW wall near st.4  (First Room)
CavesamplelocationProvalataRed colored calcite  crust (PR23)On the NW wall at st.A25 (Lower Passage)LocalitysamplelocationSadeviteTuff (T01)400 m south from Provalata Cave
LocalitysamplelocationCrveno GumništeBlack crust (CGUM04)In	altered marblesreddishdolomiticCavesamplelocationKarši PodotRed-brown clay (KP02)On a pendant above first  spring (near st.3b)
CavesamplelocationKarši PodotBrown silt  (KP03)Same as KP02CavesamplelocationKarši PodotBrown sand (KP06)Sediment  profile  in  the  southern part of Main Room (near st.1)
CavesamplelocationPeštiRed-brown clay (PES01)Clay profile in the southern end of the cave (st.29)CavesamplelocationAramiska PešteraPale (AR01)brownclayNear st.A2 in Room of Bones
CavesamplelocationAramiska PešteraSandy  layer  in  sample AR01 (AR02)Same as AR01CavesamplelocationDragoželska PropastDark (DR01)brownclayFrom a small vertical channel near st.12 (Big Room)
CavesamplelocationDragoželska PropastYellow layer in sample DR01 (DR02)Same as DR01CavesamplelocationBudimiricaOrange (BUD01)sandyclayFrom yellow sediments profile in pit (between 67 and 123 cm of paleomagnetic profile)
CavesamplelocationBudimiricaOrange sand (BUD02)From  yellow  sediments  profile  in pit  (between  123  and  131  cm  of paleomagnetic profile)CavesamplelocationTemna Peštera –DragoželBrown silt (TEM01)From the floor at st.2
CavesamplelocationTemna Peštera –DragoželBrown clay (TEM02)From  the  ceiling  (bottom  of  the flowstone false floor) above st.3CavesamplelocationGarnikovska PropastGrey-brown	silt (GAR01)From a clay filled niche on the S wall between st.201-202 (Upper Waterfall Room)
CavesamplelocationČulejcaReddish-brown	clay (CH)From the floor between st.21-22CavesamplelocationČulejcaPaleokarst filling (CH02)From the wall between st.106B1- 106b2
CavesamplelocationČulejcaPaleokarst filling (CH03)From the wall at st.106BCavesamplelocationLekovita VodaYellow clay (LEK01)In  a  small  side  passage  on  the  E wall near st.2
APPENDIX C:Hypogenic origin of Provalata Cave, Republic of Macedonia: a distinct case of successive thermal carbonic and sulfuric acid speleogenesis.












