Ognjen Bonacci 
Karst Hydrology 
With Special Reference to the Dinaric Karst 
With 119 Figures 
Springer -Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York London Paris Tokyo 
Professor Dr. OGNJEN BONACCI Civil Engineering Institute Faculty of Civil Engineering Sciences University of Split 58000 Split, V. Maslese b.b. Yugoslavia 
Translated by Zjena Vidovic-Culic 
ISBN-13: 978-3-642-83167-6 DOl: 10.1007/978-3-642-83165-2 
e-ISBN-13: 978-3-642-83165-2 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data. Bonacci, Ognjen, 1942- Karst hydrology, with special reference to the Dinaric karst. (Springer series in physical environment ; 2) Bibliography: p. Includes index. 1. Hydrology, Karst. 2. Hydrology, Karst-Dinaric Alps. I. Title. II. Series. GB843.B66 1987 551.49 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illus- trations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in other ways, and stor- age in data banks. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is only permitted under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965, in its version of June 24, 1985, and a copyright fee must always be paid. Violations fall under the prosecution act of the German Copyright Law. © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1987 Softcover reprint ofthe hardcover 1st edition 1987 The use of registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant pro- tective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. Typesetting: K + V Fotosatz GmbH, Beerfelden. 
2132/3130-543210 
To my family 
Preface 
Karst is characterized particularly by special landforms and sub- surface drainage. The various actions of water result in numerous variations of surface and sub-surface karst forms. They also bring about distinctive geologic-morphologic forms, and more striking- ly, specific flora and fauna. The scientific discipline of hydrology, although a long-established science, cannot easily be applied to karst regions with their very complex drainage system. A special approach is therefore necessary to understand and predict water circulation in these areas. 
This is the viewpoint we must adopt if hydrology is to solve the complex problems of karst phenomena. This book can be seen as the appeal of a hydrologist to experts from different scientific dis- ciplines (geology, hydrology, geomorphology, geography, geo- physics, meteorology, ecology, civil engineering, forestry, agricul- ture, etc.) to collaborate towards a better understanding of karst areas. Evidently, karst phenomena have not been sufficiently and carefully studied worldwide. It is equally true that the first theories on water circulation in karst were developed according to ex- periences in the Dinaric karst. This can easily be explained. In- habitants in those areas had no place to which to escape, as was the case in other countries. 
The greatest part of this book (ca. 70070) gives a general ap- proach to this phenomenon of karst; however, numerous practical examples are also presented. The majority of the examples refer to the Dinaric karst areas, but there are numerous examples from the other parts of the world also (United Kingdom, France, the Soviet Union, Switzerland, etc.). The approach is primarily hydrological, but the book is written so as to build a bridge over the gaps be- tween experts from various scientific fields related to karst. Close scientific cooperation between experts from various countries will ensure an optimal exploitation of water and the conservation of this natural resource for future generations. 
The careful and extensive study of the water circulation in karst involves numerous, well-organized measurements and detailed scientific analyses. Man's work in karst regimes has not always been beneficial; on the contrary, it has caused serious damage. This book may help to avoid and minimize these harmful effects. 
VIII Preface 
It covers 15 years of my work, with special emphasis on the research carried out during the last 10 years (1976-1986), i.e. since I came to live in Split and work at the Faculty of Civil Engineering. However, it also includes experiences of experts from Yugoslavia and other countries. Accordingly, I should like to thank them all for sharing these experiences and their knowledge, and apologize to any colleagues I have inadvertently not mentioned. My special thanks to my close collaborators in writing this book: Sanja Roglic-Perica for the many numerical and computer calculations, Zjena Vidovic-Culic for her translation into English, Myrna Svica- revic for the proof-reading of the English text, Suzana Blazevic for typing and Zlata Rogosic for the well-drawn figures. 
This book would never have been written without the support of my family: my wife Tanja and my children Duje, Dunja, and Lada. They have been most affected by the problems related to the writing of this book, but I hope they will also benefit from it. I should like to thank Professor Dietrich Barsch (Heidelberg), Pro- fessor Jean Nicod (Aix-en-Provence), and Dr. Marjorie Sweeting (Oxford) for helpful suggestions which contributed to increasing the quality of the book. Finally, I should like to express my deep gratitude to the publisher, Springer-Verlag, and particularly to Dr. W. Engel for his beneficial cooperation in the final formation of this book. The publishers and Dr. Engel immediately and clearly grasped the importance of the specific approach presented in this book and its significance in the field of physical environment. 
Split, August 1987 OGNJEN BONACCI 
Contents 
1 Introduction . ................................ . 
2 Karst Terminology - Definitions ................ 4 
3 Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation ...... 18 
3.1 Subcutaneous Zone (Epikarstic Zone) ............ 28 3.2 Karstification Depth and Karst Capacity for Water 
Storage ...................................... 36 
4 Karst Springs ................................. 49 
4.1 General Concept and Classification .............. 49 4.2 Discharge Curves .............................. 67 4.3 Hydrograph Analysis .......................... 75 4.4 Determination of the Catchment Area ........... 81 4.5 The Origin of Brackish Karst Springs ............ 97 
5 Swallow Holes (Ponors) ........................ 103 5.1 Introduction. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . 103 5.2 Determination of the Swallow Capacity of Ponors 103 
6 Natural Streamflows in Karst ................... 116 
6.1 Interaction Between Groundwater and Water in the 
Open Streamflows ............................. 116 6.2 Hydrologic Regime of Rivers in Karst ............ 120 6.3 Water Losses Along the Open Streamflows in Karst 124 
7 Hydrologic Budget for the Poljes in Karst 136 
8 Water Temperature in Karst ..................... 141 
8.1 Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141 8.2 Groundwater Temperature in Karst .............. 141 8.3 The Water Temperature of Springs and Open 
Stream flows in Karst ........................... 145 
x Contents 
9 Man's Influence on the Water Regime in the Karst 
Terrains ...................................... 150 
9.1 Water Storage. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 151 9.2 Increase in the Capacity of the Outlet Structures .. 159 9.3 Surface Hydrotechnical Works .................. 167 9.4 Action on the Groundwater. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . 168 9.5 Usage of the Karst Spring Water ................ 169 9.6 The Development of the Brackish Karst Springs 171 
References ......................................... 175 
Geographical and Subject Index ...................... 181 
1 Introduction 
Karst represents a specific area consisting of surface relief and a surface- underground hydrographic network resulting from the water circulation and its aggressive chemical and physical action in joints, fractures and cracks along the layers of soluble rocks, such as limestone, chalk and dolomite as well as gypsum and salt. Karst is characterized by soluble rocks located near or at the surface. The karstification process results from the physical and chemical water action on the solution and transportation of elements from the rocks. The power of water solubility in contact with rocks depends on the water temperature and its chemical composition, with the dominant component being CO2• The coarseness of grain size is an important factor in limestone dissolution. It effects the chemical quality of karst waters (Sweeting 1973). The fineness of grain affects the solubility of the rock. Sweeting (1973) has concluded, after laboratory experiments on dolomites from Ontario, that the finer grained dolomites are about twice as soluble as the 'coarser grained beds. Owing to specific geologic and geomorphologic, and par- ticularly hydraulic characteristics, karst areas exhibit a specific water circulation which should be studied by appropriate methods. Karst hydrology is a relatively new scientific discipline if it is considered as an independent scientific branch. It has been so far included in the investigations on the process of water circulation in karst as a part of geology and hydrogeology, but it is developing as an indepen- dent discipline. Its present and future development are in close connection with the advances in other disciplines primarily geology, hydrogeology, hydraulics, geophysics, chemistry, hydrometry, climatology and statistics. 
Karstified rocks can be found in all parts of the world. In certain regions they are quite frequent and cover wide and deep areas (e.g. in Yugoslavia along the Adriatic Sea), whereas in other regions they are rare and appear only in certain areas, most often as shallow surface karst (countries of northern Europe and South America). Karst is estimated to cover 20 to 25070 of the surface of all con- tinents. Milanovic (1981) describes in detail the most significant areas covered by karst in the world. 
It can be stated, without exaggeration, that the karst areas of Yugoslavia repre- sent a cradle of a systematic study of karst in the world, considering the water circulation in the cracked and fissured areas. The first theoretical and pratical engineering investigations were carried out either in the Yugoslav karst or by the Yugoslav researchers, Cvijic (1893), Gavazzi (1904), Grund (1903) and Waagen (1910). This seems quite natural if we bear in mind the fact that ca. 75000 km2 of the surface in Yugoslavia (i.e. 35% of the total area) are strongly influenced by karstification processes. Figure 1.1 represents a schematic situation of the parts of Yugoslavia covered by karst. The Dinaric karst, situated along the coast by the 
Introduction 2 ITALY 
.I 
RUMANIA 
Adriatic Sea is particulary well developed and deep with very specific karst geomorphologic forms. In the past the necessity of investigating the water circula- tion in karst in Yugoslavia has been caused by the fact that men have continually inhabited these areas. While in other parts of the world the karst regions are most- ly unpopulated, in Yugoslavia some karst areas are densely populated. The needs of people living in those areas have brought about the development of theoretical and practical solutions in karst hydrology. With the increase in the number of in- habitants on the surface of Earth, the karst areas will become more densely populated, and this fact entails the settlement of people in the karst areas. Thus, the interest in the study of karst hydrology will increase, especially with regard to water circulation, its phenomena and quantity. 
The water circulation processes in karst have been studied by numerous re- searchers; however, it can be noted that, in general, the hydrologic aspect of this problem has not been dealt with carefully enough so far, and hydrologic methodo- logy has not been appropriately applied in practice. Consequently, this book stresses the hydrologic aspect of the problem, i.e. an attempt to define quan- titatively the relations and quantities of the surface and groundwater in the karst medium. It should be borne in mind, however, that karst phenomena, and the water circulation in it can be studied in detail only by applying an inter- disciplinary approach. Karst is a very heterogeneous space medium which can be explained only be applying a great number of measurement points and by monitoring and measuring various phenomena: the water levels, water discharge and velocity, chemical composition of water, its temperature, concentration of suspended particles and the microorganisms in water. Consequently, karst should 
HUNGI\RY 
~ Dmric karst o II other karst areas 50 txl 150 200 km 
Fig. 1.1. The karst areas in Yugoslavia 
Introduction 3 
be distinguished from the hydrologically more homogeneous non-karst areas which can be treated using physical models or at least as a "grey box". Karst still calls for a system approach to an analysis performed by observing the water in- flow into and out of the system and by treating the water circulation in the system as a "black box". 
2 Karst Terminology - Definitions 
The primary objective of this book is to study the hydrologic aspect of the prob- lems of water circulation in the karst. Therefore, karst phenomena, and types and characteristics of karst will not be dealt with from the geologic and geomor- phologic point of view. The following books or papers refer to the above prob- lems: Zotl (1974), Milanovic (1981), Bogli (1980), LeGrand and Stringfield (1973), Sweeting (1973) and LeGrand (1983). Figure 2.1 is taken from the latter two papers and represents six general topographic categories which can be developed in the karst regions. The authors believe that these typical karst forms include all phenomena and are valid for the whole world. This division, as any other, has its advantages and disadvantages, but they are not important from the point of view of hydrology. The well-developed fissures of the karst areas, and consequent- ly a very fast and great water sinking strongly affect the distinctive hydrologic behaviour of water in the karst terrains to be distinguished from the circulation in porous media. The possibility of surface flow is either unlikely or completely eliminated. In these considerations we should take into account the fact that apart from the bare karst (appearing in southern Yugoslavia, Dalmatia and Herzegovina) there are areas of covered karst (Slovenia and Gorski Kotar) with rich vegetation and a layer of covering soil up to 1 m deep, in some places even several meters. In such situations the sinking is significantly slower, whereas all other processes of water circulation are identical to those in the bare karst. The karstification processes are caused by the contact of water with the solu- ble and porous rocks. The more intensive tectonic processes condition the devel- opment of stronger karstification and a more intensive water circulation. The essential prerequisite for the formation of karst forms is the temperature and abundant precipitation. The other factors more significantly affecting the karstification process are the chemical composition of water, the velocity of water circulation and the climate in general. The karstification processes are more inten- sive if there is a thick layer of humus above the carbonate rocks. This is explained by the fact that this thicker layer of humus favourably affects the production and accumulation of CO2, which in the phase of a chemical process participates in the solution of carbonate rocks. Generally speaking, karst terrains are dry and un- favourable for the living conditions of human beings, but there are some areas with abundant precipitation, ranging from 600 mm to 3000 or even 4000 mm a year (Crna Gora, southwest of Yugoslavia). This seems illogical at first sight, but it can be explained by excessively fast infiltration and by considerable water per- colation, i.e. very fast vertical sinking of water from the surface, through the aera- tion zone to the underground water level. 
Karst Terminology - Definitions 
G)~®~ CNJLLATiNG PLAIN CARBONATE 'ALLEY WITH SINKS BETWEEN NON-CARBONA.TE ~ panas HILLS ®~®~~~~ DEI'UDED HOMOCUNICAL PLAIN WITH SINKS 
KEY' 
5 
NON-CARBONATE (OR9-lALE) LOWlAND CARBONATE BETWEEN RIt:X3ES (jJ~ ~ ESCARPMENT AND LON- L Y~ LIM:STONE PLAIN ®~ 8~~ ESCARPMENT PLATEAU CAPPED AND HIGHER BY CARBONATE ROCKS 
o 2 3 L S 6 [km] 
[.;.>:1 SAND A/I() nAY 
~ CAREOIATE ROCKS 
1:::;1:::) SANDSTONE 
§=----I SHALE ~[~F 
Fig. 2.1. lYpes of landscapes in karst areas. (Le Grand and Stringfield 1973) 
The primary, textural or intergranular porosity of carbonate rocks has formed open spaces in rocks created during the period of their genesis, sedimentation and petrification. The term secondary porosity is used for the spaces created in car- bonate rocks in the post-petrification period. This phenomenon includes pore spaces created by the solution processes or by some other ways (Le. fractures). The number and dimensions of pores increase gradually with time, particulary due to the solubility of rocks and the physical action of water. Hence, the porosity of carbonate rocks per unit of area increases in time. The size and number of pores, and the shape of joints, are of primary importance for the definition of the rock porosity. The existence of voids in the rocks implies their porosity. The water can flow through the pores if they are connected and if their dimensions are such to enable the water to overcome the adhesion of molecular forces. The fact that car- bonate rocks are permeable is more important than their porosity for the hydrologic approach to karst investigations. 
6 Karst Terminology - Definitions 
Further on we will define several basic terms pertaining to the relation between water and carbonate rocks. The definitions are taken over from Castany, from the UNESCO (1984) publication. 
Gravitational water is the water, which due to gravity, penetrates and flows in- to the underground system. Its volume is designated by Vg. 
Retained water is the part of the underground water in karst pores retained there by the surface tension or molecular attraction; its volume is expressed as v,.. The relation between the volume of the gravitational water Vg and the retain- ed water v,. is the function of the pore size and the mineralogic characteristics of the rocks. If the pores are smaller than 4 to 5 11, the gravitational movement of water is practically blocked. Specific retention represents the relation between the volume of the retained v,. and the total volume of the considered rock mass V. Total porosity, n, is the relation between the volume of all pores Vv/ V is ex- pressed in percentages. In water-saturated rocks Vv = Vg + v,., i.e. it represents the sum of gravitational and retained water. The amount of the total porosity of car- bonate rocks varies considerably and ranges widely from 0.2 to 45070. 
Effective porosity, ne, applies only to connected voids with water circulation. It is expressed in percentages of the total volume V in the following way: 
ne = (Vg/V) 100. (2.1) 
Effective porosity changes in time. If we consider an idealized case of exclusively underground water inflow into the carbonate mass, the change in effective porosi- ty in time can be presented as in Figure 2.2. The effective porosity is an index of connection between the voids which can in time be filled by gravitational water. Storage coefficient, S, is the volume of water released from the prism of a unit cross-sectional area whose height is the total thickness of the aquifer due to change in the piezometric level for 1 m. In a confined aquifer the storage coeffi- cient ranges from 10-3 to 10-5 m3, whereas in a free water surface aquifer the storage coefficient corresponds to the volume of the gravitational water in 1 m3 of the aquifer. The graphic representation of the storage coefficient in the free and confined aquifer is given in Figure 2.3A,B (Castany - UNESCO 1984). 
Specific yield is defined as the change in the water quantity in the storage per unit of area of the free surface of the aquifer. It is the result of the unit change in the height of the groundwater level. The specific yield and storage coefficient increase with time. 
The storage capacity of karst carbonate rocks can be determined on samples in the laboratory or by field investigations. It represents the estimation of the water quantity which can be tapped from one part of the aquifer. In wide aquifers with a free water surface it approximately represents the volume of the free water. Since, from the hydrologic point of view, the term effective porosity ne is very in- teresting and directly connected with the storage capacity and the general capacity of karst rocks for the water storage, it will be dealt with in detail in Section 3.2. The previously analyzed terms are not related to the dynamic features of water circulation through the karst carbonate rocks, but they exclusively refer to the relationship and quantity of water in the system of fissures. The essential 
Karst Terminology - Definitions 
(schematic representatial) 
100+------r------~----_.------,_----~--~--~ 
c: 
2 3 
7 
p:lItSity I porosity 
ne in time 5 
Fig. 2.2. Development of.effective porosity ne in time - an idealized case of permanent inflow into the underground of the carbonate rocks 
phenomena related to dynamic characteristics, particularly to the velocity of water circulation, will be described later on. 
Permeability, K, is the property of rocks forming an underground reservoir, to allow water to flow with an appreciable velocity due to the existence of the pressure gradient. Permeability depends on the shape and size of the voids. Permeability K has the dimension m s - I and can be defined by the following ex- pression: 
K= Q/(A·J) , (2.2) 
where Q denotes the water discharge passing in a second through the cross-sec- tional of 20 oe. 
area A, expressed in m2 under a unit hydraulic gradient J, at a temperature 
time o of d hs] 
·nage 6 
100T-----,------.-----.------c=~~~----_; 
c: 41 2 3 5 
tine of dr ge [mont ] 
6 
8 Karst Terminology - Definitions 
® 5()11 surface 
® 
H 
·Impermeable /' / Z layer /. liberated Vg - 5 <Xluifer 
imper meable layer 
/' " /' ,/ 
/' 
/' /' Fig. 2.3A,B. Storage coefficient in a free surface (A) and confined (B) aquifer. (Castany- UNESCO 1984) 
The coefficient of transmissivity, T, is the water inflow at the prevailing water temperature through the vertical cross-section of the aquifer of one unit width, entirely saturated by water at the hydraulic gradient of 100070. Its dimension is m2 s -1, and it can be used to estimate the aquifer capacity. 
The velocity of water circulation in karst primarily depends on whether the water flows through a system of developed karst fissures and channels or through a system of small cracks. The karst porosity is not great, and consequently the water flow should be quite slow. However, well-developed paths create conditions for quick circulation. It is very difficult to define an average velocity of water cir- culation in karst, primarily as neither the exact paths of the water flow nor their actual length are generally known. Therefore, the so-called distance or fictitious velocity v* in m s -1 is defined by the following expression: 
v* = Lit, (2.3) 
Karst Terminology - Definitions 9 
where L expresses the shortest (horizontal) distance between the two points, and t is the travelling time of water between them. This method of determination is most frequently applied in establishing the relations: swallow holes-springs, piezometers-springs or piezometers-piezometers by dyeing tests. According to Knezevic (1962), the measured distance velocities in the Dinaric karst are from 0.2 to 20 cm s -1. Milanovic (1981) states that these velocities range from 0.002 to 55.2 cm s -1. The average distance velocity from both authors is 6 to 7 cm s -1 . Vlahovic (1983) presents the measurement data for fictitious velocity obtained by dyeing tests carried out in the ponors in the SIano and Krupac Poljes (the Zeta River Catchment) whose velocities range from 0.89 to 4.58 cm s -1 . Magdalenic et al. (1986) give distance velocities from 0.8 - 2.0 cm s -1 measured in Istra at the Bulai Spring. All the measurements were carried out during low groundwater levels after long periods of droughts. Small distance velocities are one of the basic features of water circulation in the Dinaric karst (Yugoslavia). 
The velocity of water circulation in karst significantly varies with the change of the hydrologic conditions of the aquifer. When the aquifer is full, the circula- tion is much faster than during long-lasting periods of droughts. Since the water velocity in karst is most often measured by dyeing tests, which can determine only distance velocity, the factors influencing 'the change in velocity are emphasized. Brown and Ford (1971) defined the possible combinations of the flow network between the points of the entrance and exit of the tracers. Figure 2.4A presents five types of networks. Figure 2.4B shows the possibility of the existence of underground storage basins which significantly affect the water flow velocity as well as the shape of the outcoming tracer wave. They essentially reduce the veloci- ty, and lengthen and flatten the outflowing wave. Figure 2.4C presents the case of a connection between the main karst system and one of its subsystems. Such, and even more complex, situations are not rare, and in a way they belong to one of the types of the network II to V, as plotted in Figure 2.4A. It should be noted that depending on the water level in the aquifer of the main system and its sub- systems, the circulation may take place in both directions. All the above facts point to the complexity and the possible errors in the determination and inter- pretation of the direct field measurements of the water flow velocity in karst. 
Brucker et al. (1972) measured the velocity of water flowing along the vertical wall of the shafts in West Virginia, Kentucky and Alabama, and obtained the results presented in Figure 2.5. The water flow velocity increased during the wet period, whereas Fig. 2.5 presents the cases of velocity measurements after long dry periods. Gale (1984) analyzed the morphology of dissolution-bed form assemblages and hydraulically-transported sediments found within conduits in carbonate aquifers in North America and Great Britain. These values were used to define numerous hydraulic conditions under which conduit flow occurs. 
Mean values of flow velocity have been calculated. Velocities always occur in the turbulent regime, and they range from 0.03 to 1.21 m S-I, whereas discharges vary from 0.13 to 9.14m3 S-I. Gale (1984) found that using indirect methods of measurements (bed form-erosional features and hydraulically-transported sedi- ments) it can be generally concluded that velocities in the conduits range from 0.01 to 1 m s -1. The velocities in a diffuse flow, however, belong to a laminar regime. Atkinson (1977) defined the velocity of the diffuse flow in a carbonate 
Karst to Terminology - Definitions ® I ~ I tIt 
o TYPE I 
1YPE IV b TYPE V CD 
main karst system ® ® © I t o 
TYPE D TYPE III 
TYFE IVa 
® 
karst subsys1em 
G o urrl!rground sIortge ~ 
TYPES OF FLOW t£IWClR< ( accoo:li'lg to BRlWN and FOOD, 1973 ) PRESENCE OF lJI'.OERGROLND WATER STORAGE CONNECTION BElWEEN lHE MAN SYSTEM AND ITS SUBSYSTEM 
Fig. 2.4 A-Co Possible types of relation between inflow (I) and outflow (0) in the karst system. A 1Ypes of flow network (Brown and Ford 1973); B presence of underground storage; C connec- tion between the main system and its subsystem 
aquifer of Mendip Hills, UK as 1.03 X 10-3 m S-I, and Foster and Milton (1974) determined the maximum velocity of the diffuse flow as 1.97 X 10-3 measured in the most permeable parts of the Cretaceous Chalk of East Yorkshire, UK. 
Fig. 2.6 represents a schematic cross-section of a typical karst system with various surface and underground phenomena. Surface karst forms are: karren, sinkholes (dolines), dry valleys and poljes (Vlahovic 1983). Karren occur in bare carbonate, gypsum and salt karst rocks and are separated by narrow ridges. They also occur under soil cover. They have been formed by an erosive action of water (chemical and physical), and appear mostly in cracked limestone rocks susceptible to the development of such forms, but there are many other types of karren which are independent of cracked limestones. Considering the water flow they represent the first significant paths along which water, passing through the other forms, sinks underground. These are characteristic features for 
Karst Terminology - Definitions 
em] h 1) 
v [m/~ 104+-~ __ ~ __ ~ __ ~~~ ____ ~-1r-__ ~~ __ ~ __ -r~ 
11 
0.1 
NR- Reynok:ls number ~ - Froude number 
10 
100 
100 
Fig. 2.5. Fence diagram showing flow regimes for wide open channels. (Bruckner et al. 1972) 
the hard and bare karst where the surface flow is not actually possible. The in- terspaces between karren are from several centimeters up to 2 m and more wide, and their depth ranges from 2 m to frequently several meters. Terrains covered by karren are most often situated along the boundaries of the poljes in karst and hardly accessible. In the inters paces there is a layer of soil penetrating deeper into the underground which plays a significant role in the subsequent karstification processes. Karren themselves are the most evident result of the current karst pro- cesses and point to the possibility of the appearance of other karst phenomena important for hydrology. 
• points Fl int obtained bf measurement; Ridges Cave (u. SA) 
in vertical shafts of 
Karst 12 
Thrminology - Definitions 
bare karst 
covered ka rst bare karst dry cave 
wtich open streamflow dies LP 
poror-slMllloN hole 
!em porory spring 
permanent spring 
maximum groundwater level 
minimum ground\Mlter level 
£ £> H - amplilLde grourrlNater of oscillation level carbonate rocks s in 1:,":;::,:,1 non·oonsolidated sediments Fig. 2.6. Schematic cross-section of a typical karst system 
Dolines (sinkholes) are cone-like karst hollow forms with a diameter ranging from a few meters to 100 m, up to 10m deep. The deepest sinkholes in Yugoslavia are the Blue and Red Lakes near Imotski, about 200 and 500 m deep respectively. Sinkholes are formed apart from the erosive chemical action of water, by collapse of the floors in caverns and karst channels (Milanovic 1981). Williams (1983) ex- plains the formation of dolines with regard to the influence of a subcutaneous zone in karst. Figure 3.11 is related to that explanation and the details are presented in the next chapter. Dolines appear mostly in groups, frequently con- centrated along the lines of faults. Only a small number of dolines in the Dinaric karst like the Blue and Red Lake have a bottom below the level of the ground- water. In shallow Dinaric karst and also in deep karst of other parts of the world the doline bottoms are frequently situated below the groundwater level, and con- sequently those dolines are often flooded. 
Dry valleys in karst are elongated recesses and valleys, at the bottom of which there are dolines, jamas (shafts) and caves. From the hydrologic standpoint it is interesting to note that there are no permanent watercourses and there are rarely intermittent open streamflows in them. The conditions for the surface flow do not exist since the karstification process has been stronger and faster than the process of the river valley formation. Milanovic (1981) gives an example of a typical Trebisnjica dry valley between Hutovo and the Neretva River Valley, where this river used to flow by a surface watercourse. Dry valleys essentially were formed because the groundwater level was low, due to strong karstification processes, and which never, or very rarely, appeared near the surface, thus making the inflow of open streamflows into the underground possible. 
Karst Terminology - Definitions 13 
[ma.s.!.] H " j f~ aJ:l] 100 c <l'5 o I 
) ~ :.;;: .In 0:: 0 t -=- H [ma.s.l] ['" 100 200 
0 
= J'! m ~ .s: "<J 0 "'" .Q 0 0 5 i -0 d 3: :> .0 OJ ~ G; 10km 
Zrmanja _ __ _ _ permanert temporary sLlfa:e surface tlow tlow -- - - - measured supposed go..ncIwater groundwater level level 
Fig. 2.7. The relation between water level in the open streamflow and the groundwater level along the river courses of the Krka and the Zrmanja Rivers (Yugoslavia). (Fritz and Pavich: 1982) It should be noted that sometimes in the Dinaric karst permanent water- courses flow beyond the groundwater level, even for 50 m. A characteristic case is the section of the Zrmanja River from Palanka to Ervenik. Similar "suspend- ed" or "perched" stretches can be found on the Krka River from Marasovina to the Miljacka Waterfalls and even further on. While the Zrmanja River dries up on the mentioned section during the dry periods, the Krka never dries up. Fur- thermore, no significant water losses were established by measurements. The rea- son why there are pra~tically no losses, and why the losses are fewer and conse- qu~ntly there are no dry valleys, can be explained by the fact that the riverbed of those rivers is filled by their own very fine-grained sediments. These make infiltra- tion more or less impossible, and hence the water losses through the wetted perimeter of the open· streamflow are quite rare or do not occur at all. Figure 2.7 presents the results obtained by Fritz and PaviCic (1982) related to the ratio be- tween the water level in the open streamflow of the Krka and Zrmanja and the groundwater level. 
Poljes in the karst represent depressions in the limestone karst, generally ellip- tical with relatively gently sloping bottoms from the spring zone to the swallow- hole zone. They are most often covered by soil belonging to the Neogene and Quarternary sediments i.e. terra rossa. The poljes are also frequently aligned along tectonic and fold axes. Their size varies from the small ones covering 0.5 km2 to the largest covering 500 km2• LeGrand (1983) gives the following definition of poljes: "They are flat alluvial valleys bordered by relatively steep bare limestone ridges, ranging from almost a kilometer to several kilometers in width and are somewhat elongated". They have either permanent or temporary 
14 Karst Terminology - Definitions 
springs, often flowing along the longer axis. The surface flow in concentrated streamflows occurs less often along the shorter axis. Poljes in karst can be found in various parts of the world, most often in the Mediterranean countries (Greece, Italy, France, Spain, Morocco, Tunis and Yugoslavia). There is a small number of poljes in Asia, a greater number in Cuba, Jamaica and Canada in the area of Nahanni, whereas there is only one polje (Bogli 1980) in the USA in Tennessee (Grassy Cove). The poljes appear most frequently and have the most specific characteristics in the Dinaric karst of Yugoslavia. This is the main reason why the word polje has passed from Croato-Serbian into all languages and is used as an international technical term in this field. We believe the term "polje in karst" should be used as it seems more appropriate than the formerly accepted term "karst polje". Poljes in the Yugoslav karst (and similarly elswhere) represent the only oases in karst with living conditions favourable for human beings. These regions are covered with arable soil and have either permanent or temporary springs and they are surrounded by bare, rocky, often non-arable terrains. Accord- ing to Barbalic (1976) the total area covered by closed poljes in Yugoslavia is ca. 1350 km2 or approximately 2070 of the total area covered by karst, estimated to cover about 75000 km2• Although they are relatively small in size, they are signif- icant from an economic and social 'standpoint. 
From the hydrologic point of view, polje is only a part of a wider system. It cannot, and should not, be treated as a complete system, but only as a subsystem in the process of surface and groundwater flow through the karst massive. Conse- quently, they cannot be studied properly without establishing the measurement points and devices not only in the polje itself, but also in the karst massive sur- rounding it, and in the poljes of higher and lower horizons connected with the analyzed subsystem. Poljes in karst are regularly flooded in the cold and wet periods of the year, in Dinaric karst from October to April, and in summer there is not enough water (Bonacci 1985). According to the hydrologic regime, inflows and outflows, poljes can be classified into four basic types: (1) closed poljes; (2) upstream open poljes; (3) downstream open poljes; (4) upstream and downstream open poljes. Flooding is caused by the limited capacity of the outlet structures. Barbalic (1976) states that 35% of the areas covered by polje in Dinaric karst becomes flooded during the year. Figure 2.8 gives a schematic presentation of the mentioned characteristics of poljes in karst. 
Underground karst phenomena are jamas (shafts), channels (passages) and caves. 
Jamas are shafts of greater dimensions, sinking deep into the carbonate massive. Usually, they can be found within a zone of vertical circulation of water and are filled with air during the greater part of the year. They represent the most important joint systems for the water flow from the surface into the underground (Gospodaric 1976). Very frequently, particularly in the poljes in karst, jamas located in the lower zones function as swallow holes or estavelle. Such jamas are generally circular and are formed by water action. Brucker et al. (1972) explained the characteristics, shape and size of vertical jamas and their role in water drainage in karst. According to these authors, jamas represent channels for the transportation of water efficiently and quickly through the vadose zone. The catchment area of a jama varies significantly. In dry periods it can be quite small, 
Karst Terminology - Definitions ® Four types of polje ~~~~ ~~~~ 
~ permanent spring ~ temporary sprirg " swallow hote-ponor .. sLbrnarine spring : es10vele 
-!> water siri<ing inlo karst • ccrdiJt flow 
polje 3 ® 
Cross-section several poljes through © Situation of a typical polje Q "l. @ Lo~tudinal cross-section a-a 
estave[es zone 
swallow holes zone 
15 
fDIi InLJ1Cbled of tempaary JXl~e 
Fig. 2.8A-D. Schematic presentation of the poljes in the karst. A Four types of polje; B cross- section through several poljes; C situation of a typical polje; D longitudinal cross-section a-a 
even less than 1 ha, whereas during floods, a jama functioning as the main outlet structure can swallow great quantities of water from a large catchment area. Jamas gradually and continually increase in depth as the groundwater level decreases. Essentially they are the forms occurring in a vadose zone, and so far no jamas with a bottom below the lowest groundwater level have been recorded, although some already discovered jamas reach great depth. Milanovic (1981) states that the deepest known jama in the entire world is Pierre Saint Martin in 
Karst 16 Terminology - Definitions 
H 
630 
620 
610 
600 590 
580 
570 
560 
I [ $() Em] 
21.7.5 
200 100 KEY: D tt:J!' l.fldergrard of karst chorreIs gwting curtain 
~ limesme 
o 
fault 
flysch 
minimum grrundwcter cbserved level 
Fig. 2.9. Longitudinal geotechnical profile of a grouting curtain in the zone of the Krupacki ponors. (Vlahovic 1983) 
the Pyrenees (1971 m) between France and Spain, whereas in Yugoslavia the deepest known jama is the PoloSka Cave near Tolmin, which is 658 m deep. 
Underground karst channels (passages) are horizontal or gently sloping pipes of irregular sha,pe and changing dimensions through which water circulates in karst. They very often connect jamas. The dimensions of the karst channels can vary from the order of 1 cm to several meters. Vlahovic (1983) presented an unex- pectedly great number of underground karst channels in the SIano Polje (Yugoslavia) on the grouting curtain Brocanac - Siroka ulica - Orlina. Chan- nels can be found both in the zone beyond the maximum groundwater level and in the zone of groundwater level oscillation, down to a depth of 80 m under the 
Karst Terminology - Definitions 17 
surface. Figure 2.9 presents a longitudinal geotechnical profile of the grouting curtain in the Krupac Polje (Vlahovic 1983). Karst erosion is stronger in the zone of intensive water flow in the vertical and horizontal direction than below this zone, which results in a greater number and larger dimensions of channels in that zone. The turbulent flow of water in them ensures a fast inflow of fresh water, while the vegetation phenomenon, closely connected with the presence of water quickens the processes of rotting away which in their turn increase the content of CO2 in water. Thus, the possibility for chemical erosion of carbonate rocks becomes greater. 
Considering the water flow through the karst channels the main factors in- fluencing it are the size and form, as well as the variation of the cross-sectional area perpendicular to the direction of the groundwater flow. Investigations in dif- ferent parts of the world show great irregularities in the appearance and dimen- sions of the cross-sections. The observed cross-sections of the channel perpen- dicular to the direction of the flow should be transformed into ellipses of the same size, in order to analyze their shapes and dimensions in a certain region. Motyka and Wilk (1984) suggest the following classification of the karst channels based on the relation between the length of the horizontal x and vertical y half-axis of the transformed ellipsis: 1, vertically, elongated (x/y)<0.8; 2, regular 0.8 ~ (x/y) ~ 1.25; 3, horizontally elongated (x/y) > 1.25. Their investigations car- ried out in the Triassic carbonates of the Olkusz region (Poland) have shown that there are 40% vertically elongated channels, 23% regular and 37070 horizontally elongated channels, whereas the maximum relation between the lengths of the horizontal and vertical half-axis of the ellipsis (x/y) ranges from 0.09 to 10.6. Motyka and Wilk (1984) propose the following division of channels considering the cross-sectional area (A in m2) perpendicular to the direction of the water movement: 1, small A < 0.25 m2; 2, medium (0.25 m2) ~A ~ (0.50 m2); 3, large (0.5 m2) < A ~ (1.0 m2); 4, very large A > 1.0 m2. 
Caves are generally considered as widened karst channels stretching horizon- tally or gently sloping; Caves provide direct contact of the surface water with the karst underground and vice versa. Caves are quite numerous in Yugoslavia. The most famous for its beauty, dimension, flora and fauna is Postojna, 16670 m long. The largest cave system in the world is Mammoth Cave in the USA in the State of Kentucky. It has not been thoroughly investigated so far, and it is sup- posed to be of the order of magnitude of 500 km in its total length. The Slana Cave (Vlahoyic 1983) has strong temporary karst springs which dry up only after long dry periods. Caves do not frequently take over the function of swallow holes. All the previously mentioned karst phenomena are ideal sites for observing the actual processes of water flow in karst. The devices used are either natural piezometers or measurement devices for continuous or temporary monitoring of various water characteristics, primarily the change of water level. Data gathered on such sites can be exceptionally well used for establishing the process of water flow in a karst system. On the other hand, all the surface, and particularly underground karst phenomena, providing a direct connection between the groundwater and the surface, represent excessively sensitive points for the possible direct and fast inflow of liquid and solid pollutants into the otherwise clear groundwater. This fact should be carefully considered in the study, design and construction of structures on the karst terrains. 
3 Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
The circulation of water through karstified rocks is similar to water circulation through non-karst terrains under normal hydrologic conditions apart from some specific features. The lateral circulation in karst is effected by the following three concentrating mechanisms (Gunn 1983): (1) overland flow; (2) throughflow, i.e. flow through a layer of soil above limestone; (3) subcutaneous flow. Each of the above flows differs from one situation to another, depending upon the soil cover and vegetation of the catchment, and on the development of the karst processes. The lateral water flow precedes the infiltration and percolation phases, i.e. the ver- tical sinking of water through the vadose zone down to the groundwater level. 
The input mechanisms of the process of groundwater transmission through the vadose zone can be divided into three mechanisms (Gunn 1983): (1) shaft flow of flow through natural, predominantly vertical shafts as a thin film of water flowing along their walls; (2) vadose flow or the flow through enlarged joints and fractures of the vadose zone with a predominantly vertical direction; (3) vadose seepage or very slow sinking through the smallest karst joints and fissures of the vadose zone, also with a dominant vertical direction. The quantitative contribu- tion of each component changes from one section to another, but is dependent on the period of the year, vegetation cover, preceding precipitation, etc. If the karst is bare, the influence of the surface flow in the concentration phase is not significant; in addition, it can be frequently neglected. Lateral flow in the layer of non-consolidated soil occurs only in those regions where such soil is dominant. The overland flow can either occur or not depending on the infiltration character- istics of that layer in covered karst. The importance of the subcutaneous flow in the karst area is great; consequently, the following chapter deals with that prob- lem. The vertical water flow through jamas significantly varies by its quantity in time (depending on precipitation), but essentially it does not quantitatively repre- sent a significaht factor, if a greater catchment area is considered instead of the narow area around the jama. It is difficult to distinguish quantitatively the flow through larger from the flow through the smaller karst joints and fissures. These two components have a dominant influence on the process of the vertical water flow through the vadose zone down to the groundwater level. Differences exist in the flow velocity as well as in the quantities varying in time. Whereas the water flows faster through larger fissures, and the hydrograph varies more evidently in time, the flow velocity in small joints is smaller (usually it is the laminar flow) and the hydro graphs are practically constant. 
A specific feature of the surface flow in karst is that open streamflows dry up in the dry period of the year. Drying most frequently occurs in summer, but it can occur also in the long dry winter periods. Drying is caused by the drainage 
Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 19 
of the stored groundwater quantities, and by the lowering of the groundwater level. One of the characteristic features of the groundwater flow in karst is the fast and considerable oscillation of the water level and great differences between the minimum and maximum groundwater levels. These oscillations can reach values of the order of 100 m and more. This fact shows that the karst water storage capacity is not so great as it appears at first sight. The water circulation in the vadose zone is, however, very fast and turbulent due to the size of fissures and a well-developed system of water circulation. 
Generally, there are two types of water circulation in karst. The turbulent flow, similar to the flow in pipe systems, occurs in the upper layers of well-developed karst areas, the so-called conduit flow. In the lower layers of karst with dominant, fine, small joints and fissures the water follows the principles of Darcy's law, similar to a flow in a porous medium, and is generally called diffuse flow. Atkin- son (1977) studied the water circulation in karst on the terrains of Mendip Hills Somerset in Great Britain. His investigations showed that the volume, and hence, the capacity of the pipe system is about 30 times smaller than the volume of the karst mass, but that 60 - 800/0 of the total quantity of water is quickly transported through the system of these channels. This phenomenon can be explained by the fact that the channel system has a much greater permeability capacity. The quan- tity of 54% of the annual discharge from the Cheddar Spring in UK is supplied by the quick flow. Quick flow comprises stream sink water and percolation from closed depressions (Atkinson 1977). The remaining part, i.e. 46% of the discharge is effected by base flow. It includes slow percolation from areas not drained by depressions and possibly groundwater leakage also. Although Atkinson's in- vestigations are related to a relatively narrow region, certain values and conclu- sions can be of more general importance for the karst areas. 
According to the order of magnitude from Cheddar Spring similar values have been determined in the case of the Klokun Spring situated in the Dinaric karst. A hydrograph analysis for an 18-year series (1965 -1983) has been carried out for this spring located in Dalmatia, in the catchment of the BaCina Lakes (Yugosla- via). Figure 3.1 presents a hydrograph separation which has been attempted on a storm-by-storm basis. The hydrograph for Klokun Spring reveals a flushy behaviour very similar to surface streams. This division was not performed ac- cording to any strict rules; instead, it was carried out according to personal estimation which cannot affect the results more than ±50,10 to a maximum of ± 10%. For the Klokun hydrographs it has been concluded that 75% of the an- nual discharge is quick flow, whereas only 25% is base flow. The mentioned values refer to an average of 19 years, and they vary significantly from one year to another, ranging for the quick flow from a minimum of 60% to a maximum of 89%. It should be stressed that there is an essential difference between the terms conduit flow and quick flow, as well as between the base flow and diffuse flow, although certain common features cannot be neglected. The base flow repre- sents the water sinking underground by slow percolation, i.e. by slow seepage through smaller cracks, whereas the quick flow supplies the groundwater to the karst region by a quick percolation across well-developed depressions, pits, shafts· and other karst forms or by fast sinking of water from the open streamflows, sometimes only temporary ones. 
Principles 20 
of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
8 Q [m3/sJ 
7 6 5 4 3 2 
[yalrsJ t 1972 1973 Fig. 3.1. Hydrograph of the Klokun Spring (Yugoslavia) in the time period from 1972 to 1974 
From the point of view of engineering practice, it is important to note that in the karst aquifer the main part of the recharge to the exploitation wells is car- ried out by the base flow and the diffuse flow, since the quick flow, as well as the conduit flow, are too short to be significant for a greater and longer exploitation, particularly in the dry periods, when there is an increase in water demands. 
The surface flow water in karst can gradually sink through a system of small joints and fissures, but sometimes all surface water sinks to the underground through a great swallow hole or through a system of several smaller swallow holes. Most often the above described situations occur simultaneously. E. White and W. White (1983) have concluded that the concentrated underground flows in karst maintain the profiles and gradients that they would have had if they had been flowing in surface channels. The conclusion reinforces the view that the ground- water flow in karst through privileged systems of channels (conduit flow) should be regarded as a "surface stream with roof" rather than as some sort of ground- water. The maintenance of these same or similar hydraulic profiles of the flow through the karst underground suggests that the development of the subsurface drainage, caused by a physical and chemical erosion of limestone, is a more rapid process than is the adjustment of the surface channels. The subsurface conduit system in karst seems to follow the development of the surface channels without difficulty. 
There are three zones of water circulation in karst: (1) vadose, inactive or the zone of vertical circulation; (2) high water stand zone or the zone of horizontal 
Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 21 
circulation and (3) phreatic zone. The zone of vertical circulation is an area with large joints through which the water circulates quickly, predominantly in the ver- tical direction, down to the groundwater level. In that zone the water level in- creases quickly, exclusively immediately after heavy rains. The zone of horizontal circulation can be identified with a phreatic zone, i.e. the area where all the voids are filled with water. This book, however, does not deal with the chemical com- position of karst water, or generally with the chemical agents used in karst in- vestigations on water resources. It should, however, be emphasized that chemical analyses employed in karst investigations are extremely significant, particularly in studying the relationship between waters from the zone of vertical circulation entering the zone of horizontal circulation. Most frequently the chemical com- position of water from the aerated zone of vertical circulation essentially differs from the water content in the zone of flooded karst. This is particularly evident after long dry periods. The zone of siphon circulation is most often found where there is contact between the karst and the sea. This zone has in general been least carefully studied and some authors believe its existence has neither been firmly proved nor does it present important evidence for the explanation of the processes of water circulation in karst. 
The covering soil layer in karst, from the hydrologic point of view, has a limited influence on the formation of the processes of surface, subsurface and groundwater flows. Its existence of absence (without regard to its thickness and distribution) cannot significantly influence the change in the flow characteristics typical for karst. It has been discovered that the covering layer of non-con- solidated soil above carbonate rocks makes chemical erosion stronger. This fact results in a greater number of better developed underground phenomena occur- ring in covered karst when compared to bare karst. The overland flow occurs rare- ly or hardly ever, in the areas of bare karst, whereas in covered karst it occurs regularly after heavy precipitation. This phenomenon can be explained by the essential difference in the infiltration capacity between bare and covered karst. The infiltration capacity of bare karst is great and practically does not decrease in time. In covered karst the infiltration depends upon the permeability features of the non-consolidated covered soil. However, when the water infiltrates through that less permeable layer it comes across a carbonate rock mass which is generally more suitable for water seepage than the rock mass in the bare karst. It is then that the water circulation typical for the karst terrains begins. 
The aerated or vadose zone (Fig. 3.2A) is an area of continuous and quick groundwater level oscillations. The water circulation in the horizontal and vertical direction, as well as its appearance on the surface are primarily influenced by the development of the karstification processes in time, i.e. the process of the develop- ment of the surface and especially underground phenomena. This statement can be illustrated by an example showing the development of a spring location in time. As the base of the karst erosion was lowered in time, so was the location of the spring. The old spring passed from the zone of horizontal circulation into the zone of vertical circulation; it stopped functioning continually, and in time it completely dried up. It became exclusively a karst phenomenon with no special function for transporting water. Most often they become caves, and more rarely jamas (Fig. 3.2B). 
22 Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
soil surface in karst 
vadose zore 
~aximum groundwater evel ggF.osc ra.n:t-M:iter f. l"lill~amtloion arrditud leY", ot, e mnimum grourrlM::rter leve I 
occdsionally occasiornUy vadose phreatic and 
zone 
~eroslon basis n karst 
® 
flysch ® Key: Inactive (fossile) spring f2\ \V r3 Q temp;ll"qry orly dunng spring-active tlocdS 
carborote rocks 
CD r! active permanent karst Sjrt'g 
L grourdNater level 
Fig. 3.2A,B. Phenomena of groundwater in karst. A Vadose and phreatic zone; B historical de- velopment of spring levels in karst 
The base of karst erosion changes constantly and the outflow level, as well as the groundwater level in a wider area, follow these changes, i.e. the spring loca- tion. When considering these phenomena we should distinguish the interest of geology, i.e. interest in the long-lasting evolution processes of karst phenomena in space and time, from the interests of practical engineering disciplines, such as hydrology, which is interested in the present conditions of karst to be applied in engineering practice. It is generally concerned with the construction of a structure to be used by people in a limited period of time, which is insignificant for geologic considerations. The purpose of these investigations is to make these structures function efficiently, ensuring a quick return of the invested financial means. In order to satisfy these requirements the characteristics of karst terrains should be studied in detail, particularly considering the water circulation in them. The best 
Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 23 
unconsolidated soil 
Fig. 3.3. Influence exerted by karst landforms and phenomena on the change in groundwater levels (GWLi) 
way to carry out such investigations is to establish a network of piezometers which can include natural piezometers as well (i.e. karst phenomena - jamas and caves). Figure 3.3 presents the influence of underground karst phenomena on the change in the groundwater level. Various alternatives are so numerous that they are difficult to classify. Consequently, several important data on the groundwater level, obtained by piezometers, should be presented. According to Borelli (1966), the piezometric levels should include the predominant conditions of the ground- water flow in the greater part of the karst rock mass and provide more significant quantitative-qualitative data on the same process than the data on permeability. It should be stressed that the permeability measurements cost a great deal more than the me~surements of the groundwater level by means of piezometers. It does not mean, however, that permeability should not be measured at all in karst ter- rains. Moreover, those measurements are indispensable, particularly in the design and construction of grouting curtains, but they should always be accompanied by groundwater level measurements, and by other types of measurements, primarily performed by geophysical methods. The local characteristics of the karst mass sig- nificantly vary in space; this frequently brings about the fact that some piezometers are influenced by local phenomena and do not display the features of the greater area. Figure 3.3 gives a schematic representation of this phenomenon, whereas Figure 3.4 presents the actual measurements of the groundwater level obtained by five piezometers in the KrCic River Catchment. Evidently all five piezometers show, in general, identical changes of the ground- water level, but those levels are significantly affected by the local characteristics 
24 
[ma.s.l.] 
H Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
3:il.0 
Key. :~ !~J piezometers 330.0 +-----j- --1[5 'Mlter level on the Krcic River at Pregroda 
~QO+---~--~-~--- 
310.0 +---+---+--III IV V VI vn VDl IX X XI xn 
"ti eeriod w~h drying up of the Krcic River surfac flow 
t [months] 
Fig. 3.4. Hydrographs of groundwater levels measured in piezometers in the Krci6 Catchment in 1978 
of the karst mass surrounding each piezometer. Borelli (1966) states that the groundwater level in a piezometer corresponds to the groundwater level surroun- ding it, only if the karst mass is permeable. If the recipient of the piezometer is not entirely separated from ist surroundings, then the groundwater level measure- ments represent an average piezometric level of all the layers through which it had been drilled. Furthermore, it is necessary to mention the frequent occurrences of a great number of suspended layers of groundwater in karst, which represent the function of the position and relation between the permeable and impermeable rocks in karst. Generally speaking, it can be stated that the permeability of the upper layers in karst is greater than the permeability of the lower layers. If this is true, it follows that it takes a shorter time for the piezometers to be filled than to be emptied, and this results in the fact that the groundwater levels shown by piezometers are higher than those occurring in the surrounding karst rock mass. This is particularly true for shorter periods of time with heavy precipitation oc- curring after long dry periods when the groundwater levels are very low. It hap- pens quite often in the karst rock mass that groups of piezometers located in the vicinity do not show identical or stable groundwater levels. This phenomenon can be explained by the fact that the porosity of the karst rock mass is neither homogeneous nor isotropic, and can be additionally caused by the existence of isolating flows or voids with high permeability. 
The most important data obtained by piezometers are those related to extreme water levels, both minimum and maximum ones. The prevailing opinion is that 
Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 25 
the minimum groundwater levels correspond to the height of the isolator location, and consequently are directly related to the change in the level of the erosion basis in karst. According to Borelli (1966), this explanation can be accepted only in special situations, and the minimum groundwater levels represent exclusively the levels reached by the groundwater after long dry periods. The same author, analyzing the data obtained by piezometers in BuSko Blato, discovered the ex- istence of a stable groundwater level near the maximum levels, characteristic for spillways. They can be explained by the existence of a strongly karstified zone through which the water flows with insignificant losses. In the case of BuSko Blato these stable levels are caused by the functioning of the swallow holes situated on the boundaries of the polje. A similar situation was observed and de- scribed by Bonacci (1985) in the Krcic Catchment. Very important data, among those obtained by piezometers, are those related to the maximum velocities of the rising and lowering groundwater level. These data represent an important basis for the permeability analysis of the karst rock mass and its capacity for water storage, which will be discussed in the next chapter. 
Table 3.1 presents essential data on the groundwater levels measured in boreholes in the Cetina Catchment, a typical Dinaric karst river, near the PranceviCi Reservoir. These piezometers are quite deep, about 150 m. Evidently the maximum oscillation amplitude of the groundwater level ranges from 70 to 120 m. The maximum intensities of the groundwater level increase after heavy rains and vary from 1.3 up to 3.2 m h -1 or 36 to 77 m day-1, whereas the maxi- mum intensities of the level decrease in the period of droughts are significantly slower and range from 0.22 to 0.31 mh-1 (5.3 to 7.4mday-1). In the KrCic Catchment, located in the Dinaric karst, northwest of the Cetina Catchment, the maximum intensity of the groundwater level increase ranges from 0.8 to 1. 7 m h -1 (20 to 40 m day -1), whereas the maximum intensity of level decrease varies from 0.25 to 0.60 m h -1 (6 to 14 m day -1); consequently, the values in both cases appear to be similar. 
The complex and consequently complicated features of water circulation in karst make it difficult to either study theoretically the relation water-karst or to exploit wholly the otherwise abundant water resources in karst. Recently, both the investigation methods and the identification of the karst medium structures have developed rapidly together with the advances in the hydrologic, hydrogeologic and 
Table 3.1. Groundwater levels measured in four boreholes in the Cetina Catchment near the Prancevici Reservoir (functioning from February 1977 - July 1979) 
Number of Maximum Minimum Maximum Maximum Maximum boreholes level level amplitude intensity of intensity of 
[m a.s.!.] [m a.s.!.] L1H groundwater groundwater 
[m] level increase decrease [mh- I] [mh- I] 
1 273.11 199.21 73.90 1.99 0.229 2 275.07 203.04 72.03 2.33 0.215 3 274.75 154.47 120.28 3.17 0.306 4 295.39 213.84 81.55 1.34 0.310 
26 Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
~~~___ A Fig. 3.5. Schematization of the space structure for water storage in 
B carbonate rocks. (Drogue 1980) C 
A - upper ( subculoneous) strongly clOcked zone B - blocks with retwork of small voids C - system of channels 
hydrodynamic analyses: hence, the modelling of outflow processes in karst has progressed too. A simple model for the karst structure, applicable in the initial stage, was presented by Drogue (1980): its schematic representation is given in Figure 3.5. He states that when analyzing water flow in karst it is essential to describe, as precisely as possible, by a single schematization, the internal structure of the possibility for water storage in karst. It should be stressed that the spatial distribution of various permeability zones, and hence, their capacity in the karst system occurs almost accidentally and quite irregularly. This fact should not pre- sent a discouragement; on the contrary, it calls for a physically justified schematization of the outflow processes in the karst fissures and channels, and this should make possible a correct mathematical modelling of these processes. Until there is a detailed schematization of the karst medium structure, the outflow processes in karst should be studied only by probability and conceptual simula- tions. Such an approach should be overcome in the future. The scheme of the structure presented in Figure 3.5 ensures only the initial steps of that process. 
In his schematization of the karst medium Drogue (1980) starts from the assumption that the existence of fissures in the carbonate rocks is an essential condition for the development of that medium with regard to the space for water storage, through which it can flow in the vertical or horizontal direction. The car- bonate mass is most karstified in the areas of contact with the surface and just below it, since the water sinking underground in that place has the maximum potential of chemical and physical aggressiveness. The influence of the sub- cutaneous zone in karst and its karstification will be analyzed in detail in the next chapter, and its position in the structure model presented in Figure 3.5 has been designated by A. C expresses the flow in the irregular channel system of karst and B denotes the flow in the cracked blocks with a network of fine fissures. The distinction between the water circulation in those two zones is significant, and it can be schematically presented as in Figure 3.6. During heavy rains, the ground- water levels in the underground channels rise more rapidly than the levels in the surrounding karst mass, thus causing the water to flow from the channels into the karst mass. During long-lasting dry periods the water flows in the opposite direc- tion_ The groundwater levels in the channels are lower and they drain the water from the surrounding karst areas. It should be repeated, however, that the storage capacity of the channel system is small compared with the storage capacity in the network of small fissures. If the fissures are exceptionally small, a layer of 
Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 27 
® roinfo II 1 1 1 1 1 1 
" sia Iv nfi ltrt~ic r-t Id-- I,:!P'':"' I I and \ pe cold ion 
;~~ , cere 
-...... ....-- ~ ~ ~ ~- -- ~ -= tY' Cr ./ 1-6 
\ 
~} 
oose of low water leve I case of high water level 
Fig. 3.6A,B. Water circulation in the karst network of large fissures. A Case of low water level; B case of high water level. (Drogue 1980) 
capillary flow from 0 to 50 cm deep can be formed above the groundwater level. The influence of zones Band C on the outflow in the structural model is repre- sented in Figures 3.7 and 3.8. The differences between the changes in the ground- water levels obtained by two neighbouring piezometers, due to the existence of zones Band C, are also presented. Piezometer T j is located in zone C and it responds rapidly to pumping, whereas piezometer T 2, although close to the other, responds slowly. Figure 3.8 presents the different reactions of the ground- water levels to rainfall of equal intensity in two closely situated piezometers. These different reactions can be explained by their position in the karst mass. The water from both piezometers appears in spring A. While piezometer T 2 is located in the system of developed fissures and channels, ensuring rapid transfer of water to the springs, piezometer T j is situated in a system of small fissures and thus its reaction is slower. This example illustrates the fact that one should be careful when dealing with the velocities of the water circulation in karst. Consequently, the flow and velocity of water circulation in a developed fissure system should be distinguished from that in a system of channels. Drogue (1980) emphasizes that the ratios water velocity-gradient, obtained by numerous measurements, can be 1000 times smaller in a network of fissures than in a system of channels. In order to support the suggested structure model, Drogue (1980) shows the influence of the karst channels with different thermic profiles on two close piezometers, as presented in Figures 3.9. The differences in permeability between zones Band C have direct thermic consequences. In this case the existence of the underground channel and the direct, rapid circulation of cold water have cooled the ground- water in the piezometer. Understandably, the water can be heated locally if the water flowing through the channel is warmer than the water in the surrounding 
28 Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
piezometers 
water pump"ng in the period from t1 tot2 and from t3 tot 4 r 
raturol undergrOlllCl channel 
no roinfoB. in period to to t 4 
/ " 
-.r- pumping -.I':-~--~(I'- pumping -.r 
hydrograph for piezometer lG hydrograph for piezometer l2 
Fig. 3.7 A,B. Differences in changes of groundwater levels B in two piezometers in media of dif- ferent permeability A caused by water pumping of the spring. (Drogue 1980) 
karst mass. The great velocity of the water flow in the system of channels and its short retention in the underground make it impossible for the massive to affect significantly this water by its thermal potential. The model presented by Drogue (1980) did not completely succeed in describing all the complex features of the karst medium functioning and affecting the flow process. Thus, the random ele- ment present in practice is missing. The model has no general significance, but it represents a sound physical basis which should be developed and modified for the actual situation in various types of carbonate reservoirs. 
3.1 Subcutaneous Zone (Epikarstic Zone) 
The Drogue structure model for karst and some earlier sections of this book stress the enormous importance of the surface and immediate subsurface zone (Fig. 3.5A) for the karstification processes and for the water circulation in karst. This first immediate contact between the carbonate mass and atmospheric water is im- portant enough to be carefully studied. The technical term in many languages is subsurface zone, while the English use a more precise term, i.e. subcutaneous zone. 
29 Subcutaneous Zone (Epikarstic Zone) 
Differences in the hydrograph shope depend on their position in the karst massive 
~ ~ ~1<20.0m - 
t 12 ~ 
-- / ) ti-:. spri =-r gA 
-:.-- 
-- ® 
~ piezometers ~ r-------~----~~ t 
Fig. 3.8A,B. Hydrographs of groundwater B in two neighbouring piezometers A caused by the same rain event. (Drogue 1980) 
Williams (1983) describes the role of the aerated and non-saturated sub- cutaneous zone where the water flows vertically and reaches the groundwater level as having the following characteristics: (1) it most often represents a large reser- voir where the water can be stored for a certain period of time; (2) the water flow within the zone, very often displays, particularly after heavy rainfall, a significant lateral component; (3) this relatively narrow zone plays an important role in the groundwater inflow, although its role is often underestimated compared with the role played by the zone located below it and stretching to the groundwater level. It is almost unnecessary to emphasize that the storage features and the lateral component of the water flow in the subcutaneous zone are not even approximate- ly uniformly distributed within the zone. A more precise definition of the sub- cutaneous zone includes a relatively narrow region of an average depth ranging from 0.5 to 2 m, located under the non-consolidated soil (if it exists) at the very top of the non-saturated zone, in the area with the best-developed, current, 
Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
130 13,5 [oc} t 0 12.5 13.0 13.5 [OC} t 1, 
~ 20 "2 
1.0 
7 em] h ® o 10 20 - 
30 1.0 50 
\\ ~ ~ 
, karst 'Mlter circulation 'In kust channel , 60 
h em] 
after long dry perlcds immediately after heavy raintoll -+= ~1<20,Om=t - 
? '\' \ \ \ ~ ~ t;/:: 
'C t--- Piezome0 30 o 125 20 1.0 60 
) ~r~ ng one crocked subcutaneous 11 
U'l 
1 zo ne at lo'Aer crocking 
;Yg/g, 
V- 
karst channel ( zone ot lost water circulation) 
Fig. 3.9A,B. Thermic profile A in two piezometers B dependent on their position in the karst. (Drogue 1980) 
karstification processes. It is, thus, a zone of carbonate rocks, directly affected by climatologic factors. This zone is primarily important for the development and explanation of hydrologic processes, as presented by Drogue's structure model (1980). In geologic and hydrogeologic publications this zone is referred to as an epikarstic zone, used to stress the presence of numerous fissures, channels and tubes used for the rapid water flow or for the temporary storage of water. 
The subcutaneous zone exists practically everywhere, both in bare and covered karst regions. One example is presented in the photograph of a Srinjine Quarry near Split (Dalmatia, Yugoslavia) (Fig. 3.10), and similar situations can be found in any natural or artificial cutting. The photograph shows that the rock cracks are best developed in the top zone ca. 1 m deep. At a distance of every 10 to 50 m there are vertical fissures, reaching a depth of 30 to 90 m. Although this case refers 
Subcutaneous Zone (Epikarstic Zone) 31 
Fig. 3.10. Photograph of a vertical section through the karst massive in the Srinjine, Quarry (taken by Granic) 
to bare karst, all or many of the fissures of the subcutaneous zone, as well as the other vertical fissures, are filled with fertile non-consolidated soil. This area is covered by terra rossa, being the only fertile soil in a wider area, with Mediterra- nean vegetation, very resistant to severe climate, i.e. wind and drought. Williams (1983) explains the origin of this zone primarily by solution. The water sinking underground contains CO2 and this results in the formation of carbonate acid which decomposes carbonate rocks. As the water sinks deeper, the corrosion decreases due to the reduced quantity of CO2 in water. The quantity and depth of chemical and other types of erosion, depend on the quantity of rainfall, its dis- tribution in time, sinking (infiltration and percolation velocity), its composition, the thickness of the soil and rocks, partial pressure of CO2, vegetation and other 
Principles 32 of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
subcutoreous surface potent iometri:: controlled infiltration by rote sil 
soil 
ret water movement 
Olpillary rapid percolation barrier prevents Fig. 3.llA,B. Subcutaneous storage, lateral subsurface flow to zones of high permeability A, and the evolution. of solution dolines B. (Williams 1983) 
parameters. Kogovsek and Rabie (1980) state that in a vertical trickle in the Planinska Cave they discovered that 42 m3 water dissolved ca. 7 kg carbonate rocks during 17 h and transported to the jama 6 kg of suspended matter. These processes are exceptionally strong and they currently change the surface of the karst terrains. Figure 3.11 depicts the influence exerted by the subcutaneous zone on the vertical and lateral water circulation and the formation of sinkholes (Williams 1983). Thus, the important role of the non-consolidated soil gathered in fissures should be stressed, not only considering its influence on chemical ero- sion, but also regarding the regulation of infiltration and percolation, and its functioning as the storage of water on its way to the phreatic zone. The water flow through the subcutaneous zone regulates the water inflow to the caves. This flow essentially differs from the base groundwater sinking, as the water does not flow from the saturated phreatic zone, but from the non-saturated vadose region. 
The previously stated facts make it necessary to analyze the vertical trickle transporting the water in the fastest way and regulating the flow from the sub- cutaneous zone to the karst mass, particularly in the system of caves or 
Subcutaneous Zone (Epikarstic Zone) 
Key' @o observed trickles ;'~~ sinkhole ® ~ - active mults channels :':':-- 'y ~ 33 
plan 
;':7~ 
::~= 
-'I'~ limestone 
® longitudinal cross- section 
URANlt-E 
GO...GOTA 
o 100 200 [m] 
Fig. 3.12A,B. Vertical water percolation in the Planinska Cave (Yugoslavia). A Plane; B Longi- tudinal cross-section through the cave. (Kogovsek and Habic 1980) 
underground karst openings. The problem has been intensively studied on the system of the Postojnska and Planinska Caves by researchers from the Institute for karst investigation SAZU from Postojna, Yugoslavia. Figure 3.12 presents a situation and cross-sectional area of the Planinska Cave with plotted vertical fissures (trickles) used for measuring the water sinking into the jama. This was taken from a paper by Kogovsek and Rabie (1980). These authors tried to deter- mine the manner and velocity of the water sinking, and the precise trajectories of the water flow to the top of the cave vault by tracing methods, using uranin, and by adding water to the sinkhole surface during drought periods. There are permanent and temporary trickles, bringing water only during the rainfall and some time after its cessation. The water quantity delivered by a single trickle was measured in the cave using a measuring glass and a stopwatch; apart from the water quantity, both its temperature and the temperature of the air were mea- sured. The catchment area was determined for each analyzed trickle primarily in 
34 Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
the dry period; these areas are quite small, from several square meters to a maxi- mum of 1000 m2• The drainage system of the trickles is composed of several dif- ferently pervious conductors, where the water could be retained. The drainage systems of neighbouring trickles are mixed with the others. Minimal and maximal discharges of different trickles occur at the rate of 1:100 up to 1:1000 or even 1 :5000. The extent of the drainage system influences the annual trickle capacity; therefore, the annual water quantities of different trickles can occur at the rate of 1:100. This seems to be an essential property of karst surface dissection. The percolation occurring through a ca. 100-m-thick cave ceiling varies considerably in space and in time. In places with continuous water dripping the conditions favour the formation of stalactites. Trickles with greater water quantities result in larger leaks, or have an opposite effect, i.e. the calotte surface is throughly washed off. The flow in smaller trickles is more constant, whereas the flows through the greater ones significantly vary in time. The maximum discharges obtained by measurements reach 15000 I h -1. 
p [mmJ s 6 I ~P=1,5mm 
4 2 0 IJ ~ 
[ haJrs] t 8 16 8 16 
Q [ Ilmin] !1lOO 
~ 4000 
3000 
2000 1000 0 
K ~n 8 16 a 8 16 [rrgO:l~/IJ 
800 
400 0 8 [mgll] 
5 16 BOO 
Fig. 3.13. Measurement data on ~oo precipitation (Q) carbonate hard- ness (K) and concentration of 8 16 a 8 16 suspended sediment (5) on trickle 1 in the Planinska Cave (Yugoslavia). 19. MAY 2). MAY 1978 (Kogovsek and Rabie 1980) 
Subcutaneous Zone (Epikarstic Zone) 35 
Trickles do not respond to all types of precipitation. After long-lasting dry periods, depending on the air temperature and vegetation, the water will manage to sink from the surface to the calotte of the cave only if the rainfall is of the order of 70 mm, whereas in the wet period even the water resulting from rainfall of 5 mm manages to penetrate. These data refer to the significant storage capacity primarily of a subcutaneous zone, and subsequently of the remaining non- saturated part of the massive. The experiments by tracing have efficiently proved that the water flow trajectories are neither vertical nor direct. The trickle hydrograph is smaller than the rainfall pluviograph as presented in Figure 3.13. The same process refers to the concentration of suspended sediment and to car- bonate hardness. Corrosion and erosion directly depend on the quantity of per- colated water, and the karst denudation is by far the greatest below the system of sinkholes situated above jamas. Kogovsek (1982) presents the results obtained by measuring the discharges in trickles 1 and 6 and the respective rainfall quantities. The results are presented in Table 3.2. Evidently, more abundant yearly precipita- tions result in greate,r water quantities. The data related to 1980/81 appear il- logical, since small water quantities result from relatively heavy rainfall. The rea- son why this is so is that the measurement periods cover the time from March to February of the following year. In January and February there was much snow which did not thaw and so this water could not enter the process of infiltration and percolation to the cave vault. It was noted that in 1980/81 about 50% of the total water quantity managed to sink during a very short period, i.e. 55 days. The regularity of the water distribution in time, flowing to the cave vault depends both on the precipitation distribution in time and on the evapotranspiration intensity. Williams (1983) studied the delay in the rise of the level in the small lakes of the Carlsbad Cave resulting from the water percolation through the karst mass ca. 250 m thick. The hydrograph responds to precipitation with a delay of 2 to 14 weeks, thus witnessing the enormous importance of the water storage par- ticularly in the subcutaneous zone. The same author stresses the existence and significance of a capillary barrier at the bottom of the subcutaneous zone. This barrier regulates the percolation into the deeper vadose layers, since the water pressure from subcutaneous storage must exceed surface tension or capillary forces in narrow fissures before percolation can occur, and only in wider fissures are surface tension effects relatively insignificant (Williams 1983). 
Table 3.2. Annual quantities of rainfall and water flowing through trickles 1 and 6 in the Planinska Cave. (Kogovsek 1982) 
Ordinal Year Rainfall Water quantity [m3] Discharge [l h -1] No. 
Trickle 1 Trickle 6 Trickle 1 Trickle 6 
min max min max 
1 1977178 1882 1900 1.2 12000 10 2 1978179 2097 2000 1.2 4200 5 6300 3 1980/81 1976 1100 1100 3 4800 3 6600 
36 Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
3.2 Karstification Depth and Karst Capacity for Water Storage 
The objective of studying the karstification depth and the karst capacity in this book is related to the needs of engineering practice, i.e. in making engineering decisions concerning the possibility and efficiency of using the water resources in an area. Sometimes, the problems deal with the spring intakes, necessity for grouting or other procedures to reduce or even completely eliminate the losses, and sometimes the problem is defined as the formation of a groundwater reser- voir in karst. From the hydrologic standpoint it is always the same problem even- tually related to the necessity of defining the water quantity in space and time. This space is both non-homogeneous and located under the surface. The hydraulic-hydrologic approach has definitely proved to be impractical since it refers to the homogeneous porous media where the water flow is predominantly laminar. To determine the water quantity in the karst underground it is necessary to define the karstification depth and the change in its quantitative values at dif- ferent levels of depth. Unfortunately, this problem cannot be solved by a single scientific discipline; furthermore, it can be stated that an interdisciplinary ap- proach does not succeed in giving a precise solution to the problem even in the simplest cases. The importance of hydrology in solving these problems can be pri- marily stressed in using data on surface flows and springs and when studying the variations of water quantities in time and space, so that they can be properly ex- ploited. 
The problem of karst capacity for water storage has already been dealt with in the literature. Numeric data exist, which all have common characteristics, i.e. they were obtained by different methods and all the authors emphasize that they represent only approximate estimations. We have to accept the fact that the results are approximate and will remain so for a long time. However, by analyzing the methods we can discover possible errors in the estimation of karst capacity and void volume in karst. Primarily, the void volume to be considered in our analysis should be defined. For practical purposes it is most convenient to define the effec- tive porosity ne as the pore values (expressed in percentages) located in the area between the maximum amplitude of the groundwater level oscillations. This definition cannot be accepted, however, without additional comments as il- lustrated in Figure 3.14. The effective porosity should refer to the part of those pores in the karst rock mass from which the air can be pressed out by water and which are found within the area of the maximum amplitude of the groundwater oscillations. It should be noted, however, that a certain quantity of air always re- mains within the massive. This explanation is not quite correct as illustrated by Figure 3.14A. The effective porosity, for engineering practice, should refer to the area of dynamic, stored-water quantities in a natural reservoir, whereas our in- terest in the effective porosity in the zone of static storage should be less impor- tant until these stored quantities become exploited by a structure (e.g. a tunnel or a gourd for siphoning). The situation becomes more complex when the effective porosity has to be defined for the ascending spring as schematically presented in Figure 3.14B. In front of the spring there is a significant impermeable barrier of great thickness. Such a spring is Bulaz in Istra (Yugoslavia). Figure 3.14C il- lustrates the case where there are no static, stored-water quantities. This situation 
37 Karstification Depth and Karst Capacity for Water Storage 
Key' ~ perrnarent karst spring aD temporary karst spring 
wciter of reservoir dynamic an undergrourd storage ® B static storage reservoir wa1e'r .of an underg round ® 
""--Dynamic r'otulOl reservok wier stolOge No stolfc in a storage. 
Fig. 3.14A-c' Explanations connected with the determination of effective porosity. Dynamic and static water storage reservoir, for descending (A) and ascending (B) springs. C Spring without static water storage 
occurs in shallow karst. In order to define the actual maximum amplitude of the groundwater level oscillations, a long series of observations should be carried out (covering at least 50 years). It should be noted, however, that all the previously mentioned facts do not thoroughly explain the problem of effective porosity, since the pore volume filled by water is the function of the dynamic conditions of the water circulation in karst and changes in time, since the karstification processes are still going on simultaneously with the process of colmation. All the previous statements point to the conclusion that all analyses can give only approximate solutions which are, however, precise enough for the needs of engineering practice. The karstification depth varies from one region to another. The existence of karstified rocks was established by borings even at a depth of 2300 m (Milanovic 1981). There is no strict difference between karstified and non-karstified rocks; it is a transitory zone, varying in depth, with no significant sinking below it. This is the definition for the height of the location of the erosion basis, for the karstification base or generally the beginning of the impermeable layer. It has al- ready been stated in the literature that there is an absolute relation of propor- tionality between karstification and depth. It has been confirmed by the following 
38 Principles of Karst Groundwater Circulation 
authors: Milanovic (1981); LeGrand and Springfield (1973); Atkinson (1977); Vlahovic (1983); Drogue (1980); Borelli (1966); Burger and Pasquier (1984) and many others. 
Motyka and Wilk (1984) measured the dimensions of fissures and karst chan- nels in the karstified Triassic rocks in the surroundings of Olkusz in Poland. The measurements included width, length and the spatial orientation of the fissures in the underground mine workings situated 150 m under the surface, as well as the mentioned geometric elements on the surface. The most frequent width equalled 0.2 mm. The maximum values of width decrease with depth. On the sur- face they reach up to 35 mm, and at the depth of 100 m the maximum width is considerably smaller, i.e. it was up to 5 mm, and at a depth of 150 m it was up to 2.5 mm. Motyka and Wilk (1984) defined on the stated location the surface fissure index As, the surface density of fissures Ds and the hydraulic equivalent fissure width bh• The surface fissure index As is expressed in percentages and is defined by the expression: 
As = C~/lib)/A , (3.1) 
where A represents the cross-sectional area of the analyzed karstified rock seg- ment in m2, Ii is the length of a respective fissure in m, bi is the width of the fissure in m, whereas n expresses the total number of fissures in the considered cross-section A. The surface density of fissures Ds is expressed in m -1 and is defined by the expression: 
Ds = C~/I)/A . (3.2) 
The measurement results of the fissure width and length were used for the calcula- tion of the hydraulically equivalent fissure width bh expressed in m, and calculated by the following expression: 
(3.3) 
Table 3.3 presents the range of values for As, Ds' and bh measured in the Triassic carbonate rocks in the Olkusz region (Poland) presented by Motyka and Wilk (1984). 
The dimensions of fissures in karst vary significantly, ranging from the smalles or micro-dimensions to the largest with dimensions reaching up to 100 m. All these fissures serve for the storage and transport of water. In the literature there are numerous classifications with regard to their origin and size. From the stand- point of engineering practice, the main disadvantage of all these classifications is that they are too complex and difficult to apply in practice. Therefore, a simple and more general classification into three categories has been suggested: (1) pore P (pore space); (2) fissure, F; (3) channel, C. The quantitative definition of their dimensions is a very complex problem. Consequently, they can be divided accord- ing to the dimension of the change in the cross-section d. In pores d<0.1 mm, for fissures (0.1mm)~d~(1.0cm) and for channels, the radius is d>1.0cm. 
Karstification Depth and Karst Capacity for Water Storage 39 
Table 3.3. Extreme values of As, Ds and bh observed within the Triassic carbonate rocks of the Olkusz region (Poland) 
Depth below the surface As Ds bh [m] [OJo] [m- I] [m] 
Terrain surface = 0 0.13-4.4 3.95 -15.98 0.23 -14.0 100 0.0046 - 0.30 0.21- 3.58 0.60- 4.48 150 0.070-0.66 2.46-14.68 0.56- 1.03 
Milanovic (1981) suggests an experimental expression as the basic law of karstification development directly proportional to the depth as measured from the surface. It is the following expression: 
e = a'e-bH , (3.4) where e is the karstification index expressed as the dimensionless quantity, H is depth in m measured from the surface, whereas a and b are parameters obtained by processing measurement data on soil permeability using the least squares method. It is an empirical expression valid only on the vertical or in a narrow region for which it has been determined. Milanovic (1981) obtained, forthe area of East Herzegovina (Yugoslavia), some parameters stating that karstification in the 10-m-deep layers is 30 times greater than at a depth of 300 m. Stepinac (1979), using a different approach, i.e. analyzing recession curves, concluded that the ef- fective porosity at a depth of 300 m is 0.57070, whereas at a depth of 10 m, it is 14.18%, i.e. about 25 times greater. He states that these data, as well as thewhole curve, refer to the average condition of the pore volume in the Dinaric karst, assuming the same height of an ideal prism. 
Burger and Pasquier (1984) obtained the results on the change in the filtration coefficient k expressed in m s -1 and measured at different points in the function of various depths. These measurements were carried out in the Swiss Jura near Neuchatel. The results are presented in Figure 3.15. Evidentlyk changes depen- ding on the location, and the filtration coefficient decreases to a certain depth (150-300 m), and subsequently remains the same. Karstification can be qualitati- vely determined in many ways, but the actual quantitative values of the effective porosity are obtained only after laborious processes. The permeability studies, no matter how complex and expensive, do not yield either reliable data ora quan- titative presentation of the porosity condition of a region. 
The karst medium is very heterogeneous and most surprising. It displayed such characteristics also during the excavation of the Zakucac 2 Tunnel in the Cetina River Catchment (Yugoslavia). Bojanic et al. (1980) report that, along the stretch of 8.5 km, six large speleologic phenomena have been investigated, whereas some smaller ones have not been studied at all; instead, they were filled by concrete. Figure 3.16 presents two greater caverns on one of the tunnel profiles, stretching from the new to the old tunnel, used to discover damage onthe old tun- nel lining. The previously described situation is not rare in the Dinaric karst. 