Land Use Policy and Practice on Karst Terrains 



Spencer Fleury 


Land Use Policy and Practice 
on Karst Terrains 

Living on Limestone 

123 



Dr. Spencer Fleury 
645 11th Avenue North 
St. Petersburg, Florida 33701 
USA 
spencer.fleury@gmail.com 

ISBN 978-1-4020-9669-3 e-ISBN 978-1-4020-9670-9 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9670-9 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009920098 
c

© 
Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009 
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording 
or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception 
of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered 
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. 

Printed on acid-free paper 

987654321 

springer.com 


Acknowledgments 


I would like to take this opportunity to thank several individuals whose help 
was instrumental in writing this book and the Ph.D. dissertation it was based 
on. They are Alin Mos, of the Apuseni Natural Park; Jim Rebmann, formerly 
of Lexington-Fayette County Urban Government; Dawn Velsor, of the Hernando 
County Planning Department; Percy Doughtery, formerly of Kutztown University; 
Todd Chavez, of the University of South Florida library; the Karst Research Group at 
the University of South Florida and in particular group members Jason Polk, Leslie 
North and Grant Harley; Dr. Bogdan Onac; Dr. Philip Reeder; Dr. Elizabeth Strom; 
Dr. Graham Tobin; and Dr. Robert Brinkmann. 

Special recognition and thanks go to my parents, who instilled in me a love of 
reading and learning, and to my wife Ann, without whose support none of this would 
have been possible. 


Preface 


At its core, this book is about understanding what happens when karst systems 
and human systems overlap, and what we can do to control the outcome of those 
cross-system interactions. Some of the social science disciplines—geography and 
economics in particular—have theoretical underpinnings that predict karst-related 
land use regulations are likely to have particular impacts on certain aspects of human 
systems, like housing densities or overall economic health. But does any of that 
actually happen? Can we identify and quantify any examples? And if so, are these 
impacts significant enough that land use planners and policymakers should consider 
them during the regulation writing and implementation process? 

In writing this book, I’ve tried to put together a solid overview of how land use 
regulations are used to control and regulate human activity on karst lands in the 
United States, what some of their actual impacts seem to be, and to draw upon that 
information to propose a generally applicable framework for the development of 
karst regulation. In the chapters that follow, I will describe how karst systems work 
and the ways in which human activity can interfere with them; I will explore the 
various regulatory techniques used to manage land use in karst areas throughout the 
United States; I will examine the thoughts and experiences of the planners who work 
with these regulations every day; I will describe some real-world examples of how 
karst aware land use regulations have impacted the cities and towns that use them; 
and finally, I will propose a basic framework by which we can better understand 
karst land use regulations. 

Contributing to the development of this framework is the main goal of this book. 
It will be built upon the data collected and the conclusions discussed in the following 
chapters and is intended to provide a description not just of the inputs and processes 
that go into developing karst regulations and ordinances, but also a broad examination 
of the ways in which various inputs interact and the effect those interactions 
have on the form that these regulations ultimately take. Since this is the first attempt 
to develop this sort of framework, it is best understood as a starting point in the 
process of creating a more detailed and refined model of the karst policy creation 
process. 

It’s true that a policy-based approach won’t necessarily keep thoughtless people 
from pouring out their used motor oil in or around sinkholes. Certainly, individual 
behavior is more likely to be affected by education and public relations than 


viii Preface 

by books on land use policy. My hope in writing this book is to contribute to a 
big-picture understanding of how myriad factors in the karst land use regulation 
process impact the human systems that choose to implement them. Because the 
potential audience for this book ranges from the academic and scientific community 
to working land use planners, some of the more technical aspects of karst systems 
are either simplified or not discussed herein. This decision was made in the interests 
of simply communicating the concepts underlying my research to a wider professional 
audience, and because there are several authoritative, technically-oriented 
sources for information on karst and karst systems already available. Should you 
wish to read a more technical explanation of how karst works, I suggest you begin 
with either White’s Geomorphology of Karst Terrains (1988), or Ford and 
Williams’ Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology (2007). 

Tampa, Florida S. Fleury 


Contents 


1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues ............................ 1 
KarstAquifers:Fragile,ThreatenedandVital ......................... 1 
WhatIsKarst? ................................................... 2 
KarstLandscapes:AnIntroduction.................................. 5 
Sinkholes(Dolines)............................................. 6 
CavesandCaverns.............................................. 7 
Springs ....................................................... 8 
Poljes ........................................................ 9 
KarstValleys .................................................. 9 
SwallowHoles................................................. 9 
ResidualHills.................................................. 9 
CockpitKarst.................................................. 10 
Cone-and-TowerKarst .......................................... 10 
TheGeographicalDistributionofKarstLandscapesandLandforms....... 10 
IssuesofHuman–KarstInteraction .................................. 11 
Subsidence .................................................... 12 
GroundwaterContamination ..................................... 13 
CavesandEcosystem/HabitatDamage............................. 15 
References ...................................................... 16 


2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains ............. 19 
ExamplesofCommonlyUsedRegulatoryTools....................... 20 
ZoningOrdinances ............................................. 20 
SubdivisionOrdinances ......................................... 20 
StormwaterManagementOrdinances.............................. 21 
Setbacks ...................................................... 21 
ComprehensivePlans ........................................... 21 
State-LevelCaveProtectionLaws................................. 22 
ExamplesofPolicy-BasedApproachestoKarstProtection ............ 23 
AppalachianBelt(Virginia,Pennsylvania,Maryland,NewYork, 
NewJersey,EasternTennesseeandEasternKentucky) ............... 24 
Southeast(Florida,Georgia,SouthCarolina)........................ 28 



Contents 

South-central (Kentucky, Tennessee, Northern Alabama, Missouri) . . . . . 31 
Great Lakes (Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Ohio) . . . . . . 33 
TheWest...................................................... 36 
Summary ....................................................... 39 
References ...................................................... 40 

3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst .43 
SurveyResults:HowPlannersThinkAboutKarst ..................... 44 
LocationofRespondentsandFamiliaritywithKarst.................. 44 
Characteristics of the Local Karst and the Nature of Karst-Related Issues 45 
The Regulations Themselves: Components, Restrictiveness and Goals . . 46 
The Implementation Process: Stakeholders, Time, and Other Factors . . . . 47 
Expected Outcomes and Actual Outcomes of Karst Regulation . . . . . . . . . 48 
Appropriateness and Effectiveness of Regulating Development on Karst . 50 
AMoreDetailedAnalysisoftheResults ............................. 51 
TheMeaningof“Restrictive” .................................... 51 
Goals, Effectiveness and the Potential for Improvement . . . . . .......... 52 
How the Extent of the Local Karst Affects Choice 
ofRegulatoryTechnique......................................... 54 
Preventative or Reactive Implementation and Regulatory Restrictiveness 55 
Initiatorsvs.Restrictiveness...................................... 56 
The Influence of Non-elected Professionals vs. Regulatory Restrictiveness 58 
ExpectedOutcomesvs.PropensitytoRegulate...................... 59 
Summary: What Planners Can Tell Us About Karst Land Use Regulation . . 62 
References ...................................................... 62 

4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities that 
Implement Them – a Pair of Case Studies .......................... 63 
Case Study One: The Impact of Sinkhole Setbacks in Kentucky and 
Missouri ........................................................ 64 
How These Four Cities Approach Issues of Karst and Land Use . . . . . . . . 65 
Determining the Relationship Between Sinkhole and Structural Densities 67 
RunningtheNumbers........................................... 68 
WhatAllTheseNumbersMean................................... 72 
Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst 
Regulations: Does It Pay Off? A Case Study from Pennsylvania ......... 73 
South-centralPennsylvaniaandItsKarst ........................... 74 
Land Use Regulation in Pennsylvania and How Karst Relates . . . . . . . . . . 77 
StrategicBehaviorandLandUseRegulation........................ 81 
Running the Numbers: Is Strategic Behavior Good Strategy? .......... 84 
References ...................................................... 88 

5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings ....................... 91 
TheBrooksvilleRidgeCave........................................ 92 
TheLandscapeoftheBrooksvilleRidge ........................... 92 



Contents 

EffortstoDeveloptheLandandtoProtecttheCave.................. 93 
HowHernandoCounty’sGroundwaterResourceProtectionOrdinance 
GovernsLandUse.............................................. 96 
Assessment.................................................... 98 
TheApuseniNaturalPark(Romania)andtheDevelopmentofaProtected 
AreaStrategy.................................................... 99 
TheApuseniNaturalPark .......................................100 
TheProtectedAreaApproach:AnOverview........................102 
HowProtectedAreaPlansWorktoProtectKarstResources ...........103 
YorkshireDalesNationalPark:AnExampleofAnotherApproachto 
ProtectedAreaManagement .....................................104 
DoestheProtectedAreaApproachActuallyWork? ..................106 
TheManagementPlanforApuseniNaturalPark.....................108 
ThreatsandSolutions .............................................109 
GrowingTourismandProtectingtheNaturalEnvironment:AreThey 
MutuallyExclusive? ............................................112 
AuthorityandAttitudes..........................................115 
How the Apuseni Experience Relates to Karst Regulations 
inMunicipalities ...............................................117 
References ......................................................118 

6 
Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations .......121 
KarstSystems,HumanSystems,andWhereTheyMeet.................125 
Inputs ..........................................................126 
Outcomes .......................................................131 
PossibleFutureDirections .........................................134 
References ......................................................135 


Appendix 

A 
A Glossary of Karst Terminology ..................................137 


B 
Results of a Survey of Land Use Professionals Working in Karstic 
Areas of the United States ........................................139 

Color Plates ........................................................153 


Index ..............................................................185 



Chapter 1 
Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

Abstract Karst systems are often extremely sensitive to the nature of human activities 
taking place on the surface. Pollutants and contaminants can wash into karst 
landforms and downward through cracks and fissures in the hard carbonate bedrock, 
rapidly entering the aquifer below. Because so much of the world’s population (some 
sources estimate as much as 25%) draws drinking water from karstic aquifers, there 
is a significant incentive to understand and develop land use regulations that work to 
prevent the inadvertent contamination of groundwater supplies in karst landscapes. 
This chapter acts as an introduction to the topic, describing the processes by which 
karst features form, identifying several of the most common karst landform types, 
and providing examples of instances in which careless or unmanaged human–karst 
interaction had negative results. 

Keywords Groundwater · Aquifer contamination · Land use policy · Karst 
processes · Human–karst interaction 

Karst Aquifers: Fragile, Threatened and Vital 

Hundreds of years ago in western Ireland, the local population turned to deforestation 
as a fuel source to drive its growing metalworking industry. Their aggressive 
approach to cutting down trees had the unforeseen consequence of clogging—and 
eventually drying up—the local aquifer. As a result, this once-productive landscape 
quickly turned into a scarred and barren wasteland (Back 1983). 

Something similar happened several centuries later and half a world away. During 
the 20th century, southwestern China underwent an intensive process of industrialization. 
For decades, hundreds of factories there have discharged severe pollution 
into the air, toxins that eventually fall out of the air and collect on the ground and in 
surface waters. The pollution from these factories was bad enough to strip most vegetation 
from the landscape; here, too, rainwater was unable to seep into the aquifer 
and recharge it on a regular basis. It soon suffered the same fate as the western Irish 
aquifer (Back 1983). 

S. Fleury, Land Use Policy and Practice on Karst Terrains, 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9670-9 1, C
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009 


2 1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

In the Yucatan Peninsula, Spanish explorers brought with them the technology 
to extract groundwater from very deep wells. This made it easier to settle and tame 
the lands further from the coast, which in turn attracted more and more new settlers. 
Eventually, water-intensive agricultural practices (like growing sugarcane and 
hemp) grew to become a key cog in the local economy. All this environmental 
stress over all these years was simply too much for the landscape to bear, and 
as a result, by the early 1900s the aquifer had become a “virtual sewer” (Back 
1983). 

In Allentown, Pennsylvania, in 1979, the bottom of an industrial retention pond 
crumbled and gave way, dumping the pond’s contents directly into the local aquifer 
(Memon and Azmeh 2001). The same thing happened at a golf course in Pinellas 
County, Florida, in 1988 (USGS 1999). Both of these retention ponds were located 
directly above sinkholes; fortunately, in both cases the actual damage to the aquifer 
was manageable. 

What do all these incidents have in common? Each resulted from inappropriate 
land use practices in karst terrains, and each could probably have been mitigated 
or avoided completely if the people living there had used a bit more foresight and 
care when deciding how to use those lands. Of course, in medieval Ireland and 
18th-century Mexico, nobody knew anything about karst landscapes or what could 
happen when those landscapes are subjected to the stresses of human-driven change. 
Nor is it likely that local peoples clearly understood the relationship between land 
use practices and local environmental health to begin with. 

Still, these incidents provide a stark lesson in the dangers of inappropriate land 
use practices in karst terrains and an example of just how serious the environmental 
consequences can be. Unfortunately, these same problems seem to keep coming 
up again and again. For example, the karst resources in the Apuseni Natural Park, 
located in northwestern Romania, are threatened by aggressive deforestation, among 
other things. The park has recently implemented a management plan that spells out 
methods for protecting these resources, but the Romanian park service is subordinate 
to the national forestry service, which wants to maximize the return on the 
forest stands in the park. The park’s caves (caves are perhaps the best known and 
most visually arresting type of karst landform) and aquifer are already threatened 
by the growing interest in nature tourism there; cutting down too many trees could 
ruin them completely. 

What Is Karst? 

The term karst is used to describe a specific type of landscape. Karst landscapes 
form under a specific combination of geological conditions, precipitation, and temperature. 
When rainwater seeps downward through the topsoil, it picks up carbon 
dioxide from the decaying organic matter found there and becomes a weak carbonic 
acid. In places with hard carbonate bedrocks (limestone is the most common, 
but other possibilities include dolomite and gypsum), the hardness of the bedrock 
prevents this acidic solution from seeping into it and, over the course of months 


What Is Karst? 

or years, making its way into the aquifer, all the while undergoing a slow filtration 
process that naturally removes many contaminants picked up on the surface. Instead, 
the carbonic acid seeks out cracks and crevices in the bedrock, where a chemical 
reaction occurs and the bedrock is slowly eaten away. Eventually, this process 
widens these cracks and crevices to the point where they become caves, sinkholes, 
or springs. Because these landforms develop by widening gaps in the bedrock, they 
can eventually grow large enough to act as direct pathways from the surface to 
the aquifer. Any surface water washed into these landforms can make its way into 
the groundwater in a matter of minutes, carrying with it a full load of toxins and 
contaminants collected from streets, parking lots, industrial sites, or landfills (White 
1988; Ford and Williams 2007). 

If one were to randomly pick a hundred people off the street and ask them what 
karst is, the vast majority—maybe even all of them—would probably not be able 
to answer. But karst landscapes are actually very common. Numbers vary when 
it comes to estimating how much of the world is actually karstic: Williams (1993) 
places the figure at 25% of the earth’s surface; White et al. (1995) put the worldwide 
figure at 20% of the earth’s dry land surface, including fully 40% of the United 
States east of the city of Tulsa, Oklahoma. Regardless of whose estimate is more 
accurate, it is clear that hundreds of millions of people worldwide live and rely on 
karst landscapes. 

Still, karst and karst-related issues are frequently overlooked by the general pub-
lic, including those who live in heavily karstified areas and are most likely to suffer 
consequences from inappropriate (or even irresponsible) land use decisions. Many 
of these karst landscapes are found in urbanized areas, where they face a much 
higher likelihood of impacts from human activities. For one thing, karst aquifers are 
often used as sources of drinking water, not only for people who live on the karst 
lands themselves, but also for people who live nearby and lack convenient access 
to other water sources—some estimates say that 25% of all human beings get their 
water from karst aquifers (Ford and Williams 2007). Water from karst aquifers is 
also frequently used for industrial and agricultural purposes, making it an important 
input into many local or regional economies. But because of the specific physical 
characteristics of karst, these aquifers are particularly susceptible to contamination 
or other human-driven damage. Naturally, this can have severe effects on drinking 
water supplies; sometimes, it can even leave the water useless for industrial and 
agricultural purposes. 

There are also other important karst-related issues that are not necessarily tied 
directly to groundwater quality. Pumping too much groundwater from a karst 
aquifer too quickly can by itself lead to new sinkhole formation and land subsidence, 
which has the potential to cause significant property damage and occasionally 
even threaten human life. And karst landforms—especially caves—offer 
a wealth of information for a wide range of scientific disciplines (geology, geomorphology, 
biology, climatology, etc.). When caves suffer damage, the ability of 
scientists to conduct new research in these and other fields is hindered; the fact 
that it often comes as the result of careless land use practices makes it all the 
more tragic. 


4 1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

In the end, the issue is a simple one: karst landscapes are simultaneously valuable 
and fragile, and humans have a long history of damaging or destroying karst systems 
by pushing the landscape’s ability to support human activity to the breaking point 
and beyond (Back 1983). It helps to think of karst landscapes as systems, each 
with a specific set of conditions required to maintain equilibrium. Similarly, human 
societies can be seen the same way, as systems with their own equilibrium 
conditions. Because these systems often interact with each other, changing one 
variable—surface water runoff paths, for example—in one system can easily bring 
dramatic change to the other system. Unless we are prepared to intervene through 
the regulatory process in this interaction of systems, one or both of them may soon 
wind up unable to maintain equilibrium, resulting in environmental degradation. 

In the United States, it’s not hard to find examples of land use or other human 
activities that pose a potential danger to karst systems, especially in densely populated, 
urbanized karst landscapes. Many jurisdictions impose some limitations on 
how land may be used in the vicinity of karst landforms. Sometimes these restrictions 
are serious enough to prevent, or at least hinder, inappropriate development. 
But more often, they are minor, even negligible, and seem less likely to have any 
noticeable or meaningful impact on land use patterns. That should not be surprising, 
since unique local conditions often play a major role in shaping the details of 
land use regulation. Different places face differences in the availability of data or 
specialized technical knowledge, differences in local political climates and priorities, 
and differences in the extent of the karst systems in question. Places without 
a strong tradition of land use regulation might also be hampered by the absence 
of a generally accepted approach to developing karst-related land use regulation 
or the lack of a comprehensive understanding of how karst land use regulation 
works. As a result, local governments and other regulating entities in karst terrains 
are usually left to their own devices to create the appropriate tools for regulating 
land use and development. This is not a problem in cities and towns that 
have the expertise to do it, but not all municipalities do, making it more difficult 
to develop regulations that are both appropriate and effective. There’s also the issue 
of duplicating effort and wasting resources, when perfectly serviceable regulations 
from other cities, towns and counties are available to borrow and adapt as 
necessary. 

As with any form of land use regulation, efforts to introduce karst-related restrictions 
on land use and development are likely to run into serious resistance. One 
of the most likely sources of this resistance is the community of land speculators 
and developers who believe that any impediments to new construction cost them 
money. In some cases, these people have considerable influence over the process 
of writing and implementing new regulations, but that is far from a universal truth. 
Regardless of whether or not the construction industry has the clout to block what 
they consider to be onerous new regulation, it is a good idea for any new regulatory 
scheme to be (a) appropriate for the karst system and (b) as unobtrusive as possible 
for the people who live there. Of course, the latter requirement is more important 
in urbanized karst areas than in protected areas like national parks, which generally 
have low population densities. 


Karst Landscapes: An Introduction 

Karst Landscapes: An Introduction 

Karst landscapes form in areas with carbonate bedrock. Over time, the bedrock is 
subjected to slow dissolution processes caused by a particular combination of temperature, 
chemistry and soil acidity. This process typically results in the formation 
of visible surface and subsurface features, including sinkholes, caves, and springs. 
In karst terrains, water is the main agent of landscape change; the role of mechanical 
erosion processes is much less significant (White 1988; Palmer 2007; Ford and 
Williams 2007). 

It is important to remember that this water must be slightly acidic in order for 
any karst processes to take place. Surface water can turn into a weak carbonic acid 
solution as it seeps through the topsoil and picks up carbon dioxide left by decaying 
biological material. When this acidic water comes into contact with the carbonate 
bedrock, it seeks out the cracks and fissures in the rock, which are then gradually 
widened as the calcite reacts with the carbonic acid. This reaction can take as long as 
several minutes to begin, depending on specific site conditions like temperature and 
acidity; when it does occur, most of the water’s dissolution potential is spent over 
the space of just a few meters (Palmer 2007; Dreybrodt 2004; Dreybrodt 1988). 
Once dissolution of the bedrock begins, a network of grooves and clefts forms on 
the bedrock’s surface and enables the surface water to descend more quickly into 
the subsurface, where it expends the remainder of its dissolution potential in the 
bedrock’s joints and fractures. Dissolution conduits then form along these fractures, 
which grow larger as more of this slightly acidic water continues to drain into them 
(Fig. 1.1). This is a long-term process, generally requiring thousands of years to 
produce an opening in the bedrock extending for 100 m or more. These gaps in 
the bedrock can then serve as a collector for insoluble surface material washing 
through the drain, leading to the formation of a sinkhole (White et al. 1995; Ford 
and Williams 2007; White 1988). 

All karst landscapes do not look alike. At first glance, the sinkhole plains of 
the central United States or the Burren Karst of western Ireland would appear to 
have little in common with the spectacular cone-and-tower karst found in places 
like southwestern China and the Caribbean; yet all of these landscapes were carved 
via the same processes. Certainly, the actual physical form taken by karst features 
in any location is highly dependent on specific local conditions. While some karst 
landforms (for example, canyons, gorges and cliffs) can be quite spectacular and 
imposing, the landforms at the center of this book generally have a lower profile— 
both physically and in the minds of most people—than landforms like mountains, 
flood plains and rivers. Most karst landscapes lack the viewshed provided by these 
landforms—a sinkhole plain is interesting enough in its own right, but it can’t 
compete with the visual impact of an Alpine vista, for example. This hard truth 
may actually be a factor in the regulatory process: i.e., a lack of widespread public 
awareness of or interest in karst landforms may translate into a lack of political will 
to regulate nearby development and land use. 

Issues of land use regulation in karst terrain are nothing more than issues of 
human–karst interaction. In order to fully understand these, it helps to have a basic 


6 1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

Water 
Carbonate 
bedrock 
Overburden/topsoil 
Pollutants wash 
down sinkhole 
Fig. 1.1 A karst system (not to scale) 

understanding of the most common karst landforms: what they are, where they form, 
and why they form where they do. An understanding of the land itself is a critical 
part of developing sensible rules for controlling the use of that land. 

Sinkholes (Dolines) 

Wells draw out 
groundwater and lowers 
water table 

Drop in hydrostatic pressure leads to 
collapse sinkhole formation 

Surface water pipes 
sediment downward and 
forms subsidence sinkhole 

Sinkholes (usually called dolines outside North America) are an extremely common 
type of karst landform, created by the subsidence of soils and rock at or near the land 


Karst Landscapes: An Introduction 

surface into empty spaces below. Sinkholes are often located in areas where soluble 
rock is near the surface, either completely exposed or beneath a layer of topsoil. In 
order for a sinkhole to form in the first place, there are three requirements: a drainage 
path for the surface water runoff to follow; a zone of bedrock modified by solution 
located at or near the surface; and a covering of soil or some other material making 
up the land surface (this last is not an absolute requirement; when that cover is 
absent, certain types of sinkholes can still form). Sinkhole development can then be 
triggered by “any mechanism that increases the head differential between the artesian 
water in the limestone and the perched water in the surface sands (Beck 1986),” 
because the downward flow and downwashing of sediment are both increased as 
well. The resulting depressions tend to have the shapes of bowls or funnels. There 
is no “standard” sinkhole size, with diameters ranging from 1 to 1000 m. Sinkhole 
depths of several hundred meters have been reported; however, depths of less than a 
meter are far more common (Ford and Williams 2007; Palmer 2007; White 1988). 

There is no universal method of sinkhole formation, and the different formation 
processes produce sinkholes with very different surface characteristics. Some form 
slowly in spots where the bedrock is actually exposed at the surface (these sinkholes 
may eventually become lakes if their drains are plugged). Others form much more 
rapidly—in as little as a few hours—and come about through sudden collapse (some 
of the most spectacular sinkholes in the world formed this way: Xiaozhai tinakeng, 
in southwestern China, is a collapse sinkhole that is over 500 m deep and 600 m 
across, and other impressive examples of large-scale collapse sinkholes can be found 
in Papua New Guinea and Croatia); the surface collapses when enough of the clayey 
topsoil has been washed away. Within these two broad groups, geologists, geomorphologists 
and other earth scientists make distinctions between sinkhole types based 
on factors like the depth and the composition of surface material. It is not necessary 
for us to understand the distinctions at that level (Waltham and Fookes 2003). 

With some exceptions, sinkholes are generally not large or spectacular landforms. 
However, they are important to understand in the context of karst systems 
because they act as recharge routes for the aquifer below. The fact that surface water 
receives no natural filtering when entering a karst aquifer via a sinkhole means that 
contaminants on the surface are easily carried into the groundwater (White 1988; 
USGS 1999). This issue is explored in greater detail later; for now, suffice it to say 
that it offers a compelling argument for more stringent management of land uses in 
the vicinity of sinkholes. 

Caves and Caverns 

It might come as a surprise to learn that the exact definition of the word “cave” is 
actually a topic of some debate in some disciplines of the earth sciences. However, 
the generally accepted definition is that a cave is a natural opening in the earth that 
is large enough to be entered by a human (White 1988; Gillieson 1996; Palmer 
2007). Not all caves are formed via the exact karst processes described earlier: 
some underground caves—like, for example, Carlsbad Caverns in Carlsbad, New 


8 1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

Mexico—formed instead by a solution process involving sulphuric acid. Regardless 
of how a cave forms, there is no guarantee that any surface opening will be 
created—in fact, it is statistically and logically likely that there is a large class of 
caves that have no entrances at all (of course, under the generally accepted definition 
of caves, these would not actually be caves because of the inability of humans 
to enter them). When they do appear, cave entrances do not have to be related to 
the solution processes that formed the cave in the first place. Sinkhole collapse, 
connection to well-developed vertical shafts in the bedrock, human excavation, and 
the random generation of upward-sloping cave passages are common ways in which 
a cave entrance can form; however, thick soil covers can prevent entrances of these 
types from forming (White 1988; Palmer 2007). 

The size and length of caves vary widely. However, the fact that a cavern narrows 
to the point where humans can no longer explore it does not mean that the karst 
drainage system ends there as well. Water draining through caves will continue 
through these passage terminations, sometimes to a spring outlet (Ritter et al. 1995). 

Cave protection is important because of the twin scientific roles played by caves: 
they provide records of earth’s paleoclimate, and they are ecosystems unto themselves. 
A cave’s speleothems (also known as stalactites and stalagmites) often contain 
enough uranium to calculate their ages, and the oxygen isotopes they contain 
mean they can also offer tantalizing information about the local temperature over 
the geologic timescales it took for them to form. This climate information is highly 
localized and can be dated from speleothems with a good deal of precision and accuracy 
(Palmer 2007). Ecosystems not found elsewhere are able to develop in caves 
because of their extremely stable, long-term environmental and climatic conditions; 
when cave degradation occurs as the result of contact with point source or dispersed 
pollution sources, these fragile ecosystems are often damaged or destroyed. Even 
changes to the environment or landscape outside a cave can have severe consequences 
within the cave. For example, paving the land above a cave will almost 
always reduce the total amount of water passing through the karst drainage system 
or redirect it through new drainage routes, and the installation of nearby toilet facilities 
for tourists can result in bacterial contamination of waters that sustain the cave’s 
ecosystem. However, careful planning and modern cave management techniques can 
help mitigate the damage caused to caves by activities like these (Gillieson 1996). 

Springs 

Springs are formed at the spots where karst waters emerge from the local underground 
drainage system. They can be found on the surface or in caves and are often 
used as sources of drinking water and as recreation areas. Spring formation is a 
direct result of carbonate rock dissolution, creating large conduits and caves that 
can then channel groundwater up to the land surface. Sinkholes and springs are 
closely related phenomena; in fact, many of Florida’s 320 springs—including major 
springs like Silver Springs and Homosassa Springs—were originally sinkholes that 
became springs as sea level rose. Springs can serve as hydrological trend indicators 


Karst Landscapes: An Introduction 

and are very stable in terms of water quality, temperature and flow, though even 
short-term variation in rainfall can be reflected by a spring’s flow. Large withdrawals 
of groundwater nearby can have serious impact on spring flow, including stopping 
it completely (B¨

ogli 1980; Field 2002; Berndt et al. 1998). 

Poljes 

Poljes—the largest karst hollows—are wide, closed depressions with flat floors, 
which are often adjacent to steep enclosing walls. They require extremely thick and 
geographically extensive carbonate bedrock to form at all. This is due to their size: 
the Likapolje in Croatia, for example, measures 700 km2 in area. Poljes are scattered 
throughout the world, but the vast majority are found in the area once occupied by 
Yugoslavia. They have their own internal drainage systems and often have complex 
hydrogeological characteristics, including swallow holes and disappearing streams. 
They are frequently used for farmland and tend to flood at least once a season. 
These floods can be severe, to the point where the entire polje floor becomes a 
lake. Flooding can sometimes be controlled and used for purposes of irrigation or 
hydroelectric power (B¨ogli 1980; Field 2002). 

Karst Valleys 

Karst valleys form when a developing underground drainage system diverts water 
away from the rivers feeding into the valley. A karst valley has all the properties of 
a stream valley except the stream itself. Karst valleys are more common in areas of 
flat, interbedded layers of limestone, sandstone and shale (White 1988). 

Swallow Holes 

Also known as ponors, swallow holes are the point at which a sinking stream heads 
underground. Swallow holes are surface drainage features that direct runoff into 
an underground channel—in other words, they are sinkholes that form in a stream 
bed, often with a large vertical shaft beneath. In poljes, the original swallow holes 
are often dry, but still act as a conduit to the karst aquifer (B¨

ogli 1980; Ford and 
Williams 2007). 

Residual Hills 

These can sometimes be found where thick layers of limestone are exposed on hillsides. 
Runoff may carve drainage pathways out of the side of one of these hills, 
as it is a more efficient method of transporting the water to the hill’s base. These 
pathways can take the form of vertical shafts, solution chimneys or even open joints 
or fractures (White 1988). 


10 1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

Cockpit Karst 

Cockpit karst landscapes are generally found in thick limestone, usually in tropical 
climes—the most notable cockpit landscapes are found in Jamaica and on the Indonesian 
island of Java. Cockpit landscapes can be quite wide, with diameters of 
a kilometer or more, and will sometimes grow large enough to develop subsidiary 
channel systems (Day and Chenoweth 2004). 

Cone-and-Tower Karst 

Cone-and-tower karst is closely related to cockpit karst. These landscapes typically 
evolve from residual hills and have almost completely vertical sides, as well as a 
distinct uniformity of size: at Gunung Sewu in Java, for example, most hills are close 
to 50 m high. Deep pits can often be found at the top of these hills; in some cases, 
high concentrations of caves can also be found. They are found primarily in tropical 
regions, like Cuba, Puerto Rico, South China, Vietnam, and New Guinea, usually in 
areas where karst processes have been underway for a considerable amount of time 
(White 1988; Field 2002). 

The Geographical Distribution of Karst Landscapes 
and Landforms 

Some karst landforms are far more likely to appear in certain places than in others. 
This is because local climatic and geographical conditions are major determinants 
of which types of karst landforms, if any, will develop in a given location. Evidence 
of this can be seen in worldwide patterns of geographic distribution of karst 
landforms. 

Limestone regions are found throughout the world, at all latitudes and in every 
climate. However, presence of limestone bedrock does not necessarily mean that a 
karst landscape has developed or will ever develop there. Karst regions are much 
more likely to develop in temperate regions and tropical zones; examples include 
the karst regions of the eastern United States, the Yucatan Peninsula area of Mexico 
and Central America, western Cuba, and parts of Southeast Asia and Indonesia. 

Why doesn’t karst form in polar regions? Simply put, because it is just too cold 
there. In order for karst landscapes to develop, there must be water that contains 
dissolved carbon dioxide. Ambient temperature is a major influence on the ability 
of water to dissolve carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, with colder water having a 
greater potential to carry carbon dioxide in solution. On its own, this would suggest 
that karst landscapes would be more likely to develop in polar zones than tropical 
zones. However, soils in warmer areas can produce more carbon dioxide than colder 
soils, which more than cancels out the advantages of cold water’s CO2-carrying 
capacity. 


Issues of Human–Karst Interaction 

Karst landforms will not develop in areas without adequate precipitation, regardless 
of climate. However, inactive karst formations are often found in arid areas, 
suggesting these dry places had wetter climates in the past. That said, it should be 
kept in mind that chemical solution of carbonate rocks is a complex process, so 
much so that it makes climate-based prediction of karst outcroppings difficult and 
unreliable (Ford and Williams 2007). 

Global and regional distributions of karst landforms can therefore be explained 
by the presence of limestone and by certain temperature-related parameters. How, 
then, can we explain the local distribution of karst landforms? As it turns out, that 
question is a bit trickier to answer. Spatial distribution can be plotted by looking at 
depression density, sinkhole areas, relative spacing between sinkholes, and through 
use of other spatial techniques. However, an explanation of what actually drives the 
spatial distributions of karst landforms has been elusive. Some studies have shown 
that local distribution of sinkholes is independent of the bedrock, and a study of the 
karst of northern Iowa showed that depression density (measuring the number of entry 
points of internal runoff water into the subsurface) increases rapidly with the age 
of glacial drift covering, but levels off soon thereafter (White 1988). Nevertheless, 
there are some guidelines for determining which sites in a given karst region are 
more prone to sinkhole development. First, areas with steep slopes tend to produce 
fewer sinkholes—not surprising, since steeper slopes mean that surface water runoff 
is likely to roll right past a sinkhole drain. Second, areas with denser, less porous 
limestone bedrock are more likely to display sinkhole formation where joints in 
the dense limestone promote drainage at specific locations. And finally, areas with 
soil and vegetation cover usually promote solution processes, due to the presence of 
carbon dioxide in the soil (Ritter et al. 1995). 

Localized cave distribution is a bit easier to examine, though it is not without 
its difficulties. Most large groups of caves—like those found in the Potomac River 
Basin or in Alabama, for example—produce smooth distribution functions when 
grouped by length. The distribution of caves according to length can be analyzed 
using certain statistical processes that eventually generate a “karst constant,” which 
describes the cave length distribution for a given area or region. It’s important to 
remember that there are some shortcomings in cave length distribution measurement 
as well: the legal definition of a cave can vary from state to state or country to 
country, and there is probably a large class of caves with no entrances at all that is 
simply not included in these analyses (White 1988). 

Issues of Human–Karst Interaction 

Rarely are human societies able to avoid having an impact on the landscape they 
occupy; this is even truer for societies in fragile environments, like karst terrains. 
Cities, towns and agricultural enterprises located above or near karst systems often 
alter the conditions necessary for equilibrium in those systems; it’s very easy for 
human society to induce cave degradation, groundwater contamination, and land 


12 1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

subsidence in karst landscapes. In turn, these impacts often define how and to what 
extent humans can interact with the karst landscapes they occupy. 

Subsidence 

In karst terrains, subsidence is observed in the form of new sinkholes. This is a common 
occurrence in karst areas experiencing rapid urbanization and has happened in 
many urbanizing karst terrains throughout the world. In the 1970s, Spain’s Central 
Ebro Basin underwent the beginning of large-scale urbanization and industrial 
development. The presence of karst was not taken into account during either the 
planning or construction phases of development, and over the next several years 
a large number of sinkholes formed in the area. Since then, these sinkholes have 
caused significant damage to buildings, roads, and water supply systems, as well 
as the loss of arable farmland. Subsidence incidents in the Chattanooga, Tennessee 
area, also began to occur with more frequency during the late 1970s; this spike 
was coincident with increased groundwater pumping for industrial uses in the area 
(Soriano and Simon 2002; Wilson 1984). 

The subsidence events in the Central Ebro Valley and in the Chattanooga area 
were almost certainly a direct result of aquifer drawdown that accompanies the urbanization 
process in karst regions. In urbanizing karst areas, the underlying aquifer 
comes under severe pressure as demand for water skyrockets. The most common 
strategy to meet this new demand is to pump more water from the ground, at what 
often turns out to be an unsustainable rate. This overextraction of groundwater can 
cause the formation of voids, as spaces that once held water are emptied. Once that 
happens, there is suddenly less pressure on the land surface from below ground, and 
subsidence and collapse into these voids can happen at any time (Patton and DeHan 
1998). 

Rapid aquifer drawdown is not the only cause of sinkhole formation in urbanizing 
karst areas. For one thing, the extra weight and pressure applied to the land 
surface by new structures and infrastructure can cause sinkholes to develop long 
before they might otherwise have done so. Construction activities that alter surface 
water drainage patterns can also induce new sinkholes by increasing the flow of 
surface water through existing sinkhole drains. This was the cause of the February 
2002 Dishman Lane collapse, in Bowling Green, Kentucky. This concentration of 
stormwater runoff resulted in a 60-m-wide, 7-m-deep sinkhole directly below the 
road surface (Kambesis et al. 2004). Water and sewer pipelines in karst areas are 
also more susceptible to damage. When these pipelines do crack or break, the extra 
water pipes soil away more quickly, and new sinks may appear (USGS 1999). A 
dramatic example of this took place in Allentown, Pennsylvania, in 1994, beneath 
the Corporate Plaza Building, which was the city’s newest downtown office building. 
The sinkhole opened up overnight and swallowed portions of the office building 
as well as the entire paved surface of North 7th Street immediately adjacent to the 
building. In this case, the cause of the incident was a natural soil sink that had been 
settling for at least several days prior to the event (occupants of the office building 


Issues of Human–Karst Interaction 

had reported evidence of subsidence during the preceding week, though it had not 
been recognized at the time); an overnight underground water leak accelerated the 
process and grew the sinkhole (Gillespie 1999). 

Many of these same issues are found in karst areas that aren’t even urbanizing. 
The need for vast amounts of groundwater can lead to rapid and excessive aquifer 
drawdown—and thus subsidence—in agricultural areas facing water pressures just 
as easily as in urban settings. For six consecutive nights in January 1977, strawberry 
growers in the Dover, Florida area, worked to prevent their crops from freezing by 
continuously applying warm water to their plants (this forms a protective sheet of ice 
over the plants and protects them from sub-freezing temperatures). The water used 
was pumped directly from the Floridan aquifer, and this sudden spike in groundwater 
pumping drew down the aquifer by 2.9 m. Reports of new sinkholes shot up; 
some of the new dolines were large enough to damage property and infrastructure. A 
total of 22 new sinkholes attributable to the freeze response were catalogued; others 
may have gone unreported (Hall and Metcalfe 1984). 

Groundwater Contamination 

In places with higher permeability bedrocks (like sandstone, for example), surface 
water must seep through the bedrock before reaching the water table. This natural 
filtration process is usually effective at keeping surface-level contaminants out of 
the aquifer. But because carbonate bedrock is not permeable, karst aquifers lack 
a filtration process for the surface waters that wash down through the cracks and 
fissures in the bedrock (sometimes, topsoil can act as a rudimentary filter, but it’s 
not very effective) (Field 2002). As a result, aquifers in karst terrains are often left 
to the mercy and wisdom of the people who live above them. Unfortunately, wisdom 
doesn’t always win out: the examples of aquifers in the Yucatan Peninsula, 
western Ireland, and southern China provided at the beginning of this chapter are 
just the tip of the iceberg; another example is the Apulia region of southern Italy, 
where the extensive karst systems have been severely degraded by an impressive 
array of anthropogenic factors (Parise and Pascalia 2003). Contributing factors to 
the destruction of all these aquifers were human-driven causes like overpumping 
of groundwater, deforestation, land drainage, agricultural practices and atmospheric 
pollution. It’s true that such activities are often harmful regardless of where they 
occur; however, karst aquifers are particularly ill-equipped to handle the damage 
they can cause. 

In many places, sinkholes and caves are often used as garbage dumps; this happens 
all over the world, from Turkey (Kacaroglu 1999) to the American Midwest 
(LeGrand 1984; Mitchem et al. 1988), and often leads to a rapid degradation in 
groundwater quality (Day and Reeder 1989). These contaminants often do not decompose 
or become absorbed into the aquifer. Many people assume that pollutants 
will be more rapidly flushed out of a karst aquifer, since groundwater moves more 
quickly through them than through other types of aquifers; this assumption is often 
wrong (Field 1992). Twenty years ago, karst professionals were lamenting that 


14 1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

“attempts to explain the relation between sinkhole dumps and water supplies still 
often fall on deaf ears” (White 1988, p. 391). It is still a problem today. 

Sinkholes do not have to be used as dumpsites to contribute to groundwater 
degradation. Because sinkholes can provide a direct passage into the aquifer for 
surface water and runoff, any contaminants picked up on the surface can quickly 
be carried into the aquifer. Sinkholes can also open directly beneath holding ponds 
or rivers and channel surface water directly into the aquifer below, as happened 
in Pinellas County, Florida, in 1988 and near Allentown, Pennsylvania, in 1979 
(USGS 1999; Memon and Azmeh 2001). In the Pinellas County case, the sinkhole 
developed under an area containing heavy loads of effluent used for irrigation, and 
the Allentown sink was used as an industrial wastewater lagoon. Incidents of this 
type are extremely expensive to clean up, and in some cases remediation is simply 
not possible. 

An even bigger potential problem is the development of sinkholes beneath landfills, 
especially in areas of active karst development where background studies have 
not been conducted. But even properly sited landfills and waste storage areas in karst 
areas can pose potential pollution problems. Precipitation or groundwater can mix 
with the garbage in any landfill, and then seep through the bottom, carrying with it 
bacterial and chemical pollutants that would quickly contaminate the aquifer (Davis 
1997). Many municipalities in karst areas try to guard against waste-driven aquifer 
contamination by strengthening environmental requirements for landfills. 

Large-scale agriculture has already been discussed as a cause of land subsidence 
in karst areas, but these operations often play a role in karst aquifer contamination as 
well. In most cases, the contamination stems from the use of nitrate-based fertilizers 
that are washed into the aquifer. One symptom of nitrate pollution is that water from 
nearby wells may have strange smells and a cloudy appearance. This type of contamination 
is common in rural areas—examples include the nitrate contamination 
of groundwater in Florida’s Woodville Karst Plain (Katz et al. 2004), in the farming 
regions of northern Iowa (Mitchem et al. 1988), and in Romania (Gatzweiler and 
Hagedom 2003), where a decline in chemical fertilizer use since the early 1990s has 
not been followed by a corresponding drop in nitrate levels in the groundwater. In 
some locations, water from wells exceeds maximum allowable limits of pollutant 
concentrations, making the water unsafe for human or animal consumption. The 
fact that this degradation has persisted despite the decline in chemical fertilizer use 
illustrates the ability of pollutants to persist in karst aquifers. Similar contamination 
has occurred in the karstic lands of rural Appalachia, where the presence of nitrates 
in local well water has been linked to the so-called “blue baby syndrome” (Smith 
2000). 

Industrial land uses also pose major threats to karst aquifers. Mining—with its 
extensive use of chemicals and the likelihood of direct contact with the water table in 
some places—is an excellent example. Eastern Europe has experienced karst aquifer 
damage from mining operations, usually from careless disposal of waste materials. 
This is a particular concern in Romania’s Apuseni Mountains, where mining has 
been a traditional economic activity for centuries (Turnock 2002; Forray 2002). 
Once again, the ability of groundwater to move quickly through karst aquifers is 


Issues of Human–Karst Interaction 

a major factor, as shown by the case of a Polish zinc-lead ore mine suffering contamination 
from paper factory fluid waste discharged over 5 km away in a karstic 
area (LaMoreaux et al. 1997). 

Caves and Ecosystem/Habitat Damage 

Of all the delicate karst environments discussed to this point, caves may be the 
most fragile. This is mostly due to their integrated nature—the overall health of 
the cave system depends on maintaining a precise balance between atmosphere, 
water, vegetation and soil factors. Obviously, direct human use of caves can result 
in alteration of the physical structure of the caves themselves, changes in the water 
chemistry or hydrology within the cave, or destruction of cave decorations and cavedwelling 
organisms. But even human activities that do not involve the direct use of 
caves often have an impact on at least one of these factors in nearby cave environments. 
Dripwater flows are critical both to cave biota and to the microclimates of 
the caves themselves, and if those flows carry surface-level contaminants, the entire 
cave environment is affected. Any human activities that pose a potential threat to the 
aquifer—like, for example, careless disposal of wastes or excessive fertilization in 
agricultural areas—can have devastating impacts on cave life by altering the water 
chemistry (Watson 1997; Gillieson 1996). Though it rarely happens, caves can also 
be destroyed by aquifer drawdown, as sinkholes can form on the surface, collapse, 
and fill in the cave. It is usually not possible to restore a cave to its original condition 
after it has been degraded by human activity; for that reason, protection is a preferred 
strategy (Elliott 2005). 

Ultimately, any processes that can alter soil composition, plant population and 
water flow patterns could have significant impacts on caves. Indeed, even modern 
cave-cleaning processes—used to remove dust and lint that accompanies humans 
into caves—can have a negative effect on cave development (Gillieson 1996). While 
the excessive groundwater pumping and heavy nitrate use, common to major agricultural 
zones, could easily upset the delicate balance of factors required for healthy 
caves, urbanization processes may be an even larger threat; not only are overpumping 
and groundwater contamination likely to occur, but construction activities may 
also redirect surface runoff flows in ways that can negatively impact caves and cave 
ecosystems. Developers and government sponsors of the Trimodal Transpark project 
near Mammoth Cave in Kentucky downplay the threat of the project by emphasizing 
the modern construction techniques designed to prevent contamination of the cave’s 
headwaters, located a mere 13 km away. However, critics note that the project location 
was identified as the highest-risk area for contamination, flooding and collapse 
in the entire state. Even the government sponsors of the project—the InterModal 
Transportation Authority—cannot rule out contamination to the cave. As of this 
writing, the project is still on track (Brucker 2003). 

The physical characteristics of karst landscapes render them extremely susceptible 
to damage and degradation. The demands of sustaining human settlements 
on karst are all but guaranteed to have some effect on these fragile landscapes; 


16 1 Karst Processes, Landforms and Issues 

however, whether out of carelessness or ignorance, humans have been abusing karst 
landscapes for centuries. In many cases human societies have suffered serious consequences 
as a result of the impacts of their own actions on the karst below them. 
It is possible that these impacts may sometimes be unavoidable. But if it is possible 
to avoid damaging the local karst system, what is the best way to go about it? The 
rest of this book will attempt to answer that question, with a focus on policy-based 
solutions to karst-related problems. 

References 

Back, W. 1983. Degradation of groundwater resources caused by inadvertent land misuse. Relation 
of Groundwater Quality and Quantity, pp. 181–188. Wellingford, Oxfordshire, UK. 
Beck, B.F. 1986. A generalized genetic framework for the development of sinkholes and karst in 
Florida, USA. Environmental Geology, v. 8, nos. 1–2, p. 12. 
Berndt, M.P.; Oaksford, E.T.; Mahon, G.L. 1998. Groundwater. In Water Resources Atlas of 

Florida (Purdum, ed.), Tallahassee, FL. 
B¨ogli, A. 1980. Karst Hydrology and Physical Speleology. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Brucker, R.W. 2003. Can the Transpark contaminate Mammoth Cave? In Sinkholes and Karst 

2003: Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst (Barry F. Beck, ed.), 
Geotechnical Special Publication no. 122. 

Davis, S.B. 1997. Interstate assessment of governmental regulations on landfills in karst areas. 
In The Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology of Karst Terranes: Proceedings of the Sixth 
Multidisciplinary Conference on Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of 
Karst (Beck, B.F.; Stephenson, J.B. eds.), Springfield, Missouri, 6–9 April 1997, pp. 433–438. 

A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam. 
Day, M.; Chenoweth, 2004. Cockpit Country Cone Karst, Jamaica. In Encyclopedia of Caves and 
Karst Science (John Gunn, ed.), pp. 233–235. Fitzroy Dearborn, FL. 
Day, M.; Reeder, P. 1989. Sinkholes and land use in southwestern Wisconsin. In Engineering and 
Environmental Impacts of Sinkholes and Karst (Beck, B.F., ed.), pp. 107–113. A.A. Balkema, 
Rotterdam. 

Dreybrodt, W. 1988. Processes in Karst Systems. Springer Verlag, Berlin. 
Dreybrodt, W. 2004. Dissolution: Carbonate rocks. In Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science 
(John Gunn, ed.), Fitzroy Dearborn, FL. 
Elliott, W.R. 2005. Protecting caves and cave life. In Encyclopedia of Caves (David C.C. and 
William B.W., eds.), pp. 458–469. Elsevier Academic Press, CA. 
Field, M.S. 2002. A lexicon of cave and karst terminology with special reference to environmental 
karst hydrology. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. 
Field, M.S. 1992. Karst hydrology and chemical contamination. Journal of Environmental Systems, 

v. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–26. 
Ford, D.C.; Williams, P.W. 2007. Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology. Chapman & Hall. 
Forray, F.L. 2002. Geochemistry of the Environment in the Areas of Mining Works from Aries 
Valley, Apuseni Mountains, Romania. PhD. thesis, Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, 
Romania. 

Gatzweiler, F.; Hagedorn, K. (eds.) 2003. Institutional Change in Central and Eastern European 
Agriculture and Environment. The Central and Eastern European Sustainable Agriculture 
Project. 

Gillespie, T.D., 1999. The 1994 sinkhole at North 7th Street, Centre City, Allentown, Pennsylvania: 
sinkhole hazards in the Lehigh Valley and the implications for land use and development 
decisions. In Economic & Environmental Geology and Topography in the Allentown-Bethlehem 
Area: Guidebook for the 64th Annual Field Conference of Pennsylvania Geologists, pp. 49–65. 


References 

Gillieson, D. 1996. Caves: Processes, Development, Management. Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge, 
MA. 

Hall, L.E.; Metcalfe, S.J. 1984. Sinkhole collapse due to groundwater pumpage for freeze protection 
irrigation near Dover, Florida, January 1977. In Hydrology of karstic terrains: Case 
Histories (Castany, G; Groba, E.; Romijn, E., eds.), International Association of Hydrogeologists, 
FL. 

Kacaroglu, F. 1999. Review of groundwater pollution and protection in Karst areas. Water, Air and 
Soil Pollution, v. 113, pp. 337–356. 

Kambesis, P.; Crawford, N.; Croft, L.A.; Moore, R.; Pfaff, R. 2004. Dishman lane collapse, 
bowling green, Kentucky. In Sinkholes and the Engineering Impacts of Karst (Beck, ed.), 
Huntsville, AL. 

Katz, B.G.; Chellete, A.R.; Pratt, T.R. 2004. Use of chemical and isotopic tracers to assess nitrate 
contamination and ground-water age, Woodville Karst Plain, USA. Journal of Hydrology, no. 
289, pp. 36–61. 

LaMoreaux, P.E.; Powell, W.J.; LeGrand, H.E. 1997. Environmental and legal aspects of karst 
areas. Environmental Geology,v.29 1/2, pp. 23–36. 

LeGrand, H.E. 1984. Pollution of karst water in the Ozark region, Missouri. In Hydrogeology 
of Karstic Terrains: Case Histories (Castany, G.; Groba, E.; Romijn, E., eds.), pp. 200–201. 
International Association of Hydrogeologists, FL. 

Memon, B.A.; Azmeh, M.M. 2001. Failure of an industrial wastewater lagoon in a karst terrain 
and remedial action. Environmental Geology, v. 40, pp. 1424–1432. 

Mitchem, P.S.; Hallberg, G.R.; Hoyer, B.E.; Libra, R.D. 1988. Ground-water contamination 
and land management in the Karst area of Northeastern Iowa. In Ground-Water Contamination: 
Field Methods, pp. 442–458. American Society for Testing and Materials, 
Philadelphia, PA. 

Palmer, A.N. 2007. Cave Geology. Cave Books, Dayton, OH. 

Parise, M.; Pascalia, V. 2003. Surface and subsurface degradation in the karst of Apulia (southern 
Italy). Environmental Geology, v. 44, pp. 247–256. 

Patton, D.; DeHan, B. 1998. Water issues: global, national, state, ecosystem. In Water Resources 
Atlas of Florida (Fernald, E.A.; Purdum, E.D., eds.), Florida State University, Tallahassee. 

Ritter, D.F.; Kochel, R.C.; Miller, J.C. 1995. Process Geomorphology. McGraw-Hill 
Publishing, NY. 

Smith, R.P. 2000. What Makes My Baby Blue? Dartmouth Medicine, summer 2000, pp. 26–31. 

Soriano, M.A.; Simon, J.L. 2002. Subsidence rates and urban damages in alluvial dolines of the 
Central Ebro basin (NE Spain). Environmental Geology, v. 42, pp. 476–484. 

Turnock, D. 2002. Ecoregion-based conservation in the Carpathians and the land use implications. 
Land Use Policy, v. 19, pp.47–63. 

United States Geologic Survey. 1999. Sinkholes of West-Central Florida. 

Waltham, A.C.; Fookes, P.G. 2003. Engineering classification of karst ground conditions. Quarterly 
Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, v. 36, pp. 101–118. 

Watson, J.; Hamilton-Smith, E.; Gillieson, D.; Kiernan, K., (eds.) 1997. Guidelines for Cave and 
Karst protection: IUCN World Commission on protected areas. WCPA Working Group on Cave 
and Karst Protection. Cambridge, UK. 

White, W.B.; Culver, D.C.; Herman, J.S.; Kane, T.C.; Mylroie, J.E. 1995. Karst lands. American 
Scientist, v. 83, Sept/Oct, pp. 450–459. 

White, W. 1988. Geomorphology and hydrology of karst terrains. Oxford University Press, NY. 

Williams, Paul W. 1993. Environmental change and human impact on karst terrains: An introduction. 
Cantena supplement, v. 25, pp. 1–19. 

Wilson, R.L. 1984. Karst induced subsidence in the Chattanooga-Rossville area, Hamilton County, 
Tennessee, and Walker County, Georgia. In Hydrogeology of Karstic Terrains: Case Histories 
(Castany, G; Groba, E.; Romijn, E., eds.), pp. 258–260. International Association of Hydrogeologists, 
FL. 


Chapter 2 
A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations 
in Karst Terrains 

Abstract Karst regulations are in place in karstic areas throughout the United 
States, although the specific forms these ordinances take can vary widely from place 
to place. In seeking to understand how these regulations are developed and how they 
work, one must consider the possibility that they are influenced by factors that are 
tied to geographic location. This chapter examines this possibility by describing the 
regulatory goals of karst-aware land use regulations and ordinances, defining many 
commonly used tools for achieving these goals and exploring detailed examples of 
these regulations and ordinances from across the United States, grouped by region. 
The chapter finds that there do not seem to be strong regional influences on the 
development and character of karst land use regulations and it ends by identifying 
several characteristics that are widely shared by these regulations across the United 
States. 

Keywords Setbacks · Stormwater runoff · Zoning · Land use regulation · Land use 
policy · Karst 

The issues raised by human–karst interaction cut both ways: Human societies can 
simultaneously threaten and be threatened by karst landscapes. One way to manage 
this interaction and minimize the risks of subsidence, groundwater contamination 
and cave destruction is to regulate how construction, development and settlement 
can take place on karst terrains. In the United States, certain karst issues are often 
addressed via a state’s administrative code (in many cases, the karst protections 
that are provided in this way are more of an afterthought or byproduct, usually in 
the course of setting rules for runoff management or dumping). But in many karstic 
areas with human populations, there are no municipal codes or ordinances that manage 
how humans and karst systems interact. While policy-based solutions have been 
successful in some locations, in others, land use policies have been less effective 
in protecting karst environments. In many cases, this failure is a result of lack of 
appropriate policy tools, weak or nonexistent enforcement, vaguely defined goals, 
poor conception or execution, or one of the other standard traps that often bedevil 
policy-based approaches. By their very nature, problems of human–karst interaction 
often require solutions derived from more than one field; however, local regulatory 

S. Fleury, Land Use Policy and Practice on Karst Terrains, 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9670-9 2, C
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009 


20 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

bodies often have more narrowly focused areas of responsibility that make the taking 
of an interdisciplinary approach difficult. Under those circumstances, organizations 
without any actual regulatory power—geological surveys, for example, or 
karst-related research institutes—can act as catalysts for policy-based solutions and 
as clearinghouses for the data required to shape such solutions (Vineyard 1976). 
There is no reason to assume that karst protection is inherently too complex an issue 
to benefit from a policy-based approach. However, many existing karst protection 
regulations have important flaws that hamper effectiveness. 

Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

When policy protection for karst is implemented in the United States, it is often 
done through the zoning and land development approval processes. Because 
of the potential to impact flooding, surface and groundwater contamination, and 
sinkhole formation and collapse, municipalities certainly have an interest in enacting 
karst-related regulation. Different localities use different regulatory tools 
to manage growth in karst terrains, which makes sense in light of the differences 
in physical and social landscapes between individual cities and towns. However, 
there are several regulatory techniques that are used with more frequency than others: 
these include zoning codes, subdivision ordinances, stormwater management 
rules, and setbacks. Comprehensive plans also frequently address karst-related issues 
and, while they are a significant influence on land use decisions, they cannot 
by themselves be considered an effective tool for managing development in karst 
landscapes. 

Zoning Ordinances 

Generally, zones that include areas where threats to local karst formations are 
higher—or where threats from the local karst formations are higher—may be subject 
to certain additional construction requirements that are intended to mitigate that 
threat. These are often related to stormwater or surface water drainage and runoff 
or to implementing mandatory setbacks between human-built structures and karst 
landforms, usually sinkholes. In some cases, zoning overlays are used; this approach 
makes sense in cases where existing zoning laws would be difficult to change, or 
where the karst system spans multiple zones. 

Subdivision Ordinances 

Subdivision and land development ordinances (SALDOs) are commonly used to 
regulate development in karst terrains. However, because it is often easier for 
developers to get a variance from a SALDO, they are usually weaker forms of 


Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

protection than zoning ordinances. In some places, the differences between subdivision 
ordinances and zoning ordinances are not clear; for example, both may be incorporated 
into a larger Land Development Code, particularly in smaller municipalities. 

Stormwater Management Ordinances 

In a karst context, stormwater management ordinances often forbid directing surface 
runoff directly into sinkholes and in some cases require a passive filtering system 
(gravel, wild grasses, etc.) be placed around the perimeter of a sinkhole near new 
construction or development. The popularity of stormwater management as a tool 
for managing development on karst landscapes seems to be an approach borne 
of practicality. Surface water is a source of contaminants and is simultaneously 
a contributing factor in sinkhole development; further, the consequences of poor 
or ineffective stormwater management practices are often highly visible, making it 
easier to build a political consensus to do something about it than it is with other 
karst-related regulatory tools. 

Setbacks 

Setbacks are another widely used approach to karst protection and land use management, 
though not as common as stormwater management. One advantage to the 
use of setbacks is that they are easy to understand conceptually, and theoretically 
require only a tape measure to enforce. However, they also make it more difficult 
for landowners to develop parcels with karst features (which often is the intent of 
the regulations in the first place); because of this, setbacks often come under heavy 
political pressure from developers or property owners who are seeking waivers or 
exemptions from setback requirements. One major shortcoming of the setback tool 
is that they generally only address sinkholes or, in some cases, springs. Contaminants 
can often find their way into the aquifer along other pathways (Rubin 1992). 
In other words, while setbacks may be effective in protecting human-built structures 
from subsidence dangers, they are not sufficient for protecting entire karst systems 
from human impacts. Some examples of communities using setback-style regulation 
can be found in Table 2.1. 

Comprehensive Plans 

Comprehensive plans are visible, high profile examples of local land use planning. 
Often, the development of a comprehensive plan is a process that incorporates significant 
community input and can take several years to complete. 

Comprehensive plans are not discussed in this book. The reason is that their 
recommendations and goals are usually not binding; comprehensive plans typically 


22 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

Table 2.1 Examples of municipalities employing setback-based karst land use regulations 
Municipality Setback size Setback stipulations 

Pasco County, FL 500 ft Applies to new construction near karst features with 
the potential to drain directly into aquifer 
Des Moines, IA 500 ft Contaminated soil cannot be applied within 500 ft of 
a sinkhole 
Amherst County, VA 200 ft Hogs or chickens may not be kept within 200 ft of a 
spring 
High Springs, FL 200 ft 50 ft. no-build zone, with the balance requiring 
guarantees of no damage to the sinkhole 
Catasauqua, PA 100 ft Applies to construction near any karst features 
within township limits 
Lower Macungie, PA 
Lower Saucon, PA 
Alachua County, FL 35–150 ft Setback size depends on specific nature of karst 
feature 
Farragut, TN 50 ft 50 ft buffer applies to sinkholes only; aquatic buffer 
(25 ft) applies to springs 
Huntsville, AL 25 ft Applies to karst features throughout city limits 
Godfrey, IL 25 ft Stormwater mgt. rules applied to any land 
disturbance within 25 ft of a sinkhole 
Maryville, IL 
Rome, GA 25 ft Land disturbance buffer applies to all waters of the 
state; this includes springs. Protects karst, but not 
karst-specific 
Savannah, GA 
Montgomery County, 20 ft Route 177 Corridor zone requires a 20 ft setback 
VA from sinkhole edges 
Springfield, MO Outline of Applies to construction near any sinkholes within 
sinkhole city limits 
Lexington-Fayette Outline of Applies to construction near any sinkholes within 
County, KY sinkhole the county 
Johnson City, TN Varies Applies in city’s Sinkhole Overlay Zone; each 
sinkhole has a unique no-build line based on 
flooding potential 

do not have the power of law. Because there is no power vested in comprehensive 
plans to compel developers and landowners to act in any particular way, they should 
not be considered a regulatory tool in this context. 

State-Level Cave Protection Laws 

Most states with any significant karst formations have passed law protecting these 
formations, to one degree or another, at the state level. These laws all tend to be 
very similar from state to state, at least in terms of the topics covered, if not in 
language. Cave vandalism is almost always the primary focus of these statutes, and 
selling speleothems that have been removed from a cave is almost always prohibited. 
Most of these laws contain provisions for protecting cave biota, while some 


Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

of them contain detailed provisions relating to archaeological expeditions and digs; 
for example, Wisconsin’s cave protection law is focused on protecting rock art in 
caves to the near exclusion of all other concerns. Language prohibiting dumping or 
polluting inside caves is also very common in these statutes, but these provisions 
are often worded in such a way that only polluting activities that occur within a cave 
are covered; only Missouri’s and Oklahoma’s laws might be interpreted to restrict 
polluting activities on the surface and nearby karst landforms. In some states, like 
Florida and Tennessee, state law provides homeowners the option of purchasing 
sinkhole insurance. In most states, however, insurance companies are not legally 
bound to offer this coverage. 

Because the focus of these state-level laws tends to be on direct protection of 
caves from vandals and not on land use, they are generally not addressed within 
this book. 

Examples of Policy-Based Approaches to Karst Protection 

Karst-related land use regulations and ordinances have been used in the United 
States since the mid-1980s (Richardson 2003). These ordinances often focus on 
a single aspect of human–karst interaction, like imposing strict controls on new 
construction or management of groundwater inflow. At the same time, “multiconcerned” 
karst ordinances that focus on the impacts of new development on 
groundwater and the structural integrity of new buildings are becoming more 
common. Examples can be found in Johnson City, Tennessee, where an interim 
multi-concerned policy statement was adopted in 1994 (immediately following an 
extended period of excessive rainfall and flooding) (Reese et al. 1997), and in 
Austin, Texas, where a combination of land use management techniques and engineering 
controls are employed to protect the Edwards Aquifer from the consequences 
of urbanization (Butler 1987). Karst regulations are not universal because 
governments are often not given a sufficiently wide range of tools with which to 
manage karst. The available tools are typically limited to the comprehensive plan, 
the zoning ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, and the stormwater management 
ordinance. However, since the general public is largely unaware of karst and the 
planning issues that go with it, local governments are typically forced to handle 
karst issues in a reactive, rather than proactive, manner (Richardson 2003). 

As human populations grow, so too do the challenges of waste disposal. As we 
have seen, the presence of karst can make disposal operations more difficult because 
of the inherent threat to groundwater quality. Requirements and regulations 
for handling the potential contamination of aquifers by landfills differ across the 
United States. For example, states take different approaches to defining both karst 
areas—only a handful specifically mention karst, while the rest use vague definitions 
of “unstable areas”—and landfills. However, there are minimum standards imposed 
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); all landfills must have 
a groundwater monitoring system in place in the immediate vicinity of landfills, for 


24 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

one thing. At the state level, Florida regulations suggest a double liner for landfills 
but do not require one; Kentucky, on the other hand, does require the use of such a 
design (Davis 1997). The benefit of this approach is that regulations can be tailored 
to meet local needs; the drawback is that local political culture is more likely to 
influence the process and can potentially do so in a way that is not consistent with 
karst protection. 

Policy-based approaches face even greater challenges when they are designed 
for implementation across multiple jurisdictions. The European Water Framework 
Directive, published in 2000, served as the catalyst for efforts to develop an effective 
and consistent European approach to groundwater protection in karst areas. The 
scientists working on this had the goal of integrating karst groundwater protection 
into the land use planning process throughout Europe. However, such integration 
had to be applicable to all karstic areas in Europe, which can vary greatly in terms 
of geologic and political conditions. Because of the difficulties in achieving this, 
they were forced to abandon the conceptual framework goal and instead attempt to 
develop a more general, common European approach to karst waters that was less 
comprehensive and less binding than they had originally intended (Zwahlen 2003). 

Obviously, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to land use regulation on karst 
terrain. The remainder of this chapter examines regional differences in karst land 
use regulations in the United States, in order to identify any regional patterns or 
similarities in the types of karst-related land use ordinances in place. If those patterns 
exist, perhaps they can tell us something about the local and regional forces 
that shape the development of these regulations. 

Appalachian Belt (Virginia, Pennsylvania, Maryland, New York, 
New Jersey, Eastern Tennessee and Eastern Kentucky) 

Karst-related ordinances are common in cities and townships in Pennsylvania and 
New Jersey. Many of these ordinances were initially passed as a reaction to rapid 
expansion of residential development in the metro New York and New Jersey area 
since the 1970s. Specific motivations behind such laws differ – in some cases, it is a 
desire to limit population growth inside the town itself and to push new development 
to surrounding areas instead; in others, it is a desire to prevent groundwater contamination 
and to ensure structural integrity of new buildings; still others spring from 
a desire to reduce legal liability for karst-related damages. The North New Jersey 
Resource Conservation and Development Council (NNJRCD) Model Ordinance has 
been held up as an example of the type of regulation that works best to protect water 
resources and structures, without shutting down population growth and locking out 
new residents (Fischer 1997). 

Indeed, karst land use ordinances based on the NNJRCD’s model ordinance 
can be found in several boroughs and townships in northern New Jersey, including 
Franklin Township (Warren County), Lebanon, Lopatcong, Pohatcong, Vernon, 
and Washington Township (both Morris and Warren counties). The ordinance itself 


Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

depends on the use of a Carbonate Area zoning district for areas where carbonate 
rocks or carbonate drainage can be found. Within these areas, additional karstrelated 
data gathering and testing is required; this data shall be collected by direct 
means (site reconnaissance, test probes, test pits, and test borings) as well as indirect 
means (aerial photography and various geophysical methods). Once the data have 
been incorporated into the development plan, these geotechnical aspects are then 
subject to a separate review and, if found lacking, can serve as the basis for the 
denial of a permit. Failure to comply with the requirements of the model ordinance 
can result in a stop-work order, a necessary component if the ordinance is to have 
any effect at all. There are also many townships and boroughs that do not take the 
comprehensive approach to karst land use regulation provided by the NNJRCD’s 
model ordinance. Nevertheless, many of these codes do still share at least one or 
two virtually identical passages, suggesting a shared source or origin. There are at 
least 23 municipalities (Table 2.2) that relied exclusively on this particular ordinance 
for karst land use management. 

Pennsylvania’s karst country extends across much of the southeastern part of the 
state. The frequency with which sinkholes occur there has spurred some cities and 
townships to draft legislation regulating the land development process in karst areas. 
This began in the late 1980s, when the township of Lower Macungie, near Allentown, 
incorporated a set of karst-related development regulations into the township’s 
land development code. Lower Macungie is a township of about 24,000 residents in 
Pennsylvania’s Lehigh County (population 326,000). It is important to note that in 
Pennsylvania, planning, zoning and subdivision responsibilities fall to local governments, 
rather than to counties or to the state. This makes it easier for localities to 
deal with any karst-related issues they may face, which are almost never replicated 
on a statewide level (and indeed, often not even on a county level). The ordinance 
relies heavily on the use of overlay districts to impose extra burdens on developers 
hoping to build in sensitive areas. 

In drafting the Lower Macungie ordinance, existing ordinances in the area were 
examined by local government and outside consultants in order to identify provisions 
that were typically utilized by localities facing the same karst issues. Only 

Table 2.2 New Jersey municipalities relying exclusively on the structural stormwater requirements 
of the NJ model karst ordinance 

Alexandria 
Andover 
Berkley Heights 
Boonton 
Branchville 
Chatham 
Clifton 
Florham Park 
Franklin 
Glen Ridge 
Hamburg 
Hampton 

Holland 
Hopcatong 
Independence 
Jefferson 
Little Falls 
Madison 
Morris 
New Brunswick 
Paterson 
Rockaway 
Sayerville 


26 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

two other ordinances were found and both were subdivision ordinances. Both had 
serious shortcomings: one included too many restrictions on new development and 
was thought to be unenforceable; the other was not particularly detailed and likely 
unable to restrict development in karst areas. Another problem common to both is 
that they are subdivision ordinances, which are easier to overrule or waive than are 
zoning ordinances (Dougherty 1993). 

Karst hazards are addressed in Section 794 of Lower Macungie Township’s 
SALDO. In addition to establishing a local Karst Hazard Map, this section describes 
additional procedures and requirements that must be met as part of the Preliminary 
Plan process for developments in karst areas. They require the participation of a 
licensed geologist to determine what steps the developer should take in order to mitigate 
any threat to the local karst; those recommendations are then subject to review 
by the Town Engineer. The performance standards generally involve a 100-foot set-
back from any karst feature for proposed buildings, stormwater detention facilities, 
swales or pipes, septic systems or tile fields, swimming pools, solid waste disposal 
areas, transfer areas or facilities, oil, gasoline, salt or chemical storage areas, and or 
blasting for quarrying or well enhancement activities. 

Beyond Lower Macungie, there are several other cities and townships in Pennsylvania’s 
karst areas that have some karst-related ordinances on their books. Many 
of these are quite limited: Allentown’s requires that the possibility of sinkhole existence 
be taken into account when creating a stormwater detention plan; Williams 
Township requires the disclosure of any karst features on property for which a 
grading permit is sought; and the extent of the city of Bethlehem’s karst regulation 
is to require a bond from the developer intended to cover the cost of any 
sinkholes that form in the first year. Hanover Township’s ordinance is not much 
stronger—it states that the presence or formation of a sinkhole under or very near 
a foundation or footing, the Building Official may withhold building or occupancy 
permits (if he or she feels the sinkhole poses a risk) until the developer explains 
exactly how that problem will be rectified. Other townships—like Catasauqua and 
Lower Saucon—have taken a more aggressive approach to regulating development 
in karst areas. Catasauqua’s Code of Ordinances prohibit waste disposal in sinkholes 
if the property is accessible to the sewer system, and their Wellhead Protection 
Plan requires developers to minimize the risk of sinkhole formation through 
design techniques and adequate site planning practices. Additionally, the Wellhead 
Protection Plan prohibits the redirection of stormwater into a sinkhole, prohibits the 
alteration of drainage patterns through regarding if such alteration would increase 
sinkhole risk, and mandates 100-foot setbacks from karst features. Lower Saucon 
has taken the overlay approach implemented by Lower Macungie. Lower Saucon’s 
zoning ordinance defines a Carbonate Geology overlay district which includes the 
following restrictions: on-lot sewer system drainfields, underground propane tanks, 
or stormwater control basins are to be kept a minimum of 100 ft from the rim of any 
depressions, sinkholes and disappearing streams and 50 ft from lineaments, fracture 
traces and pinnacles; outflow generated by the result of development cannot be directed 
into karst features; buildings or accessory structures must be 100 ft from any 
sinkhole, in most cases (likewise any toxic or hazardous substances); underground 


Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

water, sewer and stormwater lines must have an impervious liner; most underground 
storage tanks are prohibited; and public sewers should be provided whenever possible 
and required—when they are not, applicant must provide a primary on-lot 
sewage system drainfield. There are also procedures in place for instances in which 
a sinkhole appears once approval has been granted. 

Other karst-related provisions within land use regulations and ordinances predate 
the Lower Macungie ordinance. District Township has what might be the oldest 
karst-related ordinance in the area (passed in 1975), but it is also one of the weakest 
and most narrowly focused: it addresses permits for on-site sewage systems on 
property where sinkhole-related depressions exist within the absorption area. 

While some regulatory techniques—like stormwater management—are used by 
rural and urban communities alike, some tools are seemingly intended to address 
issues more common to one type of environment than the other. Through a shared 
zoning ordinance, the rural communities of Heidelsburg, Womelsdorf and Robesonia 
impose setbacks on manure storage facilities not otherwise covered by state 
regulation. This is the only karst-related provision found in this zoning code and 
is one that is very unlikely to appear in the codes of more urbanized municipalities. 
Another regulatory tactic seen in rural areas is requiring setbacks for mining 
operations from sinkholes or karst features; in some cases, no other karst-related 
provisions are included. Some municipalities in the center of the state impose riparian 
buffers around sinkholes and require filtering mechanisms to prevent unfiltered 
runoff from running directly into a sinkhole (for example, Halfmoon Township), 
features that are not generally seen in ordinances passed in the Lehigh Valley 
region. 

Karst-aware land use regulations are also present in Maryland, but often seem 
open-ended and vague; there also seem to be fewer of them than in Pennsylvania. 
Overlay-style karst management techniques are used in smaller towns like Hampstead 
and New Windsor. In New Windsor, for example, developments in areas of 
carbonate rock are required to incorporate design elements that are intended to accommodate 
the geological conditions. This is very similar to the way Taneytown 
approaches the issue, requiring subdivisions be designed in such a way that environmental 
resource areas (including areas of karst geology) are protected. The 
presence of these environmental resource areas must be included in certain plans 
during the pre-approval process. In Hagerstown, the city code stipulates that the 
presence of karst geology shall guide the selection of best management practices 
for stormwater drainage techniques. However, specific methods for accomplishing 
this are not identified, and developers and builders have significant leeway. 

By contrast, karst regulations in Virginia strongly emphasize informational requirements 
and setbacks. By far the most common karst-related land use requirements 
in Virginia are for the disclosure of sinkhole and spring locations at various 
points during the permitting process: Alexandria requires such disclosure during the 
environmental site assessment for resource protection areas; Blacksburg requires 
it during the development of the stormwater management plan; and both the city 
of Roanoke and Franklin County stipulate that this information be included on 
the comprehensive site development plans themselves. In most cases, karst-related 


28 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

setbacks are related to agricultural land uses, like the location of swine facilities 
or chicken plants. Radford, Waynesboro and Montgomery County are exceptions 
to this, with more broadly applied setback/no-build rules. Montgomery County’s 
Route 177 Corridor Overlay District stipulates a minimum 20-foot setback from the 
edges of any sinkholes that occur there. In Radford, no land with sinkholes or caves 
can be platted for subdividing, due to flooding concerns, while these same lands are 
simply described as “unsuitable” for construction in Waynesboro. One interesting 
thing about Virginia’s karst-aware land use regulations is that many places outside 
the state’s western karst belt also seem to have them on the books. Springs are the 
most commonly mentioned karst feature to be protected; this could be because the 
regulations in question are meant to apply to all watercourses, regardless of whether 
or not they are actually present in the area (hence, springs are mentioned in some 
areas’ ordinances as features meriting protection even though they are not actually 
found there). 

Virginia has also taken steps to proactively address karst issues at the state level. 
The state’s administrative code created the Cave Board, an office within the Department 
of Conservation and Resources that is tasked with cave policy development 
and enforcement. The state code also bans construction of landfills atop sinkholes 
or less than 100 ft above karstic caverns and prohibits discharging into springs or 
sinkholes. 

Johnson City, Tennessee, employs setbacks in an unusual way. The setbacks only 
apply within the city’s Sinkhole Overlay Zone, which was implemented as part of a 
larger set of floodplain regulations as a means of addressing flooding and groundwater 
contamination concerns. Within the overlay zone, development near sinkholes is 
constrained by a “25-year no-build line,” which differs for every sinkhole depending 
on its capacity to handle runoff from a major rain event. Generating a unique 
line for each sinkhole requires a high level of understanding of the local drainage 
system and is an exacting process. The code does contain provisions for altering 
the location of these lines, if necessary. Additionally, zoning appeals board can 
consider requests for variances within both zones. Farragut (a suburb of Knoxville) 
has a fairly well-developed set of setback rules, which generally mandate a 50-foot 
buffer from the edge of any sinkhole; a different buffer (25 ft) applies to springs. 
Outside Farragut, Knox County itself employs setbacks in a much more limited 
fashion, applying them only to landfill siting. The city of Knoxville permits land 
containing sinkholes to be platted and developed only if the developers have taken 
steps to eliminate the potential for sinkhole-related flooding damage to buildings and 
other structures. The specific nature and character of these “steps” is never clearly 
spelled out. 

Southeast (Florida, Georgia, South Carolina) 

Karst regulations in Florida are extremely common in local governments of all sizes, 
from large urbanized county governments to smaller, rural communities. There is 
no single dominant method of regulation: overlays, setbacks, stormwater runoff 


Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

and drainage and basic informational requirements are all employed throughout the 
state. That said, there are several areas in which karst-related land use regulation 
is stronger or better developed than most other cities or counties; examples include 
Alachua County, Leon County, and Marion County. 

Alachua and Leon counties are very similar in many ways. Both contain midsized 
cities (Gainesville and Tallahassee, respectively) alongside large stretches of 
undeveloped, rural land, and in 2000 both counties had similar populations (217,000 
and 239,000, respectively) (U.S. Census Bureau 2006). These similarities suggest 
that both areas might take similar approaches to karst land use management. In both 
counties, we see city and county regulations working in tandem to manage different 
aspects of the development of karst lands. Alachua County’s regulations emphasize 
the control of stormwater runoff as an approach to karst terrains development: 
stormwater management systems must provide treatment to sinkhole runoff before 
discharging it into a sinkhole and must be designed in a way that minimizes the risk 
of new sinkhole development. In some cases, wastewater may not be discharged 
into sinkholes at all. Additionally, the county does impose a setback around karst 
features, covering anywhere between 50 and 150 ft, depending on the specific characteristics 
of the feature in question. Within the city of Gainesville, environmental 
overlay zones are the primary tool for managing development on karst: the city’s 
Significant Ecological Communities environmental overlay zone is used to protect 
sinkholes. Within these overlay zones, the city has the right to set aside up to 10% 
of a lot’s area in order to facilitate clustered development that would protect the 
ecologically sensitive features. 

In Leon County, there is somewhat more overlap between city and county regulations. 
Both the county and the city of Tallahassee apply an identical conservation 
area regulatory overlay to lands with active karst features. Within this overlay, all 
uses permitted by the underlying zoning classification are still permitted, with the 
additional stipulation that uses must be “compatible with the environmental conditions,” 
and thus subject to additional restrictions if necessary (additionally, off-site 
density transfers are not permitted within the conservation area overlay). The city 
and county both use setbacks as well, though they are applied differently in each 
jurisdiction. The county’s setback regulation (which does not actually use the word 
“setback”) requires any active karst feature to be surrounded by a 35-foot buffer, 
inside which the land will remain in a natural state. Tallahassee’s no-build requirement 
is nearly identical to Gainesville’s in that it mandates that any land with karst 
features be given over to the city in the form of a conservation easement. The city 
also has detailed regulations on how stormwater runoff may be handled in karst 
terrains. 

Historically, Marion County has maintained a more rural character than Alachua 
or Leon counties. Located just south of Alachua County, in recent years Marion 
County has been undergoing rapid urbanization. Marion County is unusual among 
Florida’s rural areas in that it employs overlay zones as a means to control growth 
in karst terrains. The county’s Environmentally Sensitive Overlay Zone (ESOZ) is 
applied to many of the area’s springs; like the overlays used in Alachua and Leon 
counties, Marion County’s code states that within the ESOZ all requirements of the 


30 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

underlying zone apply, with the added stipulation that development or usage cannot 
impair or diminish the condition of the natural features. The ESOZ also requires 
larger minimum lot sizes (1 acre) for any new developments, as well as 75-foot 
setbacks from water bodies, including springs. Setbacks are also applied outside 
the ESOZ: residential developments must be set back 50 ft from any sinkhole edge, 
while non-residential land uses cannot be closer to a sinkhole than 200 ft. 

Florida is one of the most populous states in the country and is home to several 
major metropolitan areas. Orlando’s approach to karst land use management stands 
out among these large cities in that it uses an environmental overlay to protect karst 
features. The overlay mandates the inclusion of more open space in developments 
in karstic terrains, implements a cap on the impervious surface ratio, and requires 
the use of best practices in managing stormwater and golf course runoff as well 
as the generation of an environmental assessment that details the locations of all 
sinkholes and springs in the area. This stands in contrast to other larger cities like 
St. Petersburg or Tampa, where no similar regulations are found: in Pinellas County, 
sinkholes cannot be considered as adequate positive outfall for runoff from new 
subdivisions, while Hillsborough County regulates runoff in wellhead protection 
areas and forbids excavations and landfills from sinkhole-prone areas (though it 
should be noted that sinkholes are historically less of a problem in Pinellas County 
than in central Florida). 

On the other end of the spectrum, many of Florida’s rural counties and towns 
have basic karst protection on the books; however, it is often not quite commensurate 
with the amount of karst that underlies the municipality in question. Citrus 
County, for example, seems only to require a 300-foot setback between sinkholes 
and domestic septic systems, despite the high number of caves and sinkholes found 
there. Brooksville requires only the inclusion of karst landform information on various 
plans and maps; Lake Mary requires such information only on the drainage 
plan. Leesburg’s code forbids landfills from being located in sinkhole-prone areas. 
Levy County requires a geologic analysis for any development over five acres in 
size, or for any development located in sinkhole-prone areas; however, there are no 
other restrictions spelled out in the county code. The small Central Florida town of 
Casselberry explicitly reserves the right to address karst-related issues on a case-bycase 
basis. 

However, a hands-off approach to regulating the use of karst lands is not universal 
among rural communities. Some are more aggressive in controlling their karst 
problems. Inverness reserves the right to declare a plot of land unsuitable for development 
because of the presence of sinkholes. Pasco County’s code grants Special 
Protection Area status to karst features with the potential to drain directly into the 
aquifer; that designation includes a 500-foot setback from the edge of the feature, 
which was the largest setback found in the state. Neighboring Hernando County 
takes a similar approach by granting protected status to sinkholes and caves found 
within the county’s designated wellhead protection areas; both Pasco and Hernando 
Counties regulate runoff and discharge into sinkholes as well. High Springs, a rural 
community in Alachua County, employs a set of well-developed setback regulations. 
Lands within 200 ft of a sinkhole edge are considered to be in a development 


Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

constraint area. This includes a 50-foot no-build zone, with any development occurring 
within the remaining 150 ft requiring professional certification that no damage 
will occur to the sinkhole as a result of development. Beyond that, it is also not 
permitted to direct stormwater runoff straight into sinkholes. 

Communities in karstic areas of Georgia tend to rely on either overlay districts or 
setback ordinances for karst land use management. Auburn, Bainbridge, and Norcross 
are all examples of towns that rely on groundwater recharge overlay districts 
for this purpose; these districts are intended to protect “significant recharge areas” 
(a definition that includes karst landforms) from the negative impacts of human 
activity in the recharge zone. Of these three examples, Norcross’ ordinance is the 
most comprehensive: development density is limited within the recharge overlay 
district and is generally controlled by the imposition of larger minimum lot sizes. 
Further, “dangerous” land uses such as landfills or waste dumps are prohibited from 
being sited within the overlay; design standards are also employed to manage the 
impact of the development that does occur there. Bainbridge’s ordinance is similar, 
but is more limited in its application: only residential developments where septic 
systems will be used are subject to the larger minimum lot size requirements. By 
contrast, Auburn’s overlay does not restrict development or density at all within the 
groundwater recharge zone, but is instead solely concerned with the dumping of 
contaminants. 

South-central (Kentucky, Tennessee, Northern 
Alabama, Missouri) 

Throughout the south-central region, stormwater runoff and informational ordinances 
are commonly used as means of controlling development on karst. Some 
localities go a bit further and rely on setbacks. These setback ordinances are not 
uniform, with the most significant differences being the minimum distance between 
land disturbing activities and the sinkhole edge. Overlay districts are employed in 
smaller cities like Germantown, TN and Danville, KY; Danville’s overlay specifically 
includes sinkholes as part of an ecological hazard district, while Germantown’s 
wellhead protection overlay applies to—but never specifically mentions— 
karst landscapes. Regardless on the methods used, the goals are often related to 
flood prevention more than aquifer protection. Throughout the region, ordinances 
tend to be implemented primarily at the city level, as opposed to the county 
level. 

Karst-aware land use regulations in many Kentucky cities and towns—like Bowling 
Green, Madisonville, Mayfield, and Murray—focus on controlling the accumulation 
of sediment in sinkholes. This suggests that flood control is the primary 
concern of these regulations, since too much sediment in a sinkhole can clog its 
drain. Indeed, stormwater and flooding problems were the initial driving force 
behind Lexington-Fayette County’s sinkhole ordinance. In 1985, the Lexington-
Fayette government passed an ordinance to regulate development with respect to 


32 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

sinkholes, karst features and their associated groundwater flow systems. This was in 
response to the revelation that many stormwater problems in the areas were caused 
by development in close proximity to sinkholes. The 1980 comprehensive plan contained 
the first serious attempts at regulating development in sinkhole areas in the 
Lexington region, but was eventually found to be too general to effectively manage 
development in karst areas. The 1985 ordinance rectified this problem by providing 
a definition of sinkholes, identifying specific maps for use in the field determination 
process, identifying specific types of testing and studies that must be done prior to 
development (as well as who is capable to perform them), and laying out acceptable 
modes of development near karst features (Dinger and Rebmann 1986). Opinions 
differ on whether or not the Lexington regulations have been effective; residential 
development still occurs on lots adjacent to those which are rendered unsuitable for 
construction by the presence of karst features and because residential lots are on 
average smaller than they were when the ordinance was first passed, impact on the 
karst system is not especially unlikely (Rebmann 2006). 

Most of Alabama’s karst is found in the northern part of the state, with another 
belt stretching through the middle and running to the northeast. The city of 
Huntsville is located in this northern karst belt. Huntsville’s approach combines 
simple information requirements with actual setbacks: descriptions of all karst landforms 
and their locations must be included in various planning documents and the 
city code mandates a 25-foot setback from the edge of any sinkhole for all new 
construction. This restriction is applicable citywide, but is also specified in the development 
requirements of the city’s slope development district. Nearby Muscle 
Shoals’ ordinance is clearly designed with flooding issues in mind and takes an 
unusual approach in addressing them: the ordinance stipulates that no construction 
can occur in a sinkhole floodway, unless the developer removes a volume of material 
from the floodway that is equal to or greater than the volume of the structure erected 
in the floodway—in other words, no net loss of volume can occur as a result of 
construction. 

In contrast to communities in the eastern part of the state, karst-related land use 
ordinances in central and western Tennessee are more similar to those found in 
Kentucky that try to prevent sewage or sediment from draining directly into sinkholes. 
Towns like Brentwood, Clarksville, and Colliersville do not go beyond this 
basic level of karst protection. Germantown was mentioned earlier as an example 
of a town using overlay districts; the nearby city of Nashville, on the other hand, 
employs no karst regulations whatsoever. 

The fast-growing city of Springfield, Missouri, passed an ordinance in 1989 to 
more effectively manage the increased stormwater runoff that was a consequence of 
the rapid urbanization and population growth in sinkhole drainage areas. Prior to the 
ordinance, one method commonly used to control stormwater runoff in karst areas 
was to simply drain directly into sinkholes, which carried with it the possibility 
of introducing contaminants into the aquifer. The ordinance required that developers 
obtain an additional permit for projects proposed within sinkhole drainage 
areas; the permit application must address various geologic and structural issues to 
the satisfaction of the permitting authority before construction may proceed. Other 


Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

places in Missouri, including rural Stone County, have embarked on similar projects; 
Springfield’s experience points to potential shortcomings in their own approach, 
including the description of enforcement procedures and an oversimplified understanding 
of the spatial patterns of urban growth in the Springfield area (Barner 1999; 
Barner 1997). Jackson is another Missouri city that relies on setbacks or no-build 
areas to prevent damage to the local karst. In Jackson, any sinkholes on land undergoing 
subdivision will be given easements as a means to protect the landforms from 
human encroachment. 

Throughout Missouri, it is not uncommon to find stormwater-related karst regulations 
that are very narrowly focused. St. Louis County forbids the installation of 
sewage tanks or soil absorption systems in the drainage area of a sinkhole, while 
Ballwin specifically permits sinkholes to be used for drainage as long as there is an 
outfall pipe installed (in case the sinkhole cannot handle the excess runoff). Hannibal 
exempts one-and two-family residential developments from the requirements of 
the onsite stormwater management plan, unless the development adversely impacts 
a sinkhole; in that case, the plan is required. In most other cases, the only requirements 
relating to karst are for information about location of sinkholes or springs and 
in some cases even those requirements are limited to very specific circumstances, 
like the location of sanitary landfills. 

Great Lakes (Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, 
Wisconsin, Ohio) 

Here, karst-related land use regulations tend to be focused on either information 
requirements or stormwater management and drainage. Aquifer protection seems 
to be a stronger focus here than in, say, the south-central region: there are more 
regulations specifically mentioning sewage discharges, bio-solids or contaminants 
from construction sites draining into sinkholes, as well as limitations on the use of 
septic systems in certain areas. When setback regulations are found, they are often 
very narrowly focused, usually related to the placements of human or animal waste 
facilities. Regulations and ordinances seem to exist mostly at the city or town level 
and are less common at the county level. 

Indiana’s regulations are almost exclusively information requirements or related 
to stormwater runoff and don’t include anything not discussed elsewhere in this 
chapter. One interesting characteristic of Indiana’s karst-aware land use ordinances 
is that many, if not all, of the karst provisions are identically worded, strongly suggesting 
that most towns are working from the same basic set of templates. This is 
not all that surprising, really—it suggests that these provisions have been found to 
be legal or are thought to be most likely to be able to withstand court challenges in 
the future. 

In Illinois, the more comprehensive karst-related land use regulations are found 
in towns located in the southwestern part of the state, just east of St. Louis. This 
is the location of one of Illinois’ two large karstic zones. Here again, one sees a 
great deal of repetition in karst regulations between towns. Maryville and Godfrey, 


34 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

both near St. Louis, have several identical components to their karst-aware land use 
regulations; these include the requirement that stormwater not be redirected into 
a sinkhole, or that stormwater drainage basins be set a minimum of 100 ft from 
a sinkhole edge. Both towns also mandate that “special precautions” be taken to 
prevent damage to sinkholes as the result of necessary development activity. As 
in many other locations, neither “special precautions” nor “necessary development 
activity” are explicitly defined. 

Municipalities in the northern Great Lakes seem to rely on setbacks more frequently 
than in Indiana or Illinois; these setbacks generally relate to facilities for 
storing human or animal waste. In southwestern Wisconsin, landowners will adjust 
their own land use strategies to conform to the presence of sinkholes, even in the 
absence of local regulations or ordinances. Generally they are left alone, though in 
some cases they are used for waste disposal, as the waste often fills a secondary 
purpose of providing infill material for the sinkhole (Day and Reeder 1989). Oddly, 
in many Wisconsin communities, areas near karst features are specifically prohibited 
from meeting city runoff requirements. These runoff requirements generally include 
a reduction in the total amount of suspended solids and attempts at recovering as 
much of the preconstruction infiltrate runoff as possible. 

Fillmore County, Minnesota, provides a representative example of sinkhole ordinances 
in this part of the United States. Fillmore County is a rural farming community 
in the southeastern part of the state. Sinkholes have long been a problem there, 
with a high concentration of them running along an axis from the northwest to the 
southeast of the county. The passage of the Fillmore County sinkhole ordinance 
in 1989 was the result of a conscious effort to update and strengthen an ineffectual 
ordinance that originally dated back to 1971. During the 1980s, residents had 
grown more conscious of environmental issues, including the groundwater contamination 
issues that go hand-in-hand with living on a karstic landscape. Residents 
often voiced complaints about the practice of waste dumping in sinkholes in public 
meetings, which eventually led to the hiring of an outside consultant to rewrite the 
ordinance. The updated ordinance is typical of sinkhole ordinances throughout the 
rural midwestern United States, in that it focuses less on building and development 
restrictions and more on dumping and pollution issues. The ultimate goal of the 
ordinance is simply to keep sinkholes clean and free of trash, especially hazardous 
materials. 

The practice of dumping wastes in sinkholes had a long history in Fillmore 
County. Sinkholes were at one time widely used for wastewater disposal; local 
residents would use dynamite to open the bottoms of the sinkholes in order to drain 
the human waste away. The town of Harmony was once the source of a flu outbreak 
that was initially driven by the contamination of area sinkholes. Disease-related issues 
led local lawmakers to look at sinkhole and karst-related issues over the years; 
however, local environmental planners say issues like these are more of a historical 
relic and are much more rarer today. This could explain why the driving issue behind 
rewriting the ordinance was not public health, but quality of life: garbage-filled sinkholes 
dotting the landscape were considered to be unsightly eyesores, and residents 
wanted something done about them. 


Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

The project to rewrite and strengthen the 1971 ordinance had broad support, 
both inside and outside of local government. According to the county’s senior environmental 
planner, there were no obstacles at all to passing the ordinance, since 
“nobody had the courage to publicly argue in favor of dumping in sinkholes.” As 
a result, the county’s planning commission and board took an aggressive stance on 
the ordinance and quickly completed both the rewriting and approval processes. 
This cycle included “3 or 4” public hearings intended to solicit the input of local 
residents. 

Fillmore County has made significant efforts toward public education on karst 
and sinkhole-related issues over the last 20 years. The county’s senior environmental 
planner said he has “lost count” of the number of public education campaigns the 
county has undertaken during that time, but believes that this commitment to karst 
education has helped get residents on board. During the early stages of development 
for the ordinance, a number of other approaches were considered, including the use 
of setbacks. These had already been implemented by the local water conservation 
district and were therefore not unfamiliar to local lawmakers. However, their use for 
sinkhole protection was rejected; the high price of corn and beans—two of Fillmore 
County’s major crops—made it difficult to justify leaving otherwise productive land 
unplanted. Plugging sinkholes was apparently never seriously considered as an option, 
due mainly to the large amounts of fill material that would be required for a 
sinkhole-pocked landscape like Fillmore County’s. 

When asked about the effectiveness of Fillmore County’s sinkhole ordinance, 
the county’s senior environmental planner says that he believes the ordinance has 
had a positive effect, but admits that he has no real way to quantify that impact. 
However, he does point to a decrease in resident complaints about dumping in sinkholes 
since the ordinance was implemented as evidence to support his claim; visual 
sightlines are also less cluttered by piles of debris in open fields. He also credits 
state and county programs—including a pesticide container clean-up program that 
gave farmers an alternative to dumping pesticides into sinkholes on their property, 
a county-level white goods recycling program, and increased enforcement of dead 
animal disposal violations by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency—with helping 
to instill an awareness of the environmental problems caused by trash disposal 
in sinkholes (Craig 2008). 

Large piles of trash and waste in sinkholes are very visible to the general public 
and are therefore likely to attract negative attention. This is a theme that is repeatedly 
seen in municipalities that choose to regulate land use on and near karst features: 
when a karst-related problem has a high public profile, it is much easier to mobilize 
the political will necessary to impose appropriate land use restrictions. It is possible 
that without such a high level of visibility, the problem in Fillmore County would 
not have been viewed as something serious enough to merit attention. Indeed, it 
seems that there are limits even on high visibility karst threats, like trash-filled sinkholes, 
in their ability to drive regulation-based solutions. For example, the approach 
that Fillmore County eventually took left the local water table susceptible to nitrate 
contamination from the commercial fertilizers used in the local agriculture community, 
out of a desire to maximize the local crop yield. Clearly, the perception of the 


36 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

possibility of economic loss can have a major impact on the form and strength of 
any karst regulations passed. 

The West 

Karst-aware land use regulations and ordinances are less common in the western 
United States. This is likely due to a number of factors, including the lower population 
densities, the more scattered distribution of karstic lands, the fact that so much 
of it is paleokarst, and the so-called “western ethic” of land use regulation. However, 
there are still isolated instances of karst land use regulations. Moab, Utah uses drinking 
water protection zones that mandate tighter restrictions on development as it gets 
closer to the wellhead. However, in no case is building and development completely 
forbidden within a protection zone; instead, discharges of pollutants or contaminants 
themselves are regulated and controlled. In Santa Fe, New Mexico, density transfers 
are suggested—but not mandated—as a method of protecting springs. 

Austin, Texas provides a stark contrast to the prevailing western approaches to 
regulating karst land use. In Austin, increasing rates of urbanization had begun to 
seriously threaten the karstic Edwards Aquifer by the early 1980s. In response, the 
city enacted a series of ordinances and regulations that approached the issue of 
aquifer contamination from several different angles. These included the management 
of stormwater runoff with additional engineered solutions, the development of 
a three-tiered watershed zone system designed to manage the types and intensities 
of land use along waterways within the watershed, and the ability to transfer development 
rights (and therefore shift land use intensity) from the Buffer watershed 
zone to the Uplands zone, where development is less likely to negatively impact 
the karst aquifer (no development is permitted within the watershed’s designated 
Critical zones) (Butler 1987). 

In the early 1980s, Austin city officials began implementing watershed regulations 
intended to address water supply and quality issues in the western and southwestern 
sections of the city, where a large number of lakes, springs, and city reservoirs 
are located. These regulations were well-intentioned but suffered a major flaw: 
while they did require an assessment and identification of karst features on property 
to be developed in those areas, there was no mechanism in place to protect these 
landforms once they were identified, which meant that the overall amount of actual 
protection provided by these ordinances was low. After several years of attempting 
to protect the local aquifer using this patchwork approach, in 1986 the city adopted a 
comprehensive watershed ordinance that brought all of these regulations under one 
umbrella. 

This newer ordinance included provisions for protecting “critical environmental 
features.” Under the terms of the ordinance, karst features qualify for this designation 
and therefore received setback-based protection. These setbacks were set at 
150 ft, with the condition that they could be expanded up to 300 ft in areas located 
upstream from any significant recharge feature as a means of protecting the feature’s 
drainage area. Environmental assessments are still required to identify and evaluate 
all karst features on a parcel intended for development. City staff review the in



Examples of Commonly Used Regulatory Tools 

formation derived from these evaluations—which are provided by the developer or 
property owner—for accuracy and completeness. Staffers indicated they sometimes 
experience problems obtaining high-quality information from these applications. 
Part of the problem can be attributed to simple professional disagreement, based on 
different interpretations of scientific data. There are also some consultants who may 
favor development over conservation, and their reports may reflect that bias, either 
consciously or not. 

In 1992, the Save Our Springs ordinance was first passed after a citizen-driven 
grassroots effort to place it on the ballot as a referendum. The ordinance was written 
to specifically address water quality issues in Barton Springs—which draws directly 
from the Edwards Aquifer—by mandating low impervious cover levels and forbidding 
the release of pollutants within the spring’s recharge zone. Barton Springs takes 
in surface water from a 360-square mile area; that water perks through the ground 
rapidly and emerges at the spring, and research conducted by city staff demonstrates 
that the area does not have a high capacity for removing pollutants or filtering. The 
ordinance uses both land use controls (specifically, mandates requiring low levels of 
impervious cover of 15–25%) and engineered non-degradation water quality controls 
together. Common sentiment around Austin is that the city should not rely 
completely on engineered controls for water quality protection, because there is 
always some risk of failure in any engineered control. This approach addresses that 
shortcoming. However, city staffers still see continuing attempts by developers to 
argue that they shouldn’t have to adhere to impervious cover limits because their 
engineered solution is more than adequate to mitigate the risk. It is also apparently 
common for them to argue that restricting impervious cover below 45% amounts 
to a taking; they believe they should be compensated for protecting the aquifer in 
those cases. 

At about that same time, endangered and protected species were first identified 
within the spring and the aquifer itself, like the Barton Springs Salamander, first 
recognized as unique to that location in the mid-1990s and listed as endangered in 
1997. The presence of these species adds a layer of complexity to karst protection 
regulations in Austin, thanks to the federal Endangered Species Act. Additionally, 
there are some state-level regulations in Texas that address karst issues; however, 
Austin’s ordinances are much more restrictive. 

The city of Austin often relies on negotiation with local landowners and developers 
to maximize the level of karst protection it is able to provide. This often occurs 
in the course of large-scale legal settlements and generally involves the delineation 
of setbacks for specific karst features. In negotiating these setback sizes, the city 
has two goals: to control the amount of surface runoff and to protect the subsurface 
footprint of any caves located below. In some cases, identified karst features in upland 
areas are geologically relic features that may have once taken in significantly 
more drainage than they currently do. As a result, their drainage areas are smaller 
and larger setbacks are not generally required. These smaller setback sizes can 
then be offered to landowners or developers in exchange for larger setbacks around 
nearby karst features that are more active and handle larger amounts of runoff. In 
other cases, the setback buffer may be decreased on the downslope side of a karst 
feature—where water is unlikely to drain into the feature—in exchange for a larger 


38 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

protection buffer on the upslope side. In other cases, the city has taken a different 
approach to negotiation and has instead opted to use development agreements as a 
means to establish karst preserve areas for locations with significant karst features. 
In this way, Austin is able to keep these features in their natural state. 

One shortcoming of the regulatory approach to karst protection in Austin is that 
the city itself only controls about one-third of the Edwards Aquifer drainage basin. 
The rest is controlled by other municipal jurisdictions, but is mostly under the same 
high levels of development pressure that face Austin. Unless these lands can be 
brought under an adequate karst protection regime, all the efforts of the city of 
Austin to protect the aquifer and Barton Springs could be for nothing. To address 
this, the city has been able to convince voters to approve bonds to buy up parcels 
of sensitive land that are actually beyond Austin’s legal jurisdiction; the city then 
places these lands into easements or preserves. To date, the city has used this approach 
to obtain control of about 25,000 acres of sensitive land in other nearby municipalities. 
Austin has also capitalized on an increasing awareness of karst-related 
issues and a desire to preserve the natural character of some of these landscapes 
in surrounding cities and towns to drive a regional planning effort aimed at developing 
some level of regional cooperation on these issues. Many of these cities and 
towns are also trying to restrict new development as a means of protecting local 
resources and are beginning to see the advantages in taking a region-wide approach 
to the issue. 

Austin’s environmental officials credit the city’s progressive political culture and 
strong support from the community in general—and citizen-driven environmental 
activist groups like the Save Our Springs Alliance and the Save Barton Creek Association 
in particular—as being central to their ability to take the aggressive approach 
to karst protection that they have used over the last fifteen to twenty years. In the 
words of one Austin city official, “the ordinance we have in place now was the 
result of the culmination of years of frustration on the part of local environmentallyminded 
citizens.” The period from the late 1980s to the mid-1990s was dominated 
by political wranglings, back and forth between developers and environmentally 
minded constituents. As mentioned earlier, the first set of real comprehensive karstrelated 
regulations for Austin came in 1986 with their comprehensive watersheds 
ordinance. The next significant effort to regulate impervious cover levels came a 
few years later in the early 1990s, initially with an interim ordinance called the 
Non-Degradation of Barton Springs Act. This ordinance dropped impervious cover 
levels in the relevant area to as little as 18% of land area. Almost immediately, there 
was a pro-development reaction that managed to undo the impervious cover level 
changes. However, these tactics backfired on the development community when 
they actually acted to spur community activism against a majority pro-development 
council. Ultimately this led to the citizen-driven ordinance known as the Save Our 
Springs ordinance, which was approved by voters as a referendum but lost an initial 
court battle. It was upheld on appeal several years later, in 1996. 

However, that does not mean that acceptance of these regulations has come easily. 
Interference and resistance from both the local construction and development 
community and from state-level elected officials have slowed the process and re



Summary 39 

sulted in weaker protections than city staffers would have liked; almost every year, 
there are attempts by state government to undo the progress of the city of Austin 
in protecting its local environment. In the early 1990s, the Austin development 
community was successful in getting exemptions from the new laws; one city environmental 
official estimates that roughly 85–90% of all development projects during 
this time were “grandfathered” into an exemption from these regulations (eventually, 
many of these projects were brought under the umbrella of Austin’s karst protection 
via negotiated development agreements). The state of Texas also has a grandfathering 
statute that allows people to develop under the regulations that were in place 
when the project was first started, which in some cases could have been decades 
prior. Takings and property rights approaches are the most common tools used to 
try to roll back the Austin regulations and these happen every year. 

In the interim, the Austin City Council’s stance on environmental issues has become 
greener than it was in the early 1990s. The Save Our Springs ordinance is now 
an accepted part of the local regulatory landscape; there are no lawsuits or court battles 
involving the ordinance and most of the area’s big landowners have negotiated 
agreements with the city. The larger threats that remain come from developers going 
outside the city’s jurisdiction, but as was mentioned earlier, the city is taking steps 
to address those developments as well (Murphy and Johns 2008). 

Summary 

Table 2.3 provides a summary of the most commonly used regulatory techniques in 
each region. From the data presented in this chapter, we can draw several important 
conclusions about karst regulation in the United States: 

1. Regulations seem to display more within-state similarity than within-region similarity. 
This suggests that municipalities may be more concerned with implementing 
regulations that will withstand legal challenges within their own states 
than they are with the specific physical nature of the karst system below (because 
these systems often cross state lines, we would expect to see strong withinregion, 
interstate regulatory similarities if the strongest driving factor was the 
physical characteristics of the karst itself). The one exception to this is the case 
of Tennessee, in which communities in the eastern part of the state tend to take a 
more proactive approach to managing karst problems through regulation. 
2. There does not seem to be any relationship between levels of urbanization and 
regulatory methods used, or indeed between urbanization and the existence of 
karst regulations or ordinances. Several large, highly urbanized areas on karst— 
Tampa, Florida and Nashville, Tennessee are good examples—either have rudimentary 
karst protections on the books, or none at all, while some rural locales 
(for example, High Springs, Florida) have taken a much more proactive 
approach to regulating development on karst terrains. However, it is difficult to 
argue that there is an inverse relationship between government sophistication 
and regulatory sophistication, since urban areas like Lexington, Kentucky and 

40 2 A Brief Look at Land Use Regulations in Karst Terrains 

Table 2.3 Most commonly used regulatory techniques in each region 
Region Dominant regulatory techniques 

Appalachian belt Setbacks; stormwater management; 
extended pre-development review 
requirements 
Southeast Stormwater management; setbacks; 
overlay zones 
South-central Stormwater management; informational 
requirements 
Great Lakes Stormwater management; informational 
requirements 
Western U.S. Groundwater protection 

Huntsville, Alabama also use the regulatory system to manage development on 
or near karst landscapes; likewise, there are many examples of rural communities 
in karst terrains where no regulatory mechanisms exist. 

3. Stormwater runoff is a very common way—indeed, perhaps the most common 
way—to regulate land use in karst areas. Possible reasons for this are explored 
in the next chapter. 
4. Overlay zones, while not widely used, are applied in rural settings as well as 
urban areas. This is surprising, as it seems reasonable to assume that the lower 
demands and pressures on rural lands should not require a regulatory tool as 
blunt as an overlay zone. 
References 

Barner, W.L. 1997. A geological evaluation: The first step in land use planning in Stone 
County, Missouri. The Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology of Karst Terranes (Beck, B.; 
Stephenson, B. eds.), pp. 389–393. Balkema, Rotterdam 

Barner, W.L. 1999. Comparison of stormwater management in a karst terrane in Springfield, 
Missouri—case histories. Engineering Geology, v. 52, pp. 105–112 

Butler, K.S. 1987. Urban growth management and groundwater protection: Austin, Texas. In Planning 
for Groundwater Protection. Academic Press, Inc, MA 

Davis, S.B. 1997: Interstate assessment of governmental regulations on landfills in karst areas. 
In The Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology of Karst Terranes: Proceedings of the sixth 
multidisciplinary conference on sinkholes and the engineering and environmental impacts of 
karst (Beck, B.F.; Stephenson, J.B. eds.), Springfield, Missouri, 6–9 April 1997, pp. 433–438. 

A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam 
Day, M.; Reeder, P. 1989, Sinkholes and land use in southwestern Wisconsin, In Engineering and 
Environmental Impacts of Sinkholes and Karst (Beck, B.F., ed.), pp. 107–113. A.A. Balkema, 
Rotterdam 

Dinger, J.S.; Rebmann, J.R., 1986. Ordinance for the control of urban development in sinkhole 
areas in the Blue Grass Karst region, Lexington, Kentucky. In Proceedings of the Conference 
on Environmental Problems in Karst Terranes and Their Solutions, pp. 163–180 

Dougherty, P.H., 1993. Karst management through zoning and subdivision ordinances. In Proceedings 
of the 1993 National Cave Management Symposium, pp. 57–65 


References 

Fischer, J.A., 1997. Limestone ordinances of New Jersey and Pennsylvania: A practitioner’s experiences. 
In The Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology of Karst Terranes, pp. 473–476 

Interview with James Rebmann, senior environmental planner for the Lexington-Fayette Urban 
County Government, 2006 

Interview with Norman Craig, senior environmental planner for Fillmore County, Minnesota, 
September 2008 

Interview with Pat Murphy, Austin (TX) assistant director of environmental policy, and David 
Johns, senior hydrogeologist for the city of Austin, September 2008 

Reese, A.J.; Cantrell, A; Scarborough, J. 1997. Sinkhole and drainage planning in Johnson City, 
Tennessee. In The Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology of Karst Terranes (Beck, B.F. and 
Stephenson, Brad, eds.), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 265–271 

Richardson, J.J., Jr., 2003. Local land use regulation of karst in the United States. In Sinkholes and 
Engineering/Environmental Impacts of Karst, Huntsville, Alabama. 

Rubin, P.A., 1992. Land use planning and watershed protection in karst terranes. In Proceedings 
of the Third Conference on Hydrogeology, Ecology, Monitoring and Management of Ground 
Water in Karst Terranes, pp. 769–793 

U.S. Census Bureau, 2006 
Vineyard, J.D. 1976. The concept of a government catalyst in the planning and management of 
water resources in karst regions. In Karst Hydrology and Water Resources, Volume 2 (Yerjevich, 
V., ed.), pp. 829–845. Water Resources Publications, Ft. Collins, Colorado 

Zwahlen, F. (ed.) 2003. Vulnerability and risk mapping for the protection of carbonate (karst) 
aquifers: scope, goals, results. European Commission for Science, Research and Development, 
Luxembourg 


Chapter 3 
What Planners and Land Use Professionals 
Understand About Karst 

Abstract Developing a comprehensive understanding of the impact and effectiveness 
of karst-related land use regulations requires accurate knowledge of what these 
regulations actually do and how they work. To that end, land use planners and 
related professionals in six states were surveyed regarding their knowledge, 
understanding and opinions of karst-related land use regulations in their local areas. 
The survey’s questions touched on six broad themes in karst protection regulation, 
including karst knowledge in the planning community, pervasiveness of karst regulations, 
preferred regulatory techniques, the motivations that drove implementation 
of these regulations, the influence of different stakeholder groups on the process, and 
the overall effectiveness of the regulations. This chapter describes and analyzes the 
results of this survey and makes several recommendations regarding karst-related 
land use regulation based on the responses of survey participants. 

Keywords Land use planners · Karst land use regulation · Opinions and attitudes 

The first step in developing a full understanding of karst-related land use regulatory 
issues is to read up on actual regulations and ordinances in use across a variety of 
karst terrains, which was done in the previous chapter. But this is only the first step. 
Without knowing how these regulations interact with conditions “on the ground,” 
any understanding will be incomplete, a half-measure at best. 

We simply must understand the impacts these regulations actually have on the 
communities that use them, as well as the factors that affect the development of the 
regulations in the first place. Many relevant questions about the impacts of these 
regulations have yet to be thoroughly explored and answered. Do setback ordinances 
affect housing or population densities in areas where sinkholes are common? 
Do karst ordinances scare off new development and growth opportunities? Which 
stakeholders tend to have the loudest voices or the most influence when regulations 
are being written? These questions, and others like them, must be answered before 
any useful framework for understanding and developing karst regulations can be 
constructed. 

Perhaps the most direct way to answer these questions would be to simply 
ask the people who spend their careers designing and working with these exact 

S. Fleury, Land Use Policy and Practice on Karst Terrains, 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9670-9 3, C
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009 


44 
3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

regulations—land use planners and professionals. Their years of experience would 
certainly yield valuable insight into the inner workings of karst-related land use 
policy. In late 2006, a sampling of these insights was collected via an online survey 
of land use professionals working in karstic areas of the United States. Planners from 
Florida, Kentucky, Missouri, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Tennessee participated 
in the survey, with the heaviest responses coming from Florida and Pennsylvania. 
The intent was to collect a broad cross section of data on planners’ awareness and 
opinions on the challenges of protecting human systems and karst systems from 
each other. 

The survey’s 36 questions were mostly multiple choice and touched on six broad 
issues in karst land use regulation: 

• 
How widespread is karst knowledge in the planning community? 
• 
How widespread was the practice of regulating development in karst areas? 
• 
What kinds of karst regulations were most common? What mechanisms were 
included in these regulations? Are there differences from region to region? 
• 
What motivated the implementation of these regulations? What problems were 
they intended to address? 
• 
Which groups had the most influence on the process of regulatory development? 
Which groups had the least? 
• 
What is the actual effect of these regulations? Do they work? What do they 
actually accomplish? 
In the next section of this chapter, we’ll take a broader look at the general trends 
in the survey results, followed by a more detailed examination. 

Survey Results: How Planners Think About Karst 

As analytical techniques go, simply scanning the survey results and counting the 
responses may seem pretty superficial. However, it can provide some useful and 
interesting insights. Specifically, we can learn what planners do and do not generally 
know about karst, as well as their conscious opinions on karst-related topics. But as 
we will see later, some of these front-of-mind opinions are actually contradicted by 
answers to other survey questions. First, however, an overview. 

Location of Respondents and Familiarity with Karst 

The survey began with a series of questions designed to gauge who had responded 
to the survey and whether their insights were likely to be useful in developing 
the framework. Of the survey’s respondents 65% were from either Florida or 
Pennsylvania, with the balance split between Kentucky, Missouri, New Jersey, and 
Tennessee, and 82% work in the local government. 


Survey Results: How Planners Think About Karst 

Eighty-nine percent of the survey participants claimed some familiarity with 
karst. This is not surprising since some effort was made to target respondents from 
karstic areas; 56% of the respondents said they are aware of some form of karst 
regulation on the books in their municipalities. The question was phrased broadly, 
which means that these ordinances almost certainly include a wide variety of regulatory 
techniques and may differ significantly in terms of regulatory scope and 
strength. 

Those who indicated that they were not aware of any karst-related land use 
regulations in their communities were asked why these regulations were not in use. 
The absence of karst geology within municipal boundaries was cited by 11% of 
respondents, while approximately 17% cited either philosophical opposition to regulation 
or pressure from developers as the primary reasons for the lack of regulation. 
In the free response segment of this question, several people placed the blame on a 
lack of information on or understanding of karst; others answered that they did not 
feel karst issues were significant enough to merit such a high level of attention: 

• 
“The lack of sufficient information regarding active sinkhole areas is the biggest 
reason that no specific regulations have been developed. Although this area is 
considered karst topography, it has not presented a major problem with development.” 
• 
“Not an issue that has been raised to the level of needing to be addressed.” 
• 
“There has been no driving force to implement such regulations.” 
• 
“Lack of knowledge on the subject and no directive from policy makers to make 
it an item of discussion.” 
• 
“Our SALDO (subdivision and land development ordinance) is very old and has 
not been updated for some time. This has not been a significant issue for our 
development.” 
• 
“Allocation of time and resources to other pressing issues.” 
Characteristics of the Local Karst and the Nature 
of Karst-Related Issues 

It is clear that many of the cities, towns and counties where survey participants 
work are prime candidates for karst-related land use regulation. Seventy-five percent 
of respondents indicated that karst underlies more than 30% of their municipality’s 
land area, with 32% describing the karst system as extensive (“extensive” 
is defined here as existing beneath at least 51% of their municipality’s territory). 
Different types of karst landforms seem to be distributed more or less evenly 
throughout these communities. All respondents working in municipalities underlain 
by karst say that sinkholes are present in their municipalities; 94% have springs 
in their municipalities, while both caves and sinking streams are present in 74%. 
This similarity suggests that any differences in which regulatory techniques are 
chosen will be driven by factors other than the nature of karst landforms in the 
municipality. 


46 
3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

Forty-eight percent of respondents point to groundwater contamination as the 
most serious karst-related problem in their municipality, while 63% say that cave 
protection is the least important karst-related problem. These results are more or less 
mirrored in another question that asked respondents to rate the severity of various 
karst-related problems as “very serious,” “somewhat serious” or “not serious.” Here 
again, groundwater contamination was seen to be the most serious karst-related 
issue and cave protection the least. 

The Regulations Themselves: Components, 
Restrictiveness and Goals 

A majority of respondents indicate that karst regulations in their jurisdictions have 
some teeth. Fully 54% see the karst-related land use regulations in their municipalities 
as either somewhat or very restrictive. Survey participants were given no 
definition of “restrictive”; this was intentional, as one goal of the survey was to 
determine what the survey subjects themselves consider the word to mean. We will 
return to this issue later in the chapter. 

Groundwater protection, general environmental protection, and a desire to limit 
structural damage from sinkholes were the most common reasons for implementing 
regulations in the first place; far less frequently cited reasons included cave protection 
and avoiding litigation (only seven percent cited cave protection as a motivation 
for passing karst regulations). Stormwater drainage regulations are by far the most 
common regulatory technique employed for these purposes (cited by 90% of respondents), 
followed by mandatory setbacks (58%), dumping and waste disposal rules 
(55%), and additional steps in the permitting process (52%). Sixty-seven percent 
say that karst-related land use regulations were implemented in their municipalities 
as a reactive measure to address pre-existing problems, rather than as a preventative 
measure. Participants who said their regulations were reactive cited contamination 
of groundwater resources and damage to property as the primary drivers in pursuing 
regulation-based solutions: 

• 
“Sinkholes have caused extensive damage to buildings, highways, utilities and 
public facilities. Sinkholes have even led to death in connection with natural 
gas lines.” 
• 
“County growth made the regulations necessary for ground water protection, 
flooding, property damage, and general environmental conservation.” 
• 
“A backyard collapsed due to development over a karst system. At the time the 
house was worth 62 thousand and it cost about 175 thousand to fix the problem.” 
• 
“Flooding of new lakeside homes where developer illegally diverted stormwaters 
into an injection well/sinkhole without a TDEC Class V injection well permit. 
Sinkhole backed up and also flooded downstream before waters entered lake.” 
• 
“Mostly preventative, except for issue of groundwater/aquifer impact, which had 
been ongoing.” 
• 
“No storm sewer system; sinkholes used for storm water disposal.” 

Survey Results: How Planners Think About Karst 

• 
“Excessive nitrates in groundwater and stormwater affecting surface water 
quality.” 
• 
“Often communities try to pass a carbonate ordinance when they are faced with 
a potential development coming to town.” 
• 
“Sinkhole activity had contributed to destruction of roadway surfaces, detention 
ponds and drainage courses. There was additional impact on private wells and a 
public water supply.” 
The Implementation Process: Stakeholders, Time, 
and Other Factors 

It is difficult to fully understand the regulatory process without knowing who drives 
it. According to the survey results, 39% of the time, proposals for regulating land 
use in karst terrains came from a branch of local government; 21% of the time, it 
came from state or federal government instead. In most cases (62%), these regulations 
were ultimately approved and implemented by a commission or other elected 
body, with a single elected official being responsible for implementation 21% of 
the time. 

When asked about the length of time it took for karst-related land use regulations 
to be implemented in their jurisdictions, nearly 40% say it happened within two 
years of the initial proposal (33% either don’t know or don’t remember how long 
it took, which was the second most popular response). This suggests that certain 
policy analysis tools that focus on the long term, like Sabatier’s Advocacy Coalition 
Framework (Sabatier and Jenkins-Smith 1988; Sabatier 1991), may not be completely 
appropriate for use in analyzing the implementation process of karst-related 
land use regulations. 

In many cases, there was a varied mix of people and entities that contributed 
some input into the process of developing these regulations; of the options provided, 
the two that were selected least frequently are the building and construction industry 
(18%) and the federal government (15%). Local government departments were 
generally recognized as having the most influence on the process (52%); the federal 
government was recognized as the least influential (52%). 

Non-elected professionals were influential: Forty-seven percent of participants 
said they had a strong influence on the development of the regulations that were 
ultimately implemented. Some representative comments from this group of respondents 
include: 

• 
“Geologist, soil scientist, hydro geologist, biologist, and others all have had a significant 
role in conducting solid science to be used in development of the rule;” 
• 
“Regulations reflected credible engineering and geologic knowledge and 
experience;” 
• 
“Provision of the science base for understanding groundwater, the aquifers in the 
state, the rate of recharge, etc., affected decisions prioritizing areas that are karst 
sensitive and in developing the land use regulations to protect them.” 

48 
3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

Local residents, on the other hand, did not seem to have much influence on the 
regulations: 33% of respondents described local residents’ influence as “slight,” 
while 18% called it nonexistent. In cases where local residents had a greater influence 
on the regulation development process, no real pattern emerges; one respondent 
suggests that citizen participation is tied to the level of danger posed to residences 
by karst, but this theme is not repeated in other responses: 

• 
“Where houses have been subject to flooding, there was major clamoring to solve 
problems...buy-outs and identification of flood limits around sinkholes.” 
• 
“Local residents participated in the process; were generally supportive.” 
• 
“Public input was a continuing part of the process of developing land use regulations, 
through the comprehensive planning review process.” 
• 
“The reporting of the various incidents provided sufficient documentation to 
warrant investigation of appropriate regulations and safeguards.” 
• 
“Clearly, the public is concerned about the occurrence of sinkholes as it is a 
regular ‘phenomenon’ due to subsurface conditions, location between three bodies 
of water, and the early, dense urban development of the City pre-federal, state 
or local land use regulation. City Planning, Zoning and Engineering personnel 
took the lead develop and enforce regulations in the interest of the public health, 
safety and welfare.” 
Survey participants say that generally, these regulations were not affected by 
other land use regulations already in place. Thirty-nine percent of respondents 
claimed that pre-existing land use regulations and ordinances had no influence on 
the development of the karst-related regulations; 24% said there was some influence 
but described it as slight. Several respondents offered more information in the free 
response section; the ones listed here are from those who felt that existing land 
use regulations had either no impact or only a slight influence on karst regulatory 
development in their jurisdictions: 

• 
“City had previously passed Creek regulations governing increased setbacks.” 
• 
“Karst regulations represented a new field of regulation.” 
• 
“[Regulations were] part of comprehensive plan.” 
• 
“State already had regulations about setback of septic systems from karst areas 
(sinkholes etc.) which were incorporated in development reviews.” 
• 
“Knowledge of related state regulations was used in pressuring the local elected 
officials to push for adopting similar regulation.” 
Expected Outcomes and Actual Outcomes of Karst Regulation 

Some of the more interesting findings of this survey are the differences between 
what respondents say they would expect to come from implementing additional 
regulation on development in karst terrains and what actually happened. For example, 
34% of respondents indicated they would expect the implementation of karst 
regulations to lead to an increase in housing costs, but only 11% actually observed 


Survey Results: How Planners Think About Karst 

this reaction. Likewise, 18% say they would anticipate the number of new development 
projects in a town that regulates development on karst to decline. However, 
only 7% claim to have seen new projects locate elsewhere as a result of the presence 
of karst-related land use regulations. Similarly 14% said they would expect population 
density to decline; again, a much smaller percentage (two percent) actually saw 
this happen as a result of implementing karst regulations. Perhaps most surprising 
is that totally 75% of respondents said they would expect to see an improvement in 
groundwater quality as a result—but only 19% actually did. 

The expectations of survey participants of the outcomes of adding additional 
regulatory requirements to development in karst terrains varied widely. Qualitatively 
speaking, expectations expressed here tended to be distinctly positive or distinctly 
negative; very few responses incorporated both viewpoints. The list below is a 
representative sample: 

• 
“Effects on development could vary; could reduce development & increase housing 
costs, but karst features could also become a valued amenity to property.” 
• 
“Lower property insurance rates; a decline in structures collapsing or subsiding 
into the karst features.” 
• 
“A decline in build-out population and structural density due to better treatment 
of stormwater and the need for more space for surface water treatment. 2) More 
groundwater recharge areas. 3) Open space dedications in very karst areas, spring 
protection zones.” 
• 
“Improved public safety, preservation of land values, landscape appropriate 
development, increased environmental quality.” 
• 
“None. Karst regulations carry the same weight as other design criteria found 
in local land use ordinances, i.e., stormwater management, traffic, improvements 
layout, floodplains, watercourses, etc.” 
• 
“It would be very difficult to isolate areas that this type of regulation would apply. 
Developers in Florida are required to do hydrogeological tests to determine subsurface 
conditions. Even with these tests, sinkhole activity in Florida is hard to 
predict.” 
• 
“Increase in development related lawsuits. Also, increase in number of variances 
requested (to develop where karst exists).” 
• 
“Increase in development costs. Level or declining tax base.” 
When subjects were asked about the outcomes of implementing karst regulations 
that they actually observed, there is a sharp difference in tone and content from 
these expectations. Respondents did not observe regulations to have a significant 
impact on development costs, and some even felt the regulations improved the overall 
quality of development decisions: 

• 
“A slight increase in cost of permitting for a small number of developments.” 
• 
“Housing costs have increased in the last 15 or so years since the initial 
regulations were put in place, but I don’t think there is any correlation between 
these costs and the regulations.” 

50 
3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

• 
“Better development decisions can be made due to the requirement that karst 
features be identified on subdivision plats.” 
• 
“More environmentally appropriate development.” 
Finally, 70% of respondents say that decisions on whether or not to adopt karst 
regulations were not influenced by the presence or absence of karst regulations 
in neighboring towns. This sort of strategic behavior and its implications will be 
examined in more detail later in this book. 

Appropriateness and Effectiveness of Regulating 
Development on Karst 

Survey participants were overwhelmingly friendly to the concept of regulating 
development on karst, with 97% saying it is an appropriate thing for municipalities 
to do. Whereas 68% said the karst-related regulations in force in their own jurisdictions 
are effective; 18% say they are not, with the balance expressing no opinion. 
Even so, 70% of respondents said they feel there is room for improvement in their 
municipality’s karst regulation strategy. Recurring themes on this topic included 
tightening restrictions on development in karst areas, improving information flow 
(both between government and the public and between different branches of government), 
and enforcement and follow-through by regulating agencies: 

• 
“I’m not sure that building sites are always well selected in relation to karst 
...implication: potential review with building permit, especially on pre-existing 
subdivisions (prior to setback provisions that are currently called for with newer 
subdivisions).” 
• 
“Get more municipalities to adopt [karst land use regulations].” 
• 
“Provide more restrictions and not allowing the filling in of sinkholes unless 
approved via a public hearing.” 
• 
“We could require further setback from ‘inactive’ karst features; we could require 
‘high performance’ septic tanks or central sewer systems as a minimal requirement 
for low density residential development, to remove nitrates and reduce their 
impact to groundwater/aquifer.” 
• 
“We need to add buffering or preserves around known sinks and other karst areas. 
Right now we rely heavily on the Flood Damage Prevention Resolution to protect 
all waters of the state, the Illicit Discharge Detection and Eliminary Resolution 
to regulate illegal dumping, and more specifically holding up all construction 
plan approval until the State’s geologist can approve any new subdivisions where 
sinkholes and caves have been identified, thus requiring injection well permits if 
stormwater diverted to sink or at least protection around the cave/sink during 
construction. We definitely can stand to improve our regs.” 
• 
“Better mapping of karst areas and stronger follow-up by the regulating 
agencies.” 

A More Detailed Analysis of the Results 

• 
“Could expand consideration to all development situations, particularly commercial 
site plans.” 
• 
“Mapping karst area and grading their vulnerability to sinkhole formation and 
ground water contamination and making these maps available to the public.” 
• 
“Educating the general public to the necessity of it. More can always be 
done.” 
• 
“Larger karst feature setbacks, and larger setbacks in general for environmentally 
sensitive areas, i.e., riverine corridors.” 
• 
“Better coordination between sectors of government and other government 
entities.” 
A More Detailed Analysis of the Results 

Certainly a surface-level examination of these results has plenty to offer us, in and of 
itself. However, by cross-referencing responses, we can gain much more insight into 
what they really mean—and we even turn up a couple of interesting contradictions 
in the process. 

The Meaning of “Restrictive” 

As discussed earlier, a slim (54%) majority of survey participants described the karst 
restrictions in place in their communities as either “very restrictive” or “somewhat 
restrictive.” However, the value of knowing that is limited unless we can define 
these terms more precisely, at least in terms of what the survey participants think 
they mean in this context. For example, are there specific regulatory techniques that 
are associated with more restrictive regulations? If so, which ones? 

Cross-referencing responses between relevant survey questions, begins to draw 
out the relationship between perceived regulatory restrictiveness and the use of 
specific regulatory tools within the sample. Table 3.1 shows that, in general, most 
regulatory tools increase penetration rates as perceived regulatory restrictiveness 
increases. In particular, mandatory setbacks and extra administrative steps in the 
permitting and building process are significantly more common in jurisdictions with 
higher perceptions of regulatory restrictiveness. This suggests that the respondents’ 
views of what constitutes “restrictiveness” is not completely subjective and does in 
fact seem to be tied to the implementation of certain regulatory techniques. One 
exception to this pattern is stormwater drainage regulations. Stormwater regulations 
are almost universally applied, regardless of the overall restrictiveness of the karst 
regulations in place. Responses from follow-up interviews suggest that this may 
be related to the relatively high visibility of unaddressed runoff-related problems 
(since politicians are more likely to respond to issues that are more visible and 
immediate), as well as the comparative ease of getting developers to comply with 
these regulations. 


52 3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 
Table 3.1 Perceived restrictiveness of karst regulations 

Not at all Not very Somewhat Very 
restrictive restrictive restrictive restrictive 

Total observations in 2 12 15 4 
each category 

Techniques used 

Mandatory setbacks 0 5 (41.66%) 10 (66.66%) 4 (100%) 
Single extra step 0 3 (25%) 9 (60%) 4 (100%) 
Multiple extra steps 0 2 (16.66%) 4 (26.66%) 2 (50%) 
Stormwater drainage 2 (100%) 10 (83.33%) 14 (93.33%) 4 (100%) 
Dumping and waste 1 (50%) 5 (41.66%) 9 (60%) 3 (75%) 

disposal 
Fertilizer and 0 0 4 (26.66%) 2 (50%) 

chemical 

application 

Other options (the following regulatory tools were mentioned in the free 
response segment of this question) 

Zoning overlay 0 0 1 (6.66%) 0 
Designation of 0 1 (8.33%) 0 1 (25%) 

non-buildable areas 
Sinkhole area 0 1 (8.33%) 0 0 

excluded from 

minimum lot size 

requirements 

Numbers in parentheses reflect the percentages of communities in each restrictiveness category 
that employ a given regulatory technique 

Goals, Effectiveness and the Potential for Improvement 

By identifying the specific goals of regulating development on karst terrains, we can 
examine questions relating to the comparative effectiveness of these regulations. For 
example, are these regulations more effective in achieving some goals than others? 
Are certain regulatory techniques more effective than others? Are some of the most 
frequently cited goals of karst land use regulation perhaps too large to resolve via 
the regulatory tools available to local governments? 

Table 3.2 lists five common goals of karst land use regulation, alongside the 
number of times each was named as a regulatory goal by survey participants. This is 

Table 3.2 Relationship between regulatory goals and perceived regulatory effectiveness 

Regulatory goals Number of respondents 
citing each goal 
Effective? 
Yes No 
Environmental protection 
Groundwater protection 
Cave protection 
Limit structural damage from sinkholes 
Limit governmental liability in lawsuits 
22 
30 
7 
28 
11 
14 
19 
4 
21 
9 
4 
6 
2 
5 
2 


A More Detailed Analysis of the Results 

cross-referenced with a question about the perceived effectiveness of karst land use 
regulations in each respondent’s community. For example, of the 30 subjects who 
said that groundwater protection was one of the goals of their jurisdictions’ karst 
regulations, 19 felt those regulations were effective, while six felt they were not. 

(It should be pointed out that this does not necessarily mean that the survey 
participants felt the regulations were effective in addressing that concern specifically; 
instead, “effectiveness” is taken to mean the overall effectiveness of the karst 
regulations.) 

These responses do not offer a clear relationship between the nature of regulatory 
objectives and the perceived effectiveness of the regulations. Part of the reason for 
this is the general consensus among survey participants that these regulations are, 
in fact, effective: over 67% of respondents feel that way, with the remainder almost 
evenly split between dissenters (17.65%) and those with no opinion (14.71%). This 
high level of satisfaction poses a problem in comparing the effectiveness of various 
regulatory techniques, since there are simply not enough “ineffective” votes to be 
confident in the results, statistically speaking. For this reason, examinations of the 
perceptions of regulatory effectiveness throughout the rest of this chapter will be 
limited. 

That said, let us now briefly look at the effectiveness responses and how they 
correlate with respondents’ opinions on potential improvements in their karst regulations. 
Table 3.3 displays the relationship between perceived regulatory effectiveness 
and perception of potential for improvement in local regulations. It should not 
surprise anyone that survey participants who think their jurisdictions’ regulations 
are ineffective would say that these regulations could be improved. It may, however, 
be somewhat surprising to see that respondents who consider their jurisdictions’ 
karst regulations to be effective also feel that there is room for improvement in 
those regulations, by a nearly three-to-one margin. 

At first glance, this appears to be a tricky contradiction to reconcile: if a regulation 
or ordinance is effective, then why would it require improvement? Certainly the 
word “effective” in this context implies that the regulation or ordinance has achieved 
its goal, either in full or in part. And perhaps this is our explanation: respondents 
may be interpreting the word “effective” as meaning “at least partially successful 
in achieving its goals.” If that is the case, this may reflect the political difficulties 
involved in implementing laws and regulations that restrict development and growth 
based solely on the presence of an obscure geologic phenomenon. So something is 
better than nothing, but more would have been even better. 

Table 3.3 Relationship between perceived regulatory effectiveness and perception of potential 
improvement in local regulations 

Are local karst land use Is there room for improvement in local 
regulations effective? karst land use regulation? 
Yes No 
Yes 13 5 
No 3 1 


54 3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

How the Extent of the Local Karst Affects Choice 
of Regulatory Technique 

Certainly, the amount of karst found beneath a municipality should influence the 
final form of any karst regulations implemented there. For example, more comprehensive 
regulatory approaches may not be appropriate for locations where the extent 
of karst is limited; likewise, areas with significant karst should probably consider 
passing more than a simple stormwater runoff management ordinance. In practice, 
municipalities generally have to make that determination—how much regulation 
is enough—on their own. By consulting Table 3.4, which describes the relationship 
between karst system size and regulatory techniques employed in the survey sample, 
we can identify the regulatory components that are more commonly used in areas 
with extensive karst, as well as those used in locations with limited karst geology. 

It is clear from Table 3.4 that stormwater drainage rules are the most preferred 
regulatory technique. These rules are widely applied, regardless of the amount of 
karst present. Mandatory setbacks become a more preferred regulatory technique as 
the amount of karst present increases. In fact, setbacks, waste disposal and dumping, 
and chemical application are used most frequently by jurisdictions with the most extensive 
karst systems, while extra steps in the permitting and building process seem 
to be preferred in communities with moderate karst (in other words, municipalities 
in which between 31 and 50% of the land is underlain by karst). 

Only one survey participant said that a zoning overlay is in use in his or her community, 
despite having only a minimal karst presence there. A zoning overlay would, 

Table 3.4 Relationship between the extent of local karst systems and the regulatory techniques 
used 

Extent of karst 

< 10% 10%–30% 31%–50% > 50% 
Total observations in each 2 6 15 11 
category 
Regulatory techniques used 
Mandatory setbacks 
Single extra step 
Multiple extra steps 
Stormwater drainage 
Dumping and waste disposal 
Fertilizer and chemical application 
0 
1 (50%) 
0 
2 (100%) 
0 
0 
3 (50%) 
3 (50%) 
1 (16.66%) 
6 (100%) 
3 (50%) 
0 
9 (60%) 
9 (60%) 
5 (33%) 
12 (80%) 
6 (40%) 
1 (6.66%) 
7 (63.63%) 
5 (45.45%) 
3 (27.27%) 
10 (90.9%) 
9 (81.81%) 
4 (36.36%) 
Other options (the following regulatory tools were mentioned in the 
free response segment of this question) 
Zoning overlay 
Designation of non-buildable areas 
Sinkhole area excluded from 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
1 
0 
0 
0 
minimum lot size requirements 

Numbers in parentheses reflect the percentages of communities in each restrictiveness category 
that employ a given regulatory technique 


A More Detailed Analysis of the Results 

on the surface, seem to be one of the more restrictive approaches to development in 
karst terrains; the fact that it is employed by a jurisdiction with such low levels of 
karst is interesting and may indicate that the specific requirements of that particular 
zoning overlay district are modest. 

It would also be interesting to compare the subjects’ perception of regulatory 
restrictiveness to the extent of karst present in their jurisdictions. We would expect 
the results, shown in Table 3.5, to track closely with the results from the previous 
comparison. Very generally speaking, one could make the argument that the perceived 
restrictiveness of a jurisdiction’s regulations is loosely related to the extent 
of the local karst. However, the low numbers of respondents makes it difficult to 
definitively conclude anything. 

Table 3.5 Relationship between the extent of the local karst system and the perceived 
restrictiveness of local karst regulations 

Local extent of karst 

< 10% 10%–30% 31%–50% > 50% 
Total observations in each 2 6 15 11 
category 
Perceived restrictiveness of local 
karst regulations 
Not at all restrictive 1 1 0 0 
Not very restrictive 0 2 5 5 
Somewhat restrictive 1 3 7 4 
Very restrictive 0 0 2 2 

Preventative or Reactive Implementation and Regulatory 
Restrictiveness 

When asked if karst regulations were enacted as a preventative measure or in 
response to a specific, ongoing issue, most said that regulations had been implemented 
reactively rather than preventatively. This is worth noting because of the 
possibility that the circumstances surrounding the implementation of regulations 
may have affected the form the regulations took: if, for example, a town’s karst regulations 
were hurriedly passed in response to a serious, recently discovered problem 
with groundwater quality, those regulations may be too restrictive or otherwise inappropriate 
as a method of addressing the groundwater problem over the long term. 
There may be differences in the restrictiveness and effectiveness of karst regulations 
that were enacted as a preventative measure and those that were implemented 
reactively. 

Table 3.6 suggests that regulations enacted in response to a specific problem that 
is already occurring tend to be more restrictive than those implemented as a preventative 
measure. This does lend some weight to the idea that reactively passed regulations 
may be a bit too restrictive; on the other hand, it could also mean that more 
restrictive regulations are required to repair an established, entrenched problem than 


56 
3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

Table 3.6 Relationship between the nature of local regulations and their perceived restrictiveness 

Perceived restrictiveness 
Were local karst regulations implemented 
to be preventative or reactive? 

Preventative Reactive 
Not at all restrictive 
Not very restrictive 
Somewhat restrictive 
Very restrictive 
1 
3 
6 
0 
1 
7 
9 
4 

Table 3.7 Relationship between the nature of local regulations and their perceived effectiveness 

Perceived effectiveness 
Were local karst regulations implemented 
to be preventative or reactive? 

Preventative Reactive 
Effective 6 17 
Not effective 3 2 

to head off a potential future issue. Even more striking than that is the effective/not 
effective split shown in Table 3.7: respondents in jurisdictions where karst regulations 
were implemented in a reactive manner are far more likely to consider those 
regulations to be effective than are respondents from communities that enacted preventative 
karst regulations instead. At first glance, this may appear to bolster the 
idea that reactive regulations are more restrictive because they have to be. However, 
it may simply be another illustration of the notion that more restrictive regulation 
is by definition more effective. Another possible explanation is that cases where 
preventative measures were taken, the karst-related problems they were intended 
to prevent were by that point inevitable; the fact that they eventually occurred even 
after regulations were put in place could then be seen as “proof” that the preventative 
regulations were inadequate. 

Initiators vs. Restrictiveness 

Different actors may begin the process of implementing karst-related regulations 
for different reasons and may have distinctly different goals. Those differences may 
make themselves apparent in the specific forms taken by the resulting regulations. 
Table 3.8 shows the relationship between the initiators of the regulatory process 
and the perceived restrictiveness of the regulations that emerged from the process. 
Branches of local government were by far the most frequent initiators of regulation; 
most of these regulations came down squarely in the middle measures of regulatory 
restrictiveness. Certainly, one thing this table does show us is that who began the 
process of developing karst land use regulations has little, if anything, to do with the 
overall level of restrictiveness of those regulations. 

We can probe this question a bit further by comparing initiators to the individual 
components used in these regulations. The results are provided in Table 3.9. 


A More Detailed Analysis of the Results 

Table 3.8 Relationship between initiators of local karst regulations and perceived restrictiveness 
Initiators of local karst regulations Perceived restrictiveness 

Notatall Not very Somewhat Very 
restrictive restrictive restrictive restrictive 
Branch of local government 2 6 5 1 
Branch of state or fed government 1 4 2 0 
County commission or equivalent 1 2 2 0 
Environmental or science groups 0 2 0 0 
Other 0 1 0 1 

From these results, it is difficult to generalize about the influences of the different 
regulatory initiators in the final form of the regulations themselves. It does seem 
clear that regulations initiated by state and federal levels of government are less 
likely to incorporate mandatory setbacks than other techniques, like stormwater 
runoff and drainage management or additional steps in the permitting and building 
process. 

Table 3.9 Relationship between regulatory techniques used and identity of regulatory initiators 
Regulatory initiators 

Branch or Branch of 
department of state or Environmental 
local federal County or city or science 
government government commission groups Other 
Total observa15 
7 6 2 2 
tions in 
each 
category 
Regulatory 
techniques 
used 
Mandatory 10 2 4 1 1 
setbacks 
Single extra 7 6 2 1 1 
step 
Multiple extra 4 2 2 1 0 
steps 
Stormwater 13 7 5 2 2 
drainage 
Dumping and 8 4 2 1 1 
waste 
disposal 
Fertilizer and 2 3 0 1 0 
chemical 
application 

Other 50 1 0 0 


58 3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

The Influence of Non-elected Professionals vs. Regulatory 
Restrictiveness 

It is unrealistic to expect most elected officials to have detailed knowledge and 
understanding of karst and the challenges it poses to human systems above it. 
Therefore, input from people with subject-specific expertise could easily become 
a critical factor both in the development of karst regulations and in the form they 
ultimately take. In particular, it would be very easy for elected officials to either 
overestimate or underestimate the severity of karst-related problems without input 
from non-elected professionals like engineers, geologists, or hydrologists, among 
others. Table 3.10 displays a rough sketch of the impact of professional input on 
karst-related land use regulations. There seems to be no relationship at all between 
the amount of influence exerted by non-elected professionals and the restrictiveness 
of the resulting regulation. At all levels of professional influence, the distribution of 
regulatory restrictiveness is once again centered around “not very restrictive.” It is 
interesting to note that there is no trend toward excessive regulation as the influence 
of non-elected professionals increases. 

As when examining the role of regulatory initiators in the previous section, this 
question can be examined in more detail by including a comparison between levels 
of non-elected professional influence with the appearance of specific regulatory 
tools in the karst land use ordinances; this comparison is shown in Table 3.11. As 

Table 3.10 Relationship between levels of influence of non-elected professionals and the perceived 
restrictiveness of the resulting regulations 

Level of influence from Perceived restrictiveness of karst regulations 
non-elected professionals 
Not at all Not very Somewhat Very 
restrictive restrictive restrictive restrictive 
None 0 0 0 0 
Slight 0 3 1 0 
Moderate 1 5 1 0 
Strong 3 8 3 1 

Table 3.11 Relationship between regulatory techniques employed and the level of influence over 
the regulatory process displayed by non-elected professionals 

Level of influence from non-elected professionals 
None Slight Moderate Strong 
Total observations in each category 0 4 7 16 
Regulatory techniques used 
Mandatory setbacks 0 4 4 8 
Single extra step 0 1 4 11 
Multiple extra steps 0 1 0 8 
Stormwater drainage 0 4 7 15 
Dumping and waste disposal 0 0 6 9 
Fertilizer and chemical application 0 0 2 4 

Other 0 1 1 (overlay) 3 


A More Detailed Analysis of the Results 

the influence of non-elected professionals increases, so too does the likelihood that 
extra steps are included in the permitting and development process for projects in 
karst areas; likewise for dumping and waste disposal and fertilizer and chemical 
application. 

Expected Outcomes vs. Propensity to Regulate 

As we have seen elsewhere in this book, regulating land use is often a politically 
charged endeavor, with many strongly held opinions on both sides of the issue. One 
might wonder how these opinions affect the process of implementing karst land use 
ordinances and regulations: is it possible that towns in which land use professionals 
and policymakers have negative expectations regarding the outcomes of karst 
land use regulations are less likely to implement such regulations? By displaying 
the differences in the expected outcomes of karst land use regulation among land 
use professionals in towns that regulate development on karst and towns that don’t, 
Table 3.12 shows that this is, in fact, the case. In this table, outcomes that could best 
be described as “positive” are connoted by a (+) symbol; negative outcomes are 
connoted by a (-) symbol (the “decline in density” option could be defensibly described 
as either positive or negative and is thus not assigned a qualitative descriptor 
here). Note that the two negative responses—increasing housing costs and a decline 
in new development projects—were selected as likely outcomes significantly more 
often by respondents from jurisdictions where karst regulations are not in place. 
Likewise, two of the three positive responses (a decline in litigation filed against 
the city and improved groundwater quality) were much more likely to be identified 
as expected outcomes by respondents from jurisdictions in which karst land use 
regulations had been enacted. 

Survey participants were given the opportunity to describe the nature of outcomes 
they anticipated that might not be explicitly listed in the survey. Expected outcomes 

Table 3.12 Differences in expected outcomes of karst regulation between towns that do regulate 
and towns that do not 

Regulating Not regulating 
Total observations in each category 
Expected outcome 
32 21 
Total Pct (%) Total Pct (%) 
Increasing residential land values (+) 
Decline in litigation (+) 
Improved groundwater quality (+) 
Decline in density 
Increasing housing costs (-) 
Decline in new development projects (-) 
Other outcome 
5 
7 
25 
3 
4 (2 overlap) 
2 
11 
15.6 
21.9 
78.12 
9.4 
12.5 
6.25 
34.37 
4 
0 
8 
4 
11 (3 overlap) 
7 
3 
19 
0 
38.1 
19 
52.38 
33.3 
14.28 

A (+) represents a positive outcome; a (-) represents a negative outcome. No sign indicates a 
neutral outcome, or one that could widely be perceived as either positive or negative. 


60 3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

identified by respondents from communities in which karst-related regulations were 
present included: 

 Less structural damage; 
 more groundwater recharge space; 
 more open space dedications; 
 improved public safety; 
 landscape appropriate development; 
 lower property insurance rates; 
 better education and communication between developers, state and county; 
 reduced incidents of flooding and subsidence; 
 increased public awareness; and 
 nothing at all. 
Respondents from communities where development on karst had no additional 
restrictions, on the other hand, provided the following list of expected outcomes: 

 Increase in development costs; 
 level or declining tax base; 
 increase in development-related lawsuits; and 
 increase in number of variances requested. 
In terms of anticipating positive or negative outcomes, the qualitative difference 
in expectations between respondents from regulating areas and those from 
non-regulating areas is striking. While respondents from both groups selected 
both positive and negative outcomes from the list of supplied answers, there was 
no crossover at all in the free response answers: of the ten free response answers 
provided by respondents from regulating communities, only one (“nothing 
at all”) can be construed as even a neutral response, with the remaining nine being 
positive expectations. Similarly, three of the four free response answers from 
respondents living in non-regulating areas are negative expectations, while the 
fourth (“increase in number of variances requested”) can be seen as a neutral 
response. 

There are two possible explanations for these results that spring immediately to 
mind. First, they may be representative of a divergence of attitudes toward regulation 
in general, which is already reflected in the difference in practice of karst regulation. 
Second, with regard to respondents with positive expectations of the results of karst 
regulation, these results could be a matter of respondents projecting their current 
understanding of and attitudes toward karst regulation backwards. 

By examining responses from individuals working in regulating municipalities 
only, we can now compare respondents’ expected outcomes with the results 
they actually observed. Table 3.13 makes clear that in most cases, neither 
the positive nor the negative expected outcomes of karst-related land use regulation 
came to pass once the regulations were implemented. An improvement in 
groundwater quality was observed in five communities where karst-related regulation 
was implemented; all five of these respondents indicated that they would 
expect to see such an improvement (“overlap”). In no other case was the overlap 


A More Detailed Analysis of the Results 

Table 3.13 Differences between expected outcomes and observed outcomes of regulating karst 
(municipalities that regulate only) 

Potential outcomes Expected Observed Overlap 
Higher housing costs 4 1 1 
Lost development opportunities 2 1 1 
Improved groundwater quality 25 5 5 
Decrease in subsidence-related damage* 5 8 1 
Decrease in density 3 1 1 

* expectations were expressed in the free response section of this question 
quantity more than one. In only one instance did more respondents observe an 
outcome (a decrease in subsidence-related damage) than indicated they would expect 
such an outcome; even so, only one respondent overlapped between expectation 
and observation. Most of the negative expectations of respondents from 
non-regulating communities also did not materialize in towns that chose to 
regulate. 

Eight respondents indicated they saw no impacts of the karst land use regulations 
implemented in their jurisdictions; four others described observed outcomes not 
mentioned in the survey: 

 A small increase in permitting costs for some developments; 
 Better development decisions due to increased amount of information; 
 More environmentally appropriate development; and 
 Stronger ties between state and local development regulations and procedures. 
A fifth respondent said that he or she had observed rising housing costs over the 
last fifteen years, but added that there is probably no direct connection to the karst 
regulations in place there. 

One interesting thing about the data shown in Table 3.13 is that they are contradicted 
to some extent by the data in Table 3.2. In that table, we see that nearly 
two-thirds of respondents who cited groundwater protection as a motivating force 
for implementing karst land use regulation felt the regulation had been effective in 
achieving that goal. Yet in Table 3.13, only 20% of respondents who expected to 
see an improvement in groundwater quality could say that they had observed such 
an improvement. Why the discrepancy? The most obvious explanation is that these 
respondents simply assumed the regulations had been effective, despite not having 
observed any actual improvement. 

The responses displayed in Tables 3.12 and 3.13 have particularly interesting implications. 
First, there is a strong suggestion that attitudes of land use professionals 
could be a major factor in determining whether or not karst regulations are passed at 
all. Second, the expected results of karst land use regulation—both positive and 
negative—often do not come to pass. One exception to this was a decrease in 
subsidence-related damage; more respondents observed this result than anticipated 
it. Both of these conclusions could in turn have significant implications in the process 
of implementing karst land use regulations. 


62 
3 What Planners and Land Use Professionals Understand About Karst 

Summary: What Planners Can Tell Us About Karst 
Land Use Regulation 

The planners who participated in this survey revealed—both directly and indirectly— 
a great deal about karst regulation and how it works. While not all of this information 
will be useful in constructing the framework, some of the more noteworthy conclusions 
include: 

• 
Stormwater drainage and runoff regulations are the most popular method of regulating 
development on karst terrains; 
• 
Employing mandatory setbacks as a regulatory tool is more common in municipalities 
with more extensive karst formations; 
• 
Attitudes held by planners on the likely outcomes and impacts of karst land use 
regulation seem to have an influence on whether or not such regulations are imposed; 
• 
The expected results of karst regulation, particularly “secondary effects,” like 
changes in population density or growth rates, often do not come to pass; 
• 
Seeking input from non-elected professionals (for example, geologists, engineers, 
hydrologists) does not lead to inherently more restrictive regulations; 
• 
No clear relationship can be identified between the restrictiveness of the regulations 
and the identity of the initiator of the regulation implementation process; 
• 
“Reactive” regulations tend to be more restrictive than preventative regulations; 
• 
Often, respondents will say that karst regulations are effective methods of achieving 
a particular goal, even if they haven’t actually witnessed it; 
• 
Strategic behavior does not seem to be an issue in the process of deciding whether 
or not to implement karst land use regulations. 
It’s important to remember that, because planners are human and often have personal 
connections to these ordinances, we cannot simply accept their assertions at 
face value. Over the next two chapters, we will see the opinions and ideas shared 
by the survey sample examined in real-world situations. Both chapters present case 
studies designed to explore how human populations, karst systems and karst land 
use regulations interacted, in different environments and under varying conditions. 
And while many of the answers provided in this survey are confirmed by these case 
studies, there are some divergent results as well. 

References 

Sabatier, P.A.; Jenkins-Smith, H.C. 1988. The advocacy coalition framework: an assessment. In 

Theories of the Policy Process (Paul Sabatier, ed.), pp. 117–166. Westview Press, Boulder, CO 
Sabatier, P.A. 1991. Toward better theories of the policy process. Political Science and Politics, 

v. 24, no. 2, pp. 147–156 

Chapter 4 
The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations 
on the Communities that Implement 
Them – a Pair of Case Studies 

Abstract Urbanization and its related activities in karst landscapes often generate 
significant threats to karst aquifers. Industrial activities, street runoff, and waste disposal 
have the potential to deposit contaminants directly into the aquifer, particularly 
after a good rain. This chapter includes two case studies that examine how karst land 
use regulations work in a real-world context. The first looks at cities in Kentucky 
and Missouri in an effort to identify the ways, if any, in which mandatory setback 
ordinances affect density in the areas where they are applied. The second uses data 
from municipalities in Pennsylvania to explore what, if any, economic impact the 
act of implementing karst-aware land use regulations has within the municipalities 
that choose to do that. While the Pennsylvania case study finds no evidence of any 
economic impact brought about by implementing karst-related land use ordinances, 
the first case study suggests that the influence of setbacks on densities is ambiguous. 

Keywords Urbanization · Density · Economic impact · Karst ordinances and 
regulations · Pennsylvania · Kentucky · Missouri · Setbacks 

Karst land use regulations place restrictions on how people are able to use the land 
they live on. Sometimes these restrictions are negligible. However, in some circumstances 
they can impose significant inconveniences for anyone who lives near a 
karst feature, or above a heavily karstified limestone aquifer. In these cases, there is 
a trade-off: more diligent karst protection in exchange for accepting limits on what 
you may be permitted to do with your piece of property. That exchange is at the 
heart of any proposal to enact karst land use regulations. 

But in order to make an informed decision about this trade-off, local residents 
need some idea of the practical effects of accepting these limits. How will the regulations 
affect the way in which they live their day-to-day lives? How will they impact 
the local economy? How will densities change? These are very real questions that 
should be answered before a sinkhole ordinance is approved and they form the basis 
for the case studies conducted in this chapter. 

This chapter looks at two examples of what happens to cities and towns when 
karst land use regulations enter the equation. It asks what observable, measureable 
impacts karst land use regulations have on the communities that use them, and uses 

S. Fleury, Land Use Policy and Practice on Karst Terrains, 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9670-9 4, C
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009 


64 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

demographic, economic and geologic data to begin to flesh out an answer. The discussion 
will be limited to two general types of impact—impacts on population and 
housing densities and economic impacts, particularly lost opportunities for growth 
and development. 

The first case study examines four cities in Missouri and Kentucky and focuses 
on ways in which karst regulations change the physical form of cities and towns— 
specifically housing densities. The second uses data collected from cities and 
townships across south-central Pennsylvania and explores questions of economics— 
specifically, does a municipality that adopts karst land use restrictions put itself at 
a competitive disadvantage with respect to its neighbors that do not use such techniques? 
Certainly planners, policymakers and private citizens alike have an interest 
in answering these questions as carefully as possible before approving any karstsensitive 
land use ordinances. 

Case Study One: The Impact of Sinkhole Setbacks in Kentucky 
and Missouri 

As we have seen in the preceding chapters, karst land use regulation is common 
throughout the United States. While these regulations and ordinances are usually 
adapted to meet local conditions, some regulatory techniques are employed in 
very different environments. This first case study examines one of these common 
techniques—the setback—and its impacts on patterns of human settlement and density 
in four cities in Kentucky and Missouri. 

Setbacks (also called no-build areas in some municipal codes) are simply buffers 
placed in certain spots to prevent unwanted encroachment of human structures into 
sensitive areas. In the cases studied here, these setbacks are applied to sinkholes, 
placing a buffer between the edge of a sinkhole and the point at which construction 
or land-disturbing activities are permitted to occur. This buffer zone is therefore 
intended to act as a passive means of protecting the karst system from the impacts 
of human settlement and of protecting human-built structures from the expansion 
of karst landforms. Polluting activities and land stress are kept away from 
the sinkholes, and new buildings are not permitted so near a sinkhole edge as to 
leave the structure vulnerable to sinkhole expansion. Use of setbacks as a technique 
for controlling development on karst terrains is not unusual: setbacks are found in 
communities in Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, Florida, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, 
and Virginia, among other locations (some examples can be found in codes of ordinances 
for Pasco County, FL; Lower Saucon, PA; Lexington-Fayette County, KY; 
and Springfield, MO, for example). 

We might expect setbacks to have an impact on housing density because they 
work to limit the amount of developable land in the immediate vicinity. Any land 
enclosed by a setback is removed from that inventory, which in theory should result 
in larger parcels or more undevelopable lots. This line of thinking relies on 
two assumptions: First, that all sinkholes are correctly identified and properly cat



Case Study One: The Impact of Sinkhole Setbacks in Kentucky and Missouri 

alogued; and second, that the ordinance is actually enforced by city government. 
This last factor is critical, as city government may have neither the resources nor the 
inclination to adequately enforce their own sinkhole ordinances. 

In order to conduct a limited but representative examination of the impact of 
setbacks on housing density, we can interpret data drawn from four study areas in the 
central United States: Lexington-Fayette County, Kentucky; Louisville, Kentucky; 
Springfield, Missouri; and St. Louis, Missouri. All four of these study areas are 
underlain by geology favorable to the development of karst landforms. All four 
are urban: the smallest (Springfield) had a 2000 population of just over 150,000, 
while the largest (St. Louis) had a population of just over 360,000 that same year 

(U.S. Census Bureau 2006). These four sites met criteria for data availability, urbanization, 
and location (i.e., all within the same general region). Urban areas were 
selected for this analysis because the generally higher population and housing densities 
may make compliance with setback regulations more challenging. In rural areas 
where developable land is plentiful, such restrictions could be more easily complied 
with by relocating development to less sinkhole-prone areas, and impacts of setback 
ordinances on housing density patterns would likely be more difficult to detect. 
Despite these similarities, these cities do differ in one important way. Lexington-
Fayette and Springfield employ setback-style regulations to limit development near 
sinkholes. But while Louisville and St. Louis also have sinkholes within the city 
limits, neither uses setbacks as a means to control nearby development. Because of 
this difference in regulatory approach, we can compare trends in housing density 
changes between these two pairs of cities and perhaps identify the impact of setback 
ordinances on those trends. 

How These Four Cities Approach Issues of Karst and Land Use 

Kentucky in particular has a history of karst-related problems instigated by human 
actions. A combination of overenthusiastic land clearing and poor agricultural 
practices in the karstic Sinking Valley simultaneously increased runoff quantities 
and decreased drainage capacity, resulting in severe flooding problems (Dougherty 
1983). As late as the 1920s and 1930s, the city of Bowling Green (which at that time 
had no manmade sewer system) used the caves beneath the city as a waste disposal 
system. Indeed, even today the city has only incomplete records regarding which 
homes are connected to the sewer system and which are not; it is entirely possible 
that some homeowners who think their homes have a working sewer connection are 
actually using old, malfunctioning septic tank systems instead, which pose severe 
threats to the caves and karst below (Crawford 2003). Also in Bowling Green, a 
segment of Dishman Road directly above the Mudderhorn Room of State Trooper 
Cave collapsed in 2002 because of the concentration of stormwater runoff and the 
rapid removal of sediments; the resulting sinkhole was 60 m wide and seven meters 
deep (Kambesis et al. 2004). 


66 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

With this history in mind, it should be no surprise that some Kentucky municipalities 
have chosen to take a proactive regulatory approach to addressing karst issues. 
In Lexington-Fayette, issues of human-karst interaction influence the planning 
process from several different angles. In Chapter 2 of the county’s comprehensive 
plan, protection of sinkholes is listed as an objective of the county’s environmental 
framework. The comprehensive plan points to the presence of karst geology and 
recognizes importance of karst sensitivity to maintaining groundwater quality—in 
particular, as it relates to manure piles. Chapter 3 of the plan includes clusters of 
sinkholes in its definitions of Other Hazardous Areas, and karst areas are also included 
in the definition of Environmentally Sensitive Lands, as well as the accompanying 
overlay district. 

Nearly 800 km to the west, karst and karst landforms are mentioned frequently 
in the Springfield comprehensive plan. For example, the plan notes the threat posed 
by karst to groundwater supplies in the Fulbright Spring area, a major source of 
Springfield’s drinking water; it recommends limiting densities in certain karstic 
watersheds; it acknowledges the potential environmental problems of living on a 
fractured limestone terrain and recommends steps to mitigate these problems; and 
it recommends enacting setbacks for individual sinkholes in several sensitive locations. 
The plan’s authors repeatedly urge the city to review and update its sinkhole 
ordinance to require the consideration of water quality concerns when permitting 
construction projects in sinkhole floodplains. 

Lexington-Fayette attempts to control development in karst areas through zoning 
and subdivision ordinances. This generally means more extensive approval requirements 
for landfills in karst terrain and certain other uses located in karstic 
agricultural areas. Other controls include considering the presence of sinkholes in 
its tree protection standards (for example, according to the zoning ordinance, no 
tree may be removed from a sinkhole that will remain open space). In 1985, the 
Lexington-Fayette Urban County Government passed ordinance SRA 85-2, otherwise 
known as the Sinkhole Ordinance. While it is in some ways redundant to the 
county’s zoning and subdivision ordinances, SRA 85-2 also approaches the issue 
of karst land use regulation in notably different ways. First, it establishes “nonbuildable 
areas” around sinkholes. These non-buildable areas will usually “follow 
the limits of the sinkhole,” but can be expanded or contracted as appropriate by 
the Planning Commission. The sinkhole ordinance restricts—but does not outright 
forbid—development in the sinkhole drainage area. Sinkholes can, in certain circumstances 
also be used for drainage purposes, but buildings may not be constructed 
on sinkhole fill. 

Springfield’s sinkhole ordinance was enacted four years later, in 1989, as a response 
to rapid urbanization and the stormwater runoff problems that came with 
it. It was hoped that this ordinance would prevent the discharge of potentially contaminated 
surface runoff into sinkholes and the aquifer below. While the ordinance 
requires additional steps in the permitting process for developments in sinkhole 
drainage areas, it is the setback/no-build component that most interests us here 
(Barner 1999). Like Lexington-Fayette’s sinkhole ordinance, the non-buildable area 
specified by the Springfield ordinance generally does not extend beyond the limits 


Case Study One: The Impact of Sinkhole Setbacks in Kentucky and Missouri 

of the sinkhole itself; any deviations from this standard can be implemented by local 
government. 

While many karst regulations are enacted with the goal of protecting an aquifer 
or a unique and fragile cave system, neither was the primary goal of the Lexington-
Fayette sinkhole ordinance. Instead, one of the more important motivations behind 
the passage of the Sinkhole Ordinance was to prevent future sinkhole-related legal 
actions against the county (Rebmann 2006). Because litigation reduction has a direct 
financial benefit to the city that ecological protection does not, it seems reasonable 
to assume that the Planning Commission would be more likely to resist pressure 
from landowners and developers to shrink non-buildable areas on the sites of proposed 
construction projects than they would be if the primary motivation behind the 
ordinance were cave preservation. 

Determining the Relationship Between Sinkhole 
and Structural Densities 

Theoretically, sinkhole setbacks should affect structural densities, for reasons explained 
earlier in this chapter. But is that the case? Do karst-related setback-style 
ordinances have any impact on housing density in areas where sinkholes are present? 
And if so, what is the nature of the impact? These are the questions this case study 
was designed to answer. 

Because the effects that can answer these questions are more likely to be observable 
at a smaller scale, this analysis was conducted at the Census block level, the 
smallest geographic unit used by the Census Bureau. Shapefiles were obtained from 
several sources, including the U.S. Census Bureau, the Kentucky GIS office, and 
the Missouri Spatial Data and Information Service. Block-level housing data were 
obtained from the Census Bureau. Sinkhole location data came from the Kentucky 
Geologic Survey and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. Table 4.1 summarizes 
the data used for this analysis. 

Table 4.1 Summary of data used for setback regressions 

Variable Description Mean Std. Dev. Min Max 

lnSQKM Area of Census block, in square 
kilometers (natural log) 
lnSinkDens Number of sinkholes per square 
kilometer (natural log) 

lnHousDens Number of housing units per 
square kilometer (natural 
log) 

Setbacks Binary variable indicating the 

use of setback regulations 
yr 2K Temporal binary variable 
DIDvar Difference-in-differences 

binary variable 

1.011 

1.869 

3.716 

0.686 

0.565 

0.447 

1.273 0.002 5.441 
1.407 0.008 6.159 
2.662 0 8.334 
0.464 

01 

0.496 0 1 
0.497 0 1 
n = 695 for all variables 


68 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

In this analysis, housing and sinkhole density data were included only for blocks 
in each city that contained sinkholes. This is because setback-style ordinances would 
only be an issue in blocks that actually contain sinkholes. For blocks without sinkholes, 
such regulation is moot, since there are no sinkholes to be concerned about. 
Additionally, it meant that potentially unmapped sinkholes that may have a detectable 
impact on density, but would themselves be invisible for purposes of this 
analysis, would not be a factor. Another reason for examining only blocks with 
sinkholes is that doing so helped ensure that roughly the same geographic areas 
were examined in the 1990 and 2000 data sets. Since Census geographies change 
with every Census, block boundaries are not constant and block-level data cannot 
be directly compared between Censuses. Table 4.2 enumerates sinkholes in each of 
the four municipalities. 

The analysis used a simple calculation of the correlation coefficient between 
housing density and sinkhole density; an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression 
to determine the relationship between sinkhole density, housing density and the 
presence of karst-related setback ordinances at the block level; and a differencein-
differences regression to measure the change, if any, in that relationship between 
1990 and 2000. The correlation coefficients and the OLS regressions were run separately 
for observations taken in 1990 and in 2000. 

Several 1990 observations were dropped because housing data were not available 
for those particular blocks. This partially accounts for the different number of 
observations in 1990 and 2000; changes to Census geographies between 1990 and 
2000 account for the rest. 

Table 4.2 Sinkhole counts for each city in the study area 

Number of Number of Census blocks (year 
City sinkholes 2000) that contain sinkholes 
Lexington-Fayette County, KY 1017 217 
Louisville, KY 39 17 
Springfield, MO 181 95 
St. Louis, MO 109 65 

Running the Numbers 

Two slightly different OLS regressions were run for this analysis. The first regression 
used the natural logarithm of housing density (lnHDens) as the dependent 
variable, with the natural logarithm of sinkhole density (lnSinkDens) and setbacks 
(a binary variable set to 1 in blocks where karst-related setback-style ordinances 
were in force) as explanatory variables. The second regression included the natural 
logarithm of block area in square kilometers (lnSQKM) as an additional explanatory 
variable (the natural logs of these variables were taken in order to normalize the data 
and make it more suitable to linear regression analysis). The lnSQKM variable was 
added to account for the fact that in some areas block size varied considerably, which 


Case Study One: The Impact of Sinkhole Setbacks in Kentucky and Missouri 

could conceivably impart bias onto any analysis of density; this was of particular 
concern in Lexington-Fayette County, where many of the Census blocks outside the 
city’s urban growth boundary are quite large. 

Because Lexington-Fayette County’s sinkhole ordinance dates back to 1985, the 
setbacks variable was set to 1 for all observations taken there in both 1990 and 2000; 
this is based on the assumption that five years was enough time for the setbacks to 
show at least some initial impacts on density. By contrast, Springfield’s ordinance 
was passed in 1989; it seems unlikely that any density-related impacts would be 
strong enough to be observable by the following year. For that reason, Springfield’s 
1990 observations were assigned a setbacks value of 0, while the 2000 observations 
were assigned a value of 1. All observations from both St. Louis and Louisville were 
assigned a setbacks value of 0. 

The difference-in-differences (DD) regression is designed to measure the difference 
in the rate of change of a given statistical relationship between two distinct 
groups of observations. In this case, those groups are blocks with karst-related 
setback-style ordinances in place and those without them. DD models are often 
used for detecting changes caused by a specific event or policy. This analysis does 
exactly this, using a DD model to capture changes over time to the relationship 
between housing density and sinkhole density in Census blocks where setback-style 
regulation is in effect. 

In the DD regression used here, lnHDens is once again the independent variable, 
with lnSinkDens, setbacks, and lnSQKM included as explanatory variables. In addition 
to those, the DD regression also includes two other binary variables: yr2k, 
for observations taken in the year 2000; and setbacks yr2k, which was created by 
multiplying setbacks by yr2k. This interaction variable captures the change in the 
relationship between housing density and sinkhole density between 1990 and 2000 
for blocks in which sinkhole setbacks were applicable. In other words, if setback 
ordinances had any impact on the relationship between housing density and sinkhole 
density between 1990 and 2000—for example, by slowing housing density growth 
during that time in areas with higher sinkhole densities—this effect will be captured 
by this variable. 

The correlation coefficient between the natural logarithms of housing density 
and sinkhole density was 0.6735, revealing a moderate amount of positive statistical 
correlation between both variables. Instinctively, one might expect a negative 
correlation between sinkhole density and housing density, since one might expect 
homebuyers to prefer to live further away from sinkholes. That this seems not to 
be the case is interesting and is explored further later in this chapter. At any rate, 
this statistical relationship seems to have weakened between 1990 and 2000. It is 
important to remember that this statistic is nothing more than a general measure 
of correlation between housing density and sinkhole density across the entire study 
area; the presence of setback regulations is not taken into account. 

This positive correlation between sinkhole density and housing density is also 
evident in the OLS regression results (Tables 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6). The setbacks 
variable is statistically significant in three of the four OLS models; additionally, the 
variable’s coefficient has the expected negative sign in all four sets of results, which 


70 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

Table 4.3 Ordinary Least Squares regression results 

Model 1: regression using housing density (natural log) as the dependent 
variable, using year 2000 data. 

Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error t value 

lnSinkDens* 1.1085 0.0955 11.6 
Setbacks -0.3179 0.3408 -0.93 
Constant 1.5479 0.3985 3.88 

* 

=statistically significant at 0.01 
n = 393 
Adjusted R2 = 0.3802 
F = 121.21 


means that housing densities are uniformly lower in blocks where karst setbacks 
are applied. The impact of these conflicting effects on housing density for sinkhole 
density (positive) and for setback ordinances (negative) are linked to sinkhole density; 
in blocks with lower sinkhole densities, the negative correlation is stronger. It 
is also interesting to note that the setbacks variable was more strongly significant 
for observations taken in 1990 than in 2000; this will be examined shortly. 

Table 4.4 Ordinary Least Squares regression results 

Model 2: regression using housing density (natural log) as the dependent 
variable and including area in square kilometers as an explanatory 
variable, using year 2000 data. 

Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error t value 

lnSinkDens** 0.5956 0.1347 4.42 
lnSQKM** -0.5918 0.113 -5.24 
setbacks*-0.5099 0.3318 -1.54 
Constant 3.3121 0.5121 6.47 

** 

= statistically significant at 0.01; *= statistically significant at 0.1 
n = 393 
Adjusted R2 = 0.4195 
F = 95.43 

Table 4.5 Ordinary Least Squares regression results 

Model 3: regression using housing density (natural log) as the dependent 
variable, using year 1990 data. 

Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error t value 
lnSinkDens* 1.1216 0.0869 12.89 
setbacks* -0.8378 0.2205 -3.8 
Constant 2.5262 0.2946 8.57 
* = statistically significant at 0.01 
n = 302 
Adjusted R2 = 0.5301 
F = 170.81 


Case Study One: The Impact of Sinkhole Setbacks in Kentucky and Missouri 

Table 4.6 Ordinary Least Squares regression results 

Model 4: regression using housing density as the dependent variable 
and including area in square kilometers as an explanatory variable, using 
year 1990 data. 

Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error t value 

lnSinkDens** 0.654 0.9893 6.61 
lnSQKM** -1.4088 0.1785 -7.89 
setbacks*-0.4734 0.2061 -2.3 
Constant 4.1847 0.3408 12.28 

** 

= statistically significant at 0.01; *= statistically significant at 0.05 
n = 302 
Adjusted R2 = 0.6101 
F = 157.97 

The DD regression tends to confirm the results of the OLS regression (Table 4.7). 
Here, all five explanatory variables are statistically significant, with the lnSinkdens, 
lnSQKM and setbacks variables showing the same signs they did in the OLS results 
(positive, negative and negative, respectively). The negative sign on the yr2K variable 
argues that, within the study areas, housing densities in Census blocks with 
sinkholes fell between 1990 and 2000 irrespective of the use of setbacks, a result 
that is weakly suggested by comparing coefficients between the two sets of OLS 
regression results. Finally, the coefficient on the setbacks yr2k interaction variable 
is actually positive, counter to what we might expect—this suggests that housing 
density in blocks where setbacks apply actually increased relative to other blocks. 
Instinctively, we would probably expect to see density in these locations fall relative 
to blocks where setback regulations are not in force, particularly since housing 
density in the study areas as a whole actually fell during the 1990s. 

Table 4.7 Difference-in-differences regression results 

Dependent variable: housing density (natural log) 

Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error t value 
lnSinkDens* 0.7003 0.0854 8.2 
lnSQKM* -0.6309 0.0863 -7.31 
setbacks* -0.9743 0.2335 -4.17 
yr2k* -0.9412 0.2604 -3.61 
setbacks y2k* 0.7587 0.3202 2.37 
Constant 3.9058 .03111 12.55 
* = statistically significant at 0.01 
n = 695 
Adjusted R2 = 0.5145 
F = 148.09 


72 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

What All These Numbers Mean 

The analysis described above, while useful, does have its shortcomings. First, there 
is the question of when these sinkholes actually formed. The sinkhole location data 
used here were collected around the year 2000, instead of as they occurred; as a 
result, there is no way to tell whether a sinkhole was twenty years or twenty minutes 
old when the data were collected. It is possible that some of the sinkholes referenced 
in this analysis did not exist in 1990, which may make data on sinkhole densities in 
1990 a bit less reliable. Second, different methods of displaying sinkhole location 
in GIS are used for the Kentucky and Missouri data, which may limit the extent to 
which they are directly comparable. 

The statistical relationships described in this chapter suggest that setbacks do 
appear to be related to housing density in areas where sinkholes are present. The 
fact that housing densities in blocks with sinkholes and setback ordinances actually 
increased is interesting, especially since the time period examined here coincided 
almost exactly with the first decade after implementation of Springfield’s sinkhole 
ordinance. It is interesting because it suggests that Springfield’s sinkhole ordinance 
had no impact on housing density in sinkhole-prone areas during the 1990s: even if 
housing densities in Lexington-Fayette stayed the same—remember, their ordinance 
had already had four or five years to work—the interaction variable should have 
shown the rate of increase in housing densities to be decreasing as setbacks are 
applied to larger segments of the study area. If this interpretation is correct, it still 
leaves unanswered the question of whether the regulations are actually ineffective 
or simply unobtrusive. 

Another factor with the potential to affect this analysis is the urban service area 
(USA) that rings the urbanized section of Lexington-Fayette County. The USA was 
first defined in an amendment to the 1958 comprehensive plan as a method of controlling 
urban growth and protecting the region’s famous horse farms from urban 
encroachment (Fleming 2001). It acts as a growth boundary by imposing a minimum 
lot size beyond its borders; the definition of this area is provided by a map contained 
within the comprehensive plan. 

Originally, the USA was simply a line beyond which the city would refuse to 
provide services such as water, electricity, roads, schools or sewer. But it did not 
work particularly well, at first mostly because of a fragmentation effect: new developments 
that relied on septic systems (and thus able to go without access to 
the city’s sewer system) continued to spring up in rural Fayette County (Carruthers 
2002). This began to change only with the merger of the governments of the City of 
Lexington and Fayette County in 1973. At that point, a minimum lot size beyond the 
USA of ten acres per lot was implemented; this was increased recently to 40 acres 
per lot in an effort to stop the phenomenon of “estate sprawl” (Fleming 2001). 

In general, the goal of implementing an urban service area or urban growth 
boundary is to keep development constrained within a limited geographical area. 
However, that doesn’t stop an urban area from adding population. All things being 
equal, when this growth is contained within a non-expandable geographic area, 
it theoretically will lead to smaller residential lots and higher land rents (Alonso 


Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst Regulations 

1964; Mills 1972). This general concept is a bit more complicated in the case of 
Lexington-Fayette because of the USA. As discussed earlier, in a city with no urban 
service area boundary, the predicted effect of a sinkhole ordinance would be more 
rapid outward growth of the urban area, with larger residential lots to compensate for 
the loss of buildable square footage. But the USA boundary puts opposite pressures 
on urban growth, acting as a method of confinement and limiting growth (Ambrose 
2003). 

Ultimately, what we have in Lexington-Fayette is a city that wishes to restrict 
outward growth and instead redirect it inwards, while at the same time limiting 
the intensity of development in sinkhole-prone areas within the city. The regulations 
used to achieve these goals should have conflicting effects on population and 
structural density: one works to increase density, while the other would have lower 
density as a side effect, at least in some areas. Could the fact that so many sinkholecontaining 
blocks are located in an area with an artificial constraint on the supply of 
buildable land have imparted any bias onto the results? 

At least two factors suggest otherwise. For one thing, the majority of Lexington-
Fayette sinkholes occur outside the USA: out of a countywide total of 936 mapped 
sinkholes, only 200 are found within the USA. Secondly, if the USA were actually 
a factor, one would expect setbacks to have a weaker effect—or none at all—on 
housing density because of the density-increasing effect of the USA. 

Finally, why might we see positive correlation (in other words, as one statistic 
gets larger or smaller, the other follows) between sinkhole densities and housing 
densities? One possible explanation is reporting bias: sinkholes in highly populated 
areas may be more likely to be reported than those in areas with fewer people. However, 
because sinkhole location data from both states were compiled from USGS 
topographical maps, reporting bias is an unlikely explanation. It is also possible 
that karst features are being plugged and used as water features in new residential 
developments, where they would be more likely to be seen as amenities and not as 
hazards. One should not ignore the possibility that higher housing densities may 
bring higher sinkhole densities with them—as discussed in Chapter 1, we do know 
that human populations can place enough stress on karstic terrains to create new 
sinkholes. But without some knowledge of when individual sinkholes formed, it is 
extremely difficult to test this hypothesis. 

This case study examined a direct relationship between sinkholes, setbacks and 
densities. In the next case study, we will explore a more indirect, but no less potentially 
important, relationship: the relationship between karst regulations and local 
economic health. 

Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst 
Regulations: Does It Pay Off? A Case Study from Pennsylvania 

Karst systems are shared resources. But because these systems do not recognize 
administrative or jurisdictional boundaries, karst-related problems generated 
by human activities in one municipality can easily spread to affect neighboring 


74 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

communities. If all communities connected to a particular karst system implement 
regulations intended to protect it, costs are shared by the people who enjoy the benefits 
those regulations bring. However, as we saw in Chapter One, it is sometimes 
thought that karst land use regulations carry high costs, in terms of lost opportunities 
for economic growth. This could encourage some communities to try to avoid 
these costs by refraining from implementing karst-related land use regulation, while 
reaping the benefits of neighboring communities’ efforts at karst protection. This 
is what is known in economics as the free rider problem (see Varian 1992). But is 
such a strategy worthwhile? Using socioeconomic and regulatory data from cities 
and towns in karstic areas of Pennsylvania, this case study examines the question of 
whether towns that do not implement karst regulations enjoy an economic advantage 
over towns that do. 

South-central Pennsylvania and Its Karst 

The study area for this case study runs southwest from the Lehigh Valley to the 
Maryland border. The Lehigh Valley is located in eastern Pennsylvania, approximately 
60 miles north of Philadelphia and 90 miles due west of New York City. The 
region is in a valley of the Appalachian Mountains, with areas of relatively high 
relief along the northwestern and southeastern edges. At the center of the Lehigh 
Valley are Lehigh and Northampton counties. Both counties are highly urbanized— 
taken together, they had a population of about 579,000 in 2000 (U.S. Census Bureau 
2006), with an economic base that was once highly industrial. Socioeconomic statistics 
are pretty uniform across the region. Centers of population include the cities of 
Allentown, Bethlehem and Easton; combined, Lehigh and Northampton counties 
have 62 municipalities. Forty-two of these (Table 4.8) are at least partially underlain 
by carbonate bedrock, which has led to the development of karst landforms in the 
area (Lehigh Valley Planning Commission 2005). 

To the southwest is Berks County, which is not usually considered to be part 
of the Lehigh Valley region but is included here because its urbanized nature and 
extensive karst are characteristics it shares with Lehigh and Northampton counties. 
Berks County had a population of roughly 373,000 in 2000, which is larger than the 
population of either Lehigh County or Northampton County that year. Nearly 80,000 
of Berks County residents lived in Reading, the county’s largest city. Berks County 
contains 76 municipalities within its boundaries, many of which have implemented 
at least some level of karst-related land use regulation (U.S. Census Bureau 2006). 

The remaining three counties in the study area—Cumberland, Franklin and 
Lancaster—are located along the western edge of Pennsylvania’s karst belt, toward 
the center of the state and extending to the Maryland state line (Fig. 4.1). While 
Cumberland and Franklin counties are smaller in terms of population than the 
counties in the Lehigh Valley (with populations of 213,000 and 129,000 in 2000, 
respectively), Lancaster County has the highest population of any in the sample: 
nearly half a million people lived there in 2000. Franklin County’s largest city is 
Chambersburg, with a 2000 population of just under 18,000 (Table 4.9). 


Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst Regulations 

Table 4.8 Municipalities in Lehigh and Northampton Counties underlain by karst 

Portland Allentown 
Upper Mt. Bethel Hanover (Lehigh) 
Lower Mt. Bethel Catasauqua 
Forks North Catasauqua 
Stockertown Northampton 
Tatamy Coplay 
Palmer Whitehall 
Nazareth North Whitehall 
Upper Nazareth Upper Saucon 
Lower Nazareth South Whitehall 
Easton Emmaus 
West Easton Upper Macungie 
Wilson Lower Macungie 
Williams Macungie 
Glendon Lower Milford 
Bethlehem Twp. Upper Milford 
Bethlehem City Alburtis 
Freemansburg Weisenberg 
Hellertown Salisbury 
Allen Hanover (Northampton) 
East Allen Fountain Hill 

The southeastern quarter of Pennsylvania contains part of a long band of karst 
topography that begins in Missouri and Arkansas and stretches eastward and northward, 
all the way to New Jersey and New York. Throughout Pennsylvania’s carbonate 
bedrock band, conditions are suitable for karst topography to develop, and 
landforms like sinkholes, springs and caves are common (Kochanov 1999). Sinking 
streams are another feature commonly found in Pennsylvania’s karstic zones, 
often running considerable distances before disappearing into the earth. Leakage 
from storm sewers and water mains are common drivers of sinkhole development in 
southeastern Pennsylvania, and sudden surface collapse is often the result, sometimes 
with near-disastrous results (see Kochanov 1999; Gillespie 1999; Memon 
et al. 2001; Memon et al. 2002). 

Karst accounts for nearly the entire drainage system in some southeastern Pennsylvania 
communities, where karst aquifers are the source of groundwater 
(Chichester 1996; Kochanov 1999). In Northampton’s Limestone Belt, it is estimated 
that more than half of all precipitation finds its way into the bedrock system below. 
Often there is no surface runoff, as the area’s sinkholes are very well-developed in 
places. For example, between Monocacy and Bushkill Creeks, and between Monocacy 
and Catasauqua Creeks, there is little if any surface drainage: nearly every 
drop of surface water disappears into the underground drainage system (Miller et al. 
1939). 

There are serious problems with both water supply and water quality in some 
of the study area’s limestone regions. Because groundwater flows through—and 
is concentrated in—defined open channels created by solution processes, a well 
driller has to actually hit one of these channels to get access to the groundwater. And 


76 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 


Fig. 4.1 Mapped karst points in the six counties of the Pennsylvania study area (see color plate 35) 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources 

even if a channel is struck, these waters are easily polluted from the contaminants 
carried by surface runoff: as early as 1940, many shallow household wells were 
being abandoned for exactly this reason (Miller 1941). More recently, water drawn 
from wells in the area was found to contain high levels of coliforms, streptococcus 
bacteria, and e. coli. These higher concentrations of e. coli showed a statistically 
significant positive correlation with the presence of carbonate bedrock (Bickford 
et al. 1996). Nitrate levels in the carbonate aquifers of agricultural areas exceeded 
those found in local surface waters, as well as in carbonate aquifers in urbanized 
zones; this is probably related to more intensive use of nitrate-based fertilizers for 
agriculture (Hippe et al. 1994; Lindsey et al. 1997). 


Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst Regulations 

Table 4.9 Year 2000 demographic data for the six Pennsylvania counties in the study area 

Median Population 
household Median home Population in with college 
County Population income value poverty (pct) degree (pct) 

Berks 373,638 $44,714 $104,900 9.4 18.5 
Cumberland 213,674 $46,707 $120,500 6.6 27.9 
Franklin 129,313 $40,476 $97,800 7.6 14.8 
Lancaster 470,658 $45,507 $119,300 7.8 20.5 
Lehigh 312,090 $43,449 $113,600 9.3 23.3 
Northampton 267,066 $45,234 $120,000 7.9 21.2 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau fact sheets 

Land Use Regulation in Pennsylvania and How Karst Relates 

Growth and development across the karstic regions of Pennsylvania is generally 
managed by one of three regulatory tools: a subdivision and land development ordinance 
(SALDO), a zoning ordinance, or a comprehensive plan. However, while the 
first two have the force of law behind them, the comprehensive plan is somewhat 
weaker. The state planning code notes that an act of government shall not be declared 
invalid or subject to challenge on the sole basis that it is inconsistent with the 
adopted comprehensive plan. In other words, a comprehensive plan is for guidance 
only, even though zoning ordinances are supposed to work to promote the goals and 
objectives of the comprehensive plan. Because they do not carry the same force of 
law as a local zoning ordinance or SALDO, comprehensive plans are not included 
in the analysis that follows this section and are mentioned here only for the sake of 
completeness. In some cases, all three are used in a complementary manner so as to 
achieve the maximum level of protection possible. 

The importance of karst geology is acknowledged in comprehensive plans across 
the region. The Lehigh Valley Comprehensive Plan, for example, sets forth two 
policies related to sinkholes: one, that developments should be designed in such 
a way as to minimize the occurrence of sinkholes and sinkhole-related problems; 
and two, that municipalities on carbonate bedrock develop sinkhole management 
programs. The plan also recommends adopting SALDOs to manage development in 
carbonate areas, as well as subdivision ordinances designed to mitigate risk posed 
by sinkholes. However, some comprehensive plans make no effort to address karst 
as a factor in planning for future growth: while the Berks County Comprehensive 
Plan mentions karst as a factor in generating development pressures, nowhere 
does it describe any policies intended to address the issue. It is also important to 
remember that policies and recommendations put forth in a comprehensive plan 
are not legally binding upon the municipalities subject to them (Pennsylvania Planning 
Code 1967), which is a common limitation of comprehensive plans across the 
United States. 

Many counties in Pennsylvania have implemented their own SALDOs and zoning 
ordinances. Under state law, these countywide regulations apply only to 
municipalities without their own ordinances: the Lehigh Valley Comprehensive Plan 


78 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

notes that while “municipal plans are required to be generally consistent with the 
adopted county plan ... county comments cannot override local zoning” (Lehigh 
Valley Planning Commission 2005, p. 51) (emphasis mine). In other words, local 
governments in Pennsylvania have the power to override county governments on 
subdivision, land development, and zoning issues. In practice, this can mean that 
county-level ordinances are applicable in only small portions (i.e., boroughs and 
townships without similar or contradictory regulations) of the county that passed 
them, since counties in Pennsylvania are completely divided into smaller jurisdictions 
(townships, boroughs and cities): there is no “unincorporated” land that rely 
exclusively on county ordinances for management. This is a distinct difference from 
the situation in some other heavily karstified states like Florida, where large population 
centers in unincorporated areas are common. 

It is difficult to identify any shared characteristics of municipalities that choose to 
regulate human activities on karst landscapes in Pennsylvania. According to an examination 
of online municipal codes and data provided by the Pennsylvania Department 
of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR), municipalities with mapped 
karst are just as likely to have chosen not to implement karst land use regulations 
as they are to have chosen to do so. Figure 4.2 is a map generated from a sample 
of cities and towns in the region. Within that sample, there were 42 municipalities 
with mapped karst points in which no karst land use regulations were found and 
43 with mapped karst points where those regulations are in use. There also does 
not seem to be any correlation between the level of urbanization of a municipality 
and the likelihood of finding karst-related regulations or ordinances on the books. 
It is true that Allentown, the city with the highest population in the sample, does 
have a weak form of karst regulation on the books; however, the cities of Reading 
(with a population near 80,000 in 2000), Bethlehem City (approximately 70,000) 
and Lancaster (approximately 50,000) do not even provide the minimal level of 
karst protection that Allentown does. 

Clearly, cities and townships in Pennsylvania have a wide degree of latitude when 
it comes to implementing land use regulations that affect development near karst 
landforms. This flexibility is reflected in the variety of regulatory techniques in use. 
Table 4.10 displays a summary of techniques used to regulate development on karst 
by municipalities in the sample. The most commonly used techniques for regulating 
land use and development in karst terrains are stormwater-related components (in 
particular, more stringent design standards for stormwater retention basins), and 
requirements for inclusion of karst landforms in development plans at the sketch, 
preliminary or final plan stages. Intuitively, it may seem that the zoning overlay 
approach would be the approach that’s most effective and easiest to manage in this 
context. However, very few jurisdictions in the sample actually use it: Lower Saucon 
and Lower Macungie include karst or carbonate geology overlay zones in their zoning 
ordinances, while a handful others use more general overlay districts that affect 
development in karst areas but are not karst-specific. Several municipalities in the 
study area explicitly claim powers to reject or stop projects that do not meet certain 
karst-related requirements, often as part of their SALDO. Often this is related to a 


Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst Regulations 


Fig. 4.2 Distribution of karst and regulation practices in selected Pennsylvania municipalities (see 
color plate 36) 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, 
individual municipal codes 

declaration of unsuitability for building on a particular plot, a declaration which can 
usually be addressed and then changed. 

There is often no clear distinction between regulatory techniques that are used 
in SALDOs and those that are used in zoning ordinances. There are exceptions— 
zoning overlays and Planned Residential Development regulations are only used in 


80 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

Table 4.10 Municipalities included in the sample where land use in karst terrains faces additional 
regulations or management 

SALDO Zoning Regulatory techniques used 
Allentown city N Y Planning, stormwater 
Alsace township Y N Planning, design 
Amity township Y Y Planning, hazard 
Antrim Y N Planning 
Bechtelsville borough Y Y Planning, design, setbacks, stormwater 
Bethlehem township Y Y Planning, stormwater 
Boyertown borough Y N Planning, design, stormwater 
Brecknock township Y N Design, stormwater 
Caernarvon township Y -Planning, design 
Camp Hill N N Other 
Carlisle Y N Planning 
Dickinson N N Other 
District township N Y Other 
East Allen township Y N Planning, design, setbacks, stormwater 
East Pennsboro Y N Planning, design, hazard 
Easton city N Y Planning 
Exeter township Y N Planning, other 
Hamburg borough Y N Design 
Hampden Y N Design 
Heidelberg township Y Y Planning, other 
Kutztown borough Y N Planning, design, stormwater, other 
Lower Allen Y Y Planning, design 
Lower Heidelberg township Y -Planning 
Lower Macungie township Y Y Planning, setbacks, zoning overlays 
Lower Saucon township Y Y Planning, design, stormwater, zoning 
overlays, setbacks 
Lynn township Y Y Planning 
Maidencreek township Y N Design 
Maxatawny township N Y Planning 
Mercersburg Y N Hazard 
Muhlenberg township Y Y Planning, design, stormwater, zoning 
overlays 
New Morgan borough Y N Other 
North Heidelberg township Y Y Planning, other 
North Middleton N Y Planning 
Pike township Y N Planning 
Quincy Y N Planning, stormwater 
Richmond township Y N Planning, design, stormwater 
Robeson township Y Y Planning, design 
Robesonia borough N Y Other 
Rockland township Y N Design 
Shillington borough Y -Planning, design, stormwater 
Shippensburg Y N Planning, design, setbacks, hazard 
Shippensburg Township Y N Planning 
Shoemakersville borough Y N Planning, design, stormwater 
Silver Spring N Y Planning 
South Middletown Y Y Planning, design, setbacks, stormwater 
Southampton Y N Planning 
Strausstown borough Y N Design 
Walnutport borough Y N Planning 


Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst Regulations 

Table 4.10 (continued) 

SALDO Zoning Regulatory techniques used 
Washington Y N Planning, hazard 
Wernersville borough Y -Planning, design, stormwater 
Whitehall township Y N Planning, other 
Williams township Y N Planning 
Wilson borough Y N Planning 
Womelsdorf borough N Y Other 
Wyomissing borough Y -Design, stormwater 
Wyomissing Hills borough Y -Planning, design, stormwater 

zoning ordinances, for example—but the fact that some regulatory are found in both 
types of ordinances in different towns suggests that the main difference may be in 
how stringently a municipality wants or intends to enforce the karst regulations. 

Finally, many karst-related land use ordinances are very similar, if not identical, 
to those found in the codes of other towns in the area. For example, several different 
towns have identical or nearly identical statutory language addressing retention 
basin issues. Other towns have passed identical ordinances relating to groundwater 
contamination and spring flow, preventing subsidence-related damage, and the 
power to deny unsatisfactory applications based on karst-related requirements (in 
fact, it is not uncommon for municipalities to share precisely this regulatory language). 
This suggests at least two possibilities: one is that towns are simply copying 
ordinances used by their neighbors; another is that these ordinances all have another 
common source, like the Northern New Jersey Model Ordinance. 

Strategic Behavior and Land Use Regulation 

As discussed, regulating development in karst areas—and particularly in the vicinity 
of karst landforms—is an important tool for protecting local aquifers. In an area 
like the Lehigh Valley, where there are dozens of municipalities of vastly different 
size, groundwater contaminated in one township does not stay within the township 
lines. It also seems clear that aquifer protection is at least one major goal of the 
area’s karst regulations, because drainage and runoff into sinkholes is a frequently 
addressed issue within these regulations. 

However, simple game theory would suggest that it is in the interest of any township 
not to regulate development near karst landforms. In theory, karst regulations 
drive up the cost of development, both to the developer (who must spend more time 
investigating potential project sites and more money on mitigation) and to the town 
(which must spend more money enforcing its karst ordinances and hearing appeals 
from developers whose projects have been turned down). These ordinances may 
also have another cost to municipalities—the cost of lost growth opportunities as 
developers choose to build in lower-regulation, lower-cost neighboring towns. In 
effect, jurisdictions with karst regulations on the books would then be paying the 
entire cost of protecting the regional groundwater supplies, while non-regulating 


82 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

towns would be free to undo that protection and attract new development opportunities 
that have chosen to bypass regulating communities. Put another way, if a small 
township like Lower Saucon cannot influence what its neighbors choose to do to 
regulate development near sinkholes or other karst features, what incentive does it 
have to implement its own karst regulations? 

Intuitively, it would seem that this patchwork approach enables developers to 
“play one town against the other” when selecting a location for a large project and 
that the sensible decision for any town hoping to encourage growth would be to 
implement no karst development regulations at all. Yet despite this, many of the 
municipalities in the Lehigh Valley do indeed regulate development on and near 
karst landforms. 

This situation leads us to an interesting question that may have significant implications 
for understanding how karst land use regulations really work: When considering 
the future of the implementation of karst-related land use ordinances, should 
land use planners and public officials take into account whether or not neighboring 
communities have already implemented similar regulations? Do non-regulating 
towns enjoy any growth-related economic benefit at the expense of towns that 
choose to regulate development near karst? Or are karst regulations basically neutral 
as far as growth and development questions are concerned? 

Applying statistical methods to data collected from the U.S. Census Bureau, the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, and from the land use regulations 
of municipalities in the sample can help find evidence of a relationship between the 
presence of karst regulations and economic health and growth. Of course, there is 
no single statistic that represents overall economic health or growth, especially at 
the local level. For that reason, certain localized economic indicators have to stand 
in as proxies for overall economic growth and health. After considering several indicators 
for inclusion in this analysis, two were eventually chosen: the total number 
of residential construction permits issued for each jurisdiction between 1990 and 
2000 and the change in median housing value over that same time. These variables 
were chosen because they were easily quantifiable, they were available for nearly 
every municipality in the sample and there is a clear hypothetical connection between 
both of them and the presence of karst land use regulation (this was not the 
case for most other economic prosperity indicators: for example, it may be the case 
that the presence of karst regulation results to higher unemployment rates in towns 
that implement those regulations, but it is difficult to imagine a credible and direct 
mechanism by which that might occur). 

There are two general schools of thought regarding the impact of land use restrictions 
on home values: one is that the restrictions on the homeowner’s ability 
to use private property in whatever way he or she sees fit will be accounted for in 
the home’s total value (as a decline, usually), while the other approach holds that 
because land use restrictions can act to preserve the character and natural amenities 
of an area in which they are applied, they can just as easily have a positive impact 
on home values (McCann 2001). Assuming that both effects are possible, it seems 
more likely that karst regulations would have a positive impact on home values than 
a negative one. This is based on the fact that karst-related land use regulations often 


Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst Regulations 

act to indirectly encourage preservation of open space and the natural environment 
and to promote lower development densities. 

The total number of residential construction permits issued between 1990 and 
2000 can be used to identify any effect on building and development patterns that 
karst land use regulations may have caused. Because karst-related land use regulations 
often add steps (and expense) to the development process—and in some cases, 
can stop a development in its tracks—it is likely that we may see some direct impacts 
of such regulation reflected in the number of residential permits granted in towns 
with these ordinances on the books, as developers seek out locations with fewer 
obstacles to new projects. In other words, the presence of karst regulations, and 
in particular strong karst regulations, should act to depress the number of permits 
issued relative to municipalities that do not use such regulations. 

The sample itself contains observations taken in cities and towns located in six 
different Pennsylvania counties: Berks, Cumberland, Franklin, Lancaster, Lehigh 
and Northampton. These counties range from mostly urbanized to mostly rural; the 
common thread linking all seven is the presence of significant karst within their 
borders, which means that at least some towns located within these counties could 
be expected to have some type of karst-related land use regulation on the books. 

Taken together, these six counties contain 253 individual municipalities, according 
to the U.S. Census Bureau. Many of these cities and towns were not included 
in the sample used for these regressions. Exclusion from the sample was based on 
one of two general criteria: timing (relevant zoning ordinances or SALDOs had to 
be in place by 2000; those with unclear dates of implementation were excluded), 
and data availability (the sample includes towns with both SALDOs and zoning 
ordinances available online and towns with only one set of regulations available 
online, provided these available ordinances contained karst-related provisions and 
that these karst provisions could be categorized as strong). These documents are 
not universally available online for every city and township in Pennsylvania, and 
by including only communities that have made these documents available online, 
there may have inadvertently been some amount of bias introduced into the results. 
However, no obvious pattern could be detected to explain why some communities 
chose to make these documents available in electronic format and others 
did not. This resulted in a sample size of 120, which is 47.4% of the population 
of 253. 

The questions of the economic impacts of karst land use regulation and the utility 
of free riding are addressed here through ordinary least squares regression techniques. 
Variables describing characteristics such as population, population growth, 
urbanization, changes in median rents, and home size were included as controls. 
Additionally, binary (“dummy”) variables were used to account for the presence of 
mapped karst points within the town limits (MappedKarst), the presence of karst 
regulations in each city or township (KarstRegs), and the strength of these karst 
regulations (strong). Finally, by multiplying KarstRegs and MappedKarst for each 
observation, a fourth dummy variable was created. The point of creating this interaction 
variable is to identify communities that have both mapped karst points within 
their boundaries and karst land use regulations on the books. 


84 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

Because these regressions rely heavily on these dummy variables, an explanation 
of how they were developed is in order. First, keyword searches of electronicformat 
documents helped identify karst-related provisions in SALDOs and zoning 
ordinances. All “hits” were investigated; several did not relate to land use, and many 
others were “false positives” (for example, searches on the keyword “carbonate” 
sometimes returned results addressing the business practices of termite exterminators). 
All relevant results were then inventoried by city; this inventory is the basis 
for the karstregs variable. 

The strength variable is not quite as straightforward as that. In the context of this 
chapter, the strength of a regulation is directly related to its potential to significantly 
influence the decision to build or not build in a given town. Strong regulations display 
one of the following characteristics: a section specifically set aside to address 
development in karst or carbonate areas, explicit power to stop or reject a development 
based on karst-related issues, or generally applied setbacks. Those classified 
as “weak” lack these features (repeated use of the word “may” in a karst context, 
instead of “shall” or “must,” was another common feature of weak regulations). Categorizing 
a set of ordinances as weak or strong was, first and foremost, a subjective 
process; in some cases, a collection of individually weak requirements was classified 
as strong, based on the overall potential for impact on the development process. 
However, the criteria used were applied consistently to all ordinances in the sample 
and should at least be a useful gauge of relative regulatory strength. In the end, the 
key question in determining whether a set of regulations was strong or weak was 
this: might a particular set of regulatory requirements be onerous enough to make 
a developer think twice about building on a given piece of land with karst-related 
issues? 

Running the Numbers: Is Strategic Behavior Good Strategy? 

The regressions found one statistically significant relationship between a variable 
of interest and a dependent variable: the interaction variable was found to have a 
statistically significant relationship to the total permits issued dependent variable 
(Table 4.11). However, the coefficient is positive, meaning that total permits issued 
were higher in communities that had both mapped karst points and karst-aware land 
use regulations. This significance disappears when the strong variable is dropped 
from the model (Table 4.12); there was also no statistically significant relationship 
discovered between the change in median housing value dependent variable and any 
of the binary variables of interest (Tables 4.13 and 4.14). Further, the differences in 
R2 values demonstrates that while the model does explain a respectable amount of 
the variation in total permits issued, it is not especially useful in explaining changes 
in median home values. 

These results argue forcefully against the idea that the presence of karst regulations 
has much of an effect on development, at least with respect to the residential 
market, or on median home values. It therefore follows that towns choos



Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst Regulations 

Table 4.11 Ordinary Least Squares regression results 

Model 1: ordinary least squares regression with robust standard errors, using total 
residential building permits as the dependent variable 

Explanatory variables 
Coefficient Standard error t value 

Total population, 1990 * 

Population growth rate, 1990–2000 
(percent) * 

Change in percentage of “long-distance” 
commuters 

Growth rate of urban housing units 

Rate of change in the percentage of “large” 
homes * 

Change in median gross rent, 1990–2000 

Change in median housing value, 
1990–2000 

Karst regulations present? 

Karst regulations classified as “strong” 

Mapped karst points present? 

Interaction variable (both regulations and 
mapped karst points are present) * 

Constant 

.0148708 
12.75187 

-3.653832 

1.811643 
22.50077 

.2378838 
-.0039291 

-69.8021 
13.10388 
77.51629 
264.1354 

-29.41458 

.0059324 2.51 
2.810637 4.54 
5.864986 -0.62 
1.3552 1.34 
9.33764 2.41 
.4161294 0.57 
.0034126 -1.15 
87.08814 -0.80 
139.6921 0.09 
66.51265 1.17 
138.5633 1.91 
49.66519 -0.59 

Variables of interest in italics 

* 

= statistically significant results at 0.10 
n = 105 
Adjusted R2 := 0.4673 

ing to implement karst-related land use regulation are not putting themselves at 
a disadvantage in competing for development and growth opportunities with their 
non-regulating neighbors. 

There are several possible explanations for these results: 

• 
Development pressures may be causing the development of mappable karst features. 
This hypothesis was also advanced as a potential explanation of the results 
in the first case study and would explain the positive coefficient on the interaction 
variable in the first regression (Table 4.11); 
• 
Karst protections may act to increase the desirability of living (and thus the demand 
for available housing) in a community that employs them, by forcing more 
land to remain open and undeveloped; 
• 
Even the strongest karst regulations may not really be that onerous. We know 
from the regression results that the strength of karst regulation did not have an 
impact on the indicator variables for jurisdictions in the sample. When combined 
with the knowledge that the presence of karst regulations also had no impact, 
perhaps this can be taken to mean that karst regulations and ordinances generally 
aren’t very restrictive and cannot counteract the influence of market forces; 
• 
The lack of impact of karst ordinances could be a reflection of a lack of enforcement. 
Certainly, variances and waivers can be obtained in most jurisdictions; 
whether there is a lack of will to regulate in this case is unclear and beyond the 
scope of this chapter; and 

86 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

Table 4.12 Ordinary Least Squares regression results 

Model 2: ordinary least squares regression with robust standard errors, using total 
residential building permits as the dependent variable 

Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error t value 

Total population, 1990 * 

Population growth rate, 1990–2000 
(percent) * 

Change in percentage of “long-distance” 
commuters 

Growth rate of urban housing units 

Rate of change in the percentage of 
“large” homes * 

Change in median gross rent, 1990–2000 

Change in median housing value, 
1990–2000 

Karst regulations present? 

Mapped karst points present? 

Interaction variable (both regulations and 
mapped karst points are present) 

Constant 

0.0146225 
11.19164 

-3.893057 

1.727809 

16.4858 

0.0311469 
-0.0045279 

-72.97573 
70.12362 
201.7053 

0.1563617 

0.0058305 2.51 
2.841066 3.94 
5.765894 -0.68 
1.458323 1.18 
9.322062 1.77 
0.3794541 0.08 
0.0034124 -1.33 
79.97385 -0.91 
68.48701 1.02 
129.5102 1.56 
49.39859 0.00 

Variables of interest in italics 

* 

= statistically significant at 0.10 
n = 112 
Adjusted R2 = 0.4051 

Table 4.13 Ordinary Least Squares regression results 

Model 3: ordinary least squares regression with robust standard errors, using change 
in median home value as the dependent variable 

Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error t value 

Total population, 1990 

Population growth rate, 1990–2000 
(percent) 

Growth rate of urban housing units 

Change in percentage of “long-distance” 
commuters 

Change in population with bachelors 
degree (percentage) * 

Rate of change in the percentage of 
“large” homes 

Change in median gross rent, 1990–2000 

Karst regulations present? 

Karst regulations classified as “strong” 

Mapped karst points present? 

Interaction variable (both regulations and 
mapped karst points are present) 

Constant 

Variables of interest in italics 

* 

= statistically significant at 0.10 
n = 105 
Adjusted R2 = 0.1732 

-0.1233191 
112.6703 

-10.87793 
-327.9395 

-749.3715 

557.9663 

18.80939 
-1176.088 
-6893.434 
-3734.006 

2940.861 

5435.561 

0.0829727 -1.49 
93.63839 1.20 

64.47095 -0.17 
267.3179 -1.23 

405.4695 -1.85 

380.3822 1.47 

13.12235 1.43 

4287.548 -0.27 
4317.497 -1.60 
3321.258 -1.12 
5368.743 0.55 

3458.283 1.57 


Case Study 2: Strategic Behavior in the Development of Karst Regulations 

Table 4.14 Ordinary Least Squares regression results 

Model 4: ordinary least squares regression with robust standard errors, using change 
in median home value as the dependent variable 

Explanatory variables 
Coefficient Standard error t value 

Total population, 1990 

Population growth rate, 1990–2000 
(percent) 

Growth rate of urban housing units 

Change in percentage of “long-distance” 
commuters 

Change in population with bachelors 
degree (percentage) * 

Rate of change in the percentage of 
“large” homes * 

Change in median gross rent, 1990–2000 

Karst regulations present? 

Mapped karst points present? 

Interaction variable (both regulations and 
mapped karst points are present) 

Constant 

-0.1406539 

122.9927 
-3.222844 
-283.8614 

-796.6282 
783.9302 
18.1366 

-3165.006 
-3790.971 
3071.677 

5314.729 

0.0861091 -1.63 
82.45413 1.49 

61.00146 -0.05 

254.122 -1.12 
380.1347 -2.10 
354.0678 2.21 
12.2212 1.48 
4070.196 -0.78 
3315.346 -1.14 
5188.513 0.59 

3395.833 1.57 

Variables of interest in italics 

* 

= statistically significant at 0.10 
n = 120 
Adjusted R2 = 0.1715 

• 
Timing may be a factor. It seemed plausible that the short-term impacts of enacting 
this type of regulation could be different from the long-term effects—perhaps 
it takes a few years for karst regulations to make a noticeable impact on these 
indicator variables. By including a dummy variable indicating the year a karst 
ordinance was enacted, such a relationship could be identified. Unfortunately, 
this goal was out of reach for this analysis, because there was no way to determine 
the actual enactment date with any degree of certainty. It is possible that 
this could be done using different data and is a worthwhile direction for future 
research. 
At first glance, the two case studies included in this chapter may appear to be too 
different from each other to tell us anything useful about karst land use regulation. 
But a closer look reveals that they are actually related in that they seek to understand 
how karst land use regulations affect the lives of the people subject to them, in a nonkarst 
context. In other words, with these case studies we are not trying to determine 
if these regulations actually prevent people from dumping trash into sinkholes or 
pouring used motor oil on their lawns. We are instead trying to determine the true 
cost of implementing karst land use regulations, in terms of restrictions on how land 
can be used, impacts on urban densities, and general economic impacts. 

When viewed that way, these two case studies, taken together, can indeed tell us 
something worth knowing: specifically, that there is a distinct lack of clear evidence 
that karst land use regulations directly or significantly impact the people living 


88 4 The Practical Impacts of Karst Regulations on the Communities 

with them. It is true that the evidence regarding impacts on density is mixed: for 
example, when housing densities in sinkhole-prone areas are compared between 
municipalities that employ setback-style ordinances for sinkholes and those that 
do not, we see that structural density in these areas is lower in cities with setback 
ordinances. However, we do not see this differential increasing over the 10-year 
period studied here, which is the result we might have expected to see; instead, we 
actually see the opposite situation, where housing densities in sinkhole-prone areas 
with setbacks increase more quickly than in similar places without setbacks. This 
suggests that new residential construction in sinkhole-prone areas grew in the 1990s 
independently of whether or not setback regulations were in place. This would seem 
to have more to do with desirability questions not related to karst; i.e., the wide 
range of factors affecting neighborhood quality or the attractiveness of a larger real 
estate market. When the entire study area is taken as a whole, we actually see a 
positive correlation between sinkhole densities and housing densities, another result 
we might not instinctively expect. This phenomenon could be due to reporting bias, 
to the use of sinkholes as water features in newer developments, or to excessive 
stress placed on the karst by new development projects. The results of the analysis 
conducted here suggests that setbacks can be an effective regulatory tool to control 
development in karst terrains; however, it would be worthwhile to examine more 
closely why setback ordinances did not appear to have the anticipated effect on 
changes in residential density in sinkhole-prone areas throughout the 1990s, with 
specific attention paid to localized factors. 

We get no such mixed results from our Pennsylvania case study. Those findings 
do not support the hypothesis that municipalities employing restrictions on development 
and construction in karstic areas suffer an economic disadvantage, relative to 
municipalities that do not employ such restrictions. It seems that there is no rational 
economic basis for planners and policymakers to consider the actions of neighboring 
towns and cities when contemplating the possible future implementation of karst 
regulations in their own jurisdictions. 

This is interesting because it suggests that it should be feasible to implement karst 
regulations in areas that need them without worrying too much about unintended 
and undesirable impacts on the local economy. Even if densities are impacted, it 
doesn’t seem that this impact takes the form we might expect based on the dictates 
of conventional economic thought. It seems probable that a wide range of other 
policies are likely to affect density more than karst regulations do. Ultimately, the 
results of these case studies can be used by proponents of regulation-based solutions 
to counter certain anti-regulation arguments, particularly those that are based on the 
threat of some potential, unknown (but almost invariably negative) future economic 
impact. 

References 

Alonso, W. 1964. Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of Land Rent.Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, MA 


References 

Ambrose, B.W. 2003. Urban growth controls and affordable housing: The case of Lexington, 
Kentucky. Report prepared for the Lexington—Fayette County Human Rights Commission 
and Lexington-Fayette Urban County Government Division of Community Development 

Barner, W.L. 1999. Comparison of stormwater management in a karst terrane in Springfield, 
Missouri—case histories. Engineering Geology, v. 52, pp. 105–112 

Bickford, T.M.; Lindsey, B.D.; Beaver, M.R. 1996. Bacteriological quality of ground water used 
for household supply, Lower Susquehanna River Basin, Pennsylvania and Maryland. USGS 
water resources investigations report 96–4212 

Carruthers, J.I. 2002. Growth at the fringe: The influence of political fragmentation in United States 
metropolitan areas. Papers in Regional Science, v. 82, pp. 475–499 

Chichester, D.C. 1996. Hydrogeology of, and simulation of ground-water flow in, a mantled 
carbonate-rock system, Cumberland Valley, Pennsylvania. USGS water resources investigations 
report 94–4090 

Crawford, N.C. 2003. Karst hydrogeologic investigation for proposed Kentucky trimodal 
Transpark. In Sinkholes and Karst 2003: Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental 
Impacts of Karst (Barry F. Beck, ed.). Geotechnical Special Publication no. 122 

Dougherty, P.H. 1983. Valley tides—land use response floods in a Kentucky karst region. In Environmental 
Karst, pp. 3–15. Geospeleo Publications, Cincinnati, OH 

Fleming, R.A. 2001. Land use planning and farm land protection in the Blue Grass. In Current 
Issues Associated with Land Values and Land Use Planning: Proceedings of a Regional Workshop 
(John C. Bergstrom ed.). Southern Rural Development Center and Farm Foundation 

Gillespie, Thomas D., 1999. The 1994 sinkhole at North 7th Street, Centre City, Allentown, 
Pennsylvania: sinkhole hazards in the Lehigh Valley and the implications for land use and 
development decisions. In Economic & Environmental Geology and Topography in the 
Allentown-Bethlehem Area: Guidebook for the 64th Annual Field Conference of Pennsylvania 
Geologists, pp 49–65. 

Hippe, D.J.; Witt, E.C.; Giovannitti, R.M. 1994. Hydrogeology, herbicides and nutrients in ground 
water and springs, and relation of water quality to land use and agricultural practices near 
Carlisle, Pennsylvania. USGS Water resources investigactions report 93–4172 

Interview with James Rebmann, Senior environmental planner for the Lexington-Fayette Urban 
County Government, 2006 

Kambesis, P.; Crawford, N.; Croft, L.A.; Moore, R.; Pfaff, R. 2004. Dishman lane collapse, 
bowling green, Kentucky. In Sinkholes and the Engineering Impacts of Karst (Beck ed.). 
Huntsville, AL. 

Kochanov, W.E. 1999. Sinkholes in Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania Geological Survey Educational 
Series 11 

Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, 2005. Lehigh Valley Comprehensive Plan 

Lindsey, B.D.; Loper, C.A.; Hainly, R.A. 1997. Nitrate in ground water and stream base flow 
in the Lower Susquehanna River Basin, Pennsylvania and Maryland. USGS Water resources 
investigations report 97–4146 

McCann, P. 2001. Urban and Regional Economics. Oxford University Press, NY, 286 pp. 

Memon, Bashir, A. and Azmeh, M. Mumtaz 2001. Failure of an industrial wastewater lagoon in a 
karst terrain and remedial action. Environmental Geology, v. 40, pp. 1424–1432. 

Memon, Bashir A.; Azmeh, M. Mumtaz; Pitts, Mary Wallace. 2002. The environmental hazards of 
locating wastewater impoundments in karst terrain. Environmental Geology, v. 65, pp. 169–177. 

Miller, B.L. 1941. Lehigh County, Pennsylvania: Geology and Geography. Pennsylvania Geological 
Survey, Fourth Series (Bulletin C39) 

Miller, B.L.; Fraser, D.M.; Miller, R.L. 1939. Northampton County, Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania 
Geological Survey, Fourth Series (County Report 48) 

Mills, E. 1972. Urban Economics. Glenview, Illinois 

Pennsylvania Planning Code, 1967. Act 247 

U.S. Census Bureau, 2006 

Chapter 5 
Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

Abstract The specific nature of the issues relating to regulation and land use are 
different in rural areas than in urbanized areas, and they often require taking a 
different approach in addressing those issues. This chapter examines questions of 
karst land use regulation in rural areas through a pair of case studies. The first case 
study describes attempts to develop a parcel of land containing Brooksville Ridge 
Cave in Hernando County, Florida, and helps to illuminate both the role and limitations 
of land use regulation in protecting unique karst features from the inevitable 
damage that a large-scale residential development would bring with it. The second 
case study examines the development and implementation of a protected area plan 
in Romania’s rural Apuseni Natural Park, where park managers have faced significant 
obstacles in the implementation of an enforceable set of regulations that would 
protect the park’s noteworthy karst resources. 

Keywords Protected area management · Brooksville Ridge Cave · Romania · Rural · Economic development · Karst protection 

Until this point, this book has mostly discussed the use of land use ordinances and 
regulations in managing the challenges inherent to urbanized populations existing 
on karst lands. But karst landscapes are also found in less developed, wilder areas; in 
many cases, these landscapes are in close proximity to valuable natural resources, 
and could suffer serious damage if those resources are exploited without regard 
for the karst. The specific nature of the issues relating to regulation and land use 
are different in rural areas than in urbanized areas, and they often require taking a 
different approach in addressing those issues. 

This chapter examines questions of karst land use regulation in rural areas 
through a pair of case studies. The first case study describes attempts to develop 
a parcel of land containing Brooksville Ridge Cave in Hernando County, Florida, 
and helps to illuminate both the role and limitations of land use regulation in protecting 
unique karst features from the inevitable damage that a large-scale residential 
development would bring with it. The second case study examines the development 
and implementation of a protected area plan in Romania’s rural Apuseni Natural 

S. Fleury, Land Use Policy and Practice on Karst Terrains, 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9670-9 5, C
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009 


92 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

Park, where park managers have faced significant obstacles in the implementation 
of an enforceable set of regulations that would protect the park’s noteworthy karst 
resources. 

The Brooksville Ridge Cave 

Brooksville Ridge Cave was discovered in 2002 by a recreational caver in rural 
Hernando County, Florida. The cave, which has been described as containing unique 
formations and is considered to be significant by amateur and professional speleologists 
alike, is located on undeveloped property adjacent to a golf course. This 
property has been the subject of development efforts for years, as the golf course 
owners want to build a large residential subdivision there in order to maximize the 
economic return from the golf course. The presence of the cave on the property 
has complicated matters significantly over the last six years, and no construction on 
the property has yet begun. This case study will explore the effects of the state of 
Florida’s cave protection laws and applicable Hernando County regulations on the 
efforts to protect the cave, and on those to develop the property. 

The Nature Conservancy has made repeated attempts to purchase the site, but, 
being bound by appraisal values, they were unable to meet the property owner’s 
high asking price. Over the ensuing years three major development corporations 
have courted the cave’s owner and entered into negotiations to build on the site. 
All three have withdrawn from their contracts, citing concerns of building on the 
unpredictable karst terrain. 

The Landscape of the Brooksville Ridge 

The Brooksville Ridge Cave is located in rural Hernando County, Florida, outside 
the town of Brooksville. The land containing the cave is privately owned by World 
Woods, which has developed a well-regarded golf course on another part of the 
property. The cave is located very near the Withlacoochee State Forest, and is adjacent 
to some of the last remaining tree stands of the Annutteliga Hammock, which 
was once known for its tremendous rock outcrops and sinkholes; the Punch Bowl 
sinkhole is located here, and was considered a significant local feature in the 1930s 
(Velsor 2008). 

The cave itself contains fragile speleothems that are sometimes densely concentrated, 
and while its decoration and formations have been described as unique, it is 
by no means the only cave in the vicinity. Most caves in the area have been vadose 
caves, without human-sized openings or entrance points. Historically, they could 
only be discovered via digging them out or after a sinkhole collapse creates a new 
entrance (Florea 2005). 

The cave is part of an extensive conduit network found beneath the land surface, 
generally at shallow depths in the structurally weak Florida limestone. Ephemeral 


The Brooksville Ridge Cave 

sinking streams that vanish into sinkholes are not uncommon sights in this landscape; 
all these sinkholes probably feed into the Brooksville Ridge Cave and the Floridan 
Aquifer before making their way to Chassahowitzka Spring, five miles to the west 
of the World Woods property. Generally, it is safe to assume that all the sinkholes in 
the area are likely recharge points for the spring (Florea 2005). 

Indeed, all the attention paid to the intricate and extensive formations within the 
cave has led people to overlook the importance of the local watershed; one local 
environmental professional has described groundwater as suffering from “out of 
sight, out of mind syndrome” (Werner 2008). Even the low levels of urbanization 
in the area—characterized mainly by expansive residential lawns and meticulously 
maintained golf courses—have increased the nitrate load carried by the groundwater. 
And most of the available data suggests that the overall health of the aquifer 
surrounding Chassahowtizka has generally been declining since the 1970s (Velsor 
2008; Werner 2008). 

Despite the sensitivity of the landscape around Brooksville Ridge Cave, it may 
well be possible to develop the land while limiting the impact of that development 
on the local karst. This would probably require, at a minimum, a thorough assessment 
of the area’s drainage basins, a partial set-aside of the property, and the implementation 
of techniques to keep stormwater runoff from draining into the caves. 
Stormwater control techniques could be as simple as basic avoidance, where runoff 
is directed away from the cave and other karst features, thus making it less likely 
that surface-level pollutants will contaminate the cave. 

These precautions would almost certainly mean that the permissible housing density 
would be lower than that desired by the developer. But even then, any significant 
level of residential development brings with it the threat of aquifer drawdown, which 
could have serious consequences for the cave in general, and specifically for the 
biota within it. Without more hydrologic data from the area, it is nearly impossible 
to predict any specific impacts of development on Brooksville Ridge Cave (Velsor 
2008; Werner 2008). 

Efforts to Develop the Land and to Protect the Cave1 

Brooksville Ridge Cave was discovered when local cavers noticed gusts of air emanating 
from a small crack in the ground; this is a telltale sign that a cave exists 
beyond that crack. The amount of air moving suggested the cave was a large one. 
The cave’s discoverers immediately realized the cave’s significance—the intricacy 
and size of many of the cave’s decorations were extremely unusual, like bushes of 
12-inch helictities (these rarely grow larger than four inches). These recreational 
cavers recruited like-minded friends to begin exploring the cave’s significant lower 
section over the next several months, during which time the group located a series 

1 Much of the chronological information in this section is derived from a series of articles published 
in the St. Petersburg Times between June 2003 and October 2007. 


94 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

of rooms with decoration that outshone anything else known in the state of Florida: 
translucent, pastel-colored speleothems; collections of hundreds of tiny rimstone 
dams; hundreds of faceted, carrot-like stalactites (Turner 2008). 

It was during this initial exploration phase that one of the cave’s discoverers 
contacted The Nature Conservancy and the Southwest Florida Water Management 
District with the intention of eventually getting the land into state hands. Initially, 
ownership of the cave itself was not clear, and there were no signs or markers delineating 
where state forest property ended and World Woods property began. Once it 
became clear that the cave was in fact located on World Woods property, The Nature 
Conservancy, which often negotiates land purchases on behalf of the state, attempts 
to initiate talks to purchase the property from World Woods. The company turned 
down the offer, describing it as too low. Four days later, however, World Woods 
reversed itself and suggested that it might be willing to part with the desired parcel. 
Negotiations, mostly focusing on the value of the land, were then conducted over 
the next six months. 

At this point the company was not aware that there was a significant cave located 
on its property; by Nature Conservancy estimates, the cave and its associated 
drainage system may take up 25% of the entire parcel. The Nature Conservancy 
did not inform them of this fact, stating later that it was not their job to apprise 
property owners of the features on their own properties. It was during this period that 
the existence of the cave was first publicized, first in a publication of the National 
Speleological Society, and then later in the St. Petersburg Times. However, in both 
cases the exact location of the cave was kept secret, so even this announcement did 
not alert World Woods to the existence of a cave on the property they were hoping 
to develop. 

At the same time, the cavers who had first discovered the cave (and who had 
since unilaterally assumed exploration and protection responsibilities for the cave) 
had begun surveying, photographing and collecting data from the cave in earnest. 
The cavers also installed a gate to restrict access to the cave, despite the fact that 
they were on private property and had no legal right to do so. Nearly a year after the 
deal between World Woods and The Nature Conservancy fell through, the company 
struck a deal with WCI to develop the property, a deal the cavers learned about once 
survey stakes began appearing on the property. 

It was only then, in October of 2004 and nearly two full years after the cave’s discovery, 
that The Nature Conservancy and the cave’s discoverers revealed the cave’s 
location to both World Woods and to the Hernando County Planning and Zoning 
Department. The information seems to have been kept secret not with the intention 
of deceiving World Woods, but as a way to prevent the cave’s location from being 
entered into the public record, as would have been required under Florida public 
records law. A World Woods spokesperson described himself as furious that the 
company had not been informed of the cave’s presence until that point. 

A few months later, the county rejected WCI’s attempts to amend the comprehensive 
plan. The company wanted the right to build 1680 homes on a parcel that 
had originally been permitted for 660 homes. County planners recommended the 
request be approved, based on the ability to provide the required infrastructure and 


The Brooksville Ridge Cave 

utilities. Two weeks later, however, the county commission voted to reconsider their 
decision after a consultant working with WCI told the commission that the company 
was trying to preserve the land above the cave itself, and that the state may be able 
to purchase the land. This decision meant that WCI would not have to resubmit 
their proposal after making changes, which could have added months onto a process 
that can take up to a year when everything runs smoothly. The decision did not go 
unnoticed, and drew strong criticism from both local cavers and area media sources 
for giving WCI what amounted to preferential treatment; the St. Petersburg Times 
described it as “unprecedented” (February 16, 2005). 

A month later, in February, the commission voted to approve WCI’s request. 
However, the change also included language that addressed the cave system. The 
cave system must be mapped by a professional geologist before development will 
be permitted to begin, and WCI’s choice to conduct this mapping would be subject 
to county approval. The cave system would then be made part of a preservation 
tract, which would eventually be managed by an organization with the resources 
and expertise to do it. 

But the following month, while the revisions to the comprehensive plan were 
making their way through the state approval process, WCI unexpectedly announced 
they would not develop the property after all. A company vice-president cited the 
presence of Brooksville Ridge Cave, and the uncertainty associated with developing 
above it, as a significant factor in the decision. 

Around the same time, local cave experts as well as out-of-state karst 
consultants were trying to secure a contract from World Woods to survey and 
explore the cave, and provide recommendations for future action based on data 
collected in those expeditions. The work was eventually performed by a Kentuckybased 
consultant, whose report was strongly criticized by some individuals with 
knowledge of the cave and karst systems in Hernando County. The report posits 
that the cave is actually quite small, at less than 3 acres, and is mostly bereft 
of formations (Gulley et al. 2005). World Woods then said that about 70% of 
the property will remain undeveloped (Coastal Engineering 2005); however, this 
figure includes land already occupied by golf courses, which is problematic because 
of the high potential for nitrate and pesticide contamination from golf course 
runoff. 

Later in the year, Florida’s Department of Community Affairs—the state-level 
agency with review authority over World Woods’ request for changes to the comprehensive 
plan—recommended that each of the desired amendments be rejected. 
Concerns had to do with utility service, contamination hazards to Chassahowitzka 
Spring, traffic issues and completeness of the application (it was missing 
transportation-related data). The fact that the project included plans for over 1000 
houses meant that it was subject to the requirements of a Development of Regional 
Impact (DRI). The next developer to become involved in the project proposed in 
early 2007 to split the development up into two separate projects of fewer than 999 
units each, to be owned by two separate entities, as a way to avoid the requirements 
of the DRI process. This proposal also contained a recommendation to reseal the 
cave entrance. Cavers saw this as World Woods reneging on its agreement to protect 


96 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

the cave; a company spokesperson argued that placing the cave in its natural state 
was the best possible protection. By July of that same year, this developer had also 
withdrawn from the project. 

The cave was finally gated by World Woods in late 2007; the gating was a direct 
response to a St. Petersburg Times article that described how easily vandals were 
able to enter the cave and damage some of the rarest and most intricate formations. 
As of this writing, no official plans have been announced to develop the property, 
but rumors to that effect have cropped up from time to time in the local caving 
community. It should be emphasized that these rumors are, as of this writing, unsubstantiated. 


How Hernando County’s Groundwater Resource Protection 
Ordinance Governs Land Use 

As mentioned earlier in this book, the state of Florida does have a cave protection 
law in place. However, it is often described by cave enthusiasts as too weak to provide 
any actual protection, and therefore likely has little impact on the state’s caves. 

Like most state cave protection acts, the primary focus of the Florida statute is 
vandalism. The act makes it unlawful to damage speleothems or other formations 
or otherwise deface a cave’s interior; there is also a related section prohibiting the 
sale or transporting for sale of any speleothems that have been unlawfully removed 
from a Florida cave. The statute also makes it illegal to harm or kill cave biota. 
And while these provisions are certainly critical to any attempts to preserve caves 
in their natural states, they are inadequate to address questions of protecting caves 
from external influences, like pollution generated by industrial or agricultural land 
uses, for example. 

Unfortunately, the other provisions in the law do not rectify this situation. Like 
most state-level cave laws, Florida’s cave protection law does provide some protection 
against contamination from human activities, but the wording of the law 
is such that it only prohibits dumping directly into the cave, or storing hazardous 
material inside a cave. It provides no protection to caves from external actions or 
occurrences that directly result in the pollution or contamination of a cave, like an 
accidental chemical spill occurring fifty feet from a cave opening. 

The statute specifies that any violation of this law constitutes a first degree misdemeanor, 
which is punishable by a $1000 fine. Considering the difficulty in enforcing 
this law, combined with the prices some speleothems are able to command, this 
penalty hardly seems adequate to dissuade much in the way of cave degradation; 
certainly it provides no protection whatsoever from degradation resulting from inappropriate 
land uses in the vicinity of caves. 

In a less karst-specific context, chapter 187 of the state comprehensive plan 
requires local governments to use appropriate regulatory means to protect local 
aquifers from contamination. In a heavily karstified area like Florida, this essentially 
amounts to a requirement to implement karst protection regulations in the 


The Brooksville Ridge Cave 

appropriate situations. Similarly, Hernando County’s comprehensive plan contains 
a list of objectives relating to the protection and preservation of the integrity of 
the local aquifer recharge system, as well as policy language on the identification 
and preservation of environmentally sensitive lands as well as development of land 
above cave systems. These policy goals are addressed by Hernando County ordinance 
94-8, which is also known as the groundwater resource protection ordinance 
and is intended to “protect and maintain the quality of groundwater in Hernando 
County by providing criteria for land uses and the siting of facilities which use, 
handle, produce, store or dispose of Regulated Substances; and by providing protection 
to vulnerable features which discharge directly to the Floridan aquifer.” 

According to the ordinance, the whole of Hernando County is defined a groundwater 
resource protection area, based on the physical characteristics of the landscape 
and the aquifer. The ordinance also defines designated wellhead protection areas 
(WHPAs), the borders of which are based on time of groundwater-travel contours 
around community public water supply locations. These differ from Special Protection 
Areas (SPAs), which are placed around landforms that have the potential to 
discharge directly into the aquifer. This would naturally include karst formations, 
and indeed the ordinance specifically mentions both sinkholes and caves. These 
SPAs are plotted at a distance of 500 ft from the edge of the feature in question. 

The practical effect of both WHPAs and SPAs are to restrict land use activities 
in these particularly sensitive locations. There are actually two WHPA designations 
defined by the ordinance: WHPA-1, which either restricts or prohibits dumping, 
certain agriculture-related activities, the placement of new residential subdivisions 
with a density greater than one unit per acre that lack a central sanitary sewer facility 
and wastewater treatment plant outside the WHPA, and the construction of golf 
courses, unless they do not use pesticides or fertilizers that can drain into the aquifer; 
and WHPA-2, which contains no restrictions for subdivisions or golf courses. The 
SPA zones feature restrictions that are very similar to those in force in a WHPA-1 
zone. The cave itself is not in a WHPA zone, but as other development projects 
unfold in the general vicinity, this could change as new community public water 
supply locations are added to meet a growing population; ironically, this means that 
new development nearby could actually help save the cave, or at least contribute to 
improved conditions inside. 

The ordinance does contain enforcement provisions, a crucial component for any 
functioning ordinance. Under the ordinance, the county can compel landowners to 
submit to an inspection and examination of their lands. People who violate the ordinance 
are subject to assessment for cleanup costs, a fine of $500 and/or jail time 
of up to 60 days. The ordinance also includes an appeals process, through which 
landowners can argue that their property should not be subject to the restrictions of 
aWHPAorSPA. 

Planners in Hernando County also attempted to more directly influence the relationship 
between the prospective development and the BRC system through the 
project scope document. The second draft of the project scope agreement between 
the county and the company (completed in 2005) included new requirements for 
groundwater protection and data collection. Buffer areas were required for karst 


98 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

features on the property, as was the development of a map that overlay the cave and 
its passages atop a topographical representation of the property. New data would be 
collected via a series of test drillings, to be spaced at a distance of 30 ft in selected 
locations on the property; a consultant would then provide a full hydrogeologic 
evaluation on and around the project site. The developer would also be responsible 
for identifying and describing all subsurface features and explaining how they were 
hydrogeologically tied to the cave. The data collected in this way was supposed to 
form the basis of their recommendations. 

Assessment 

It seems clear that in the case of Brooksville Ridge Cave, state-level cave protection 
laws have done little to effectively preserve the resource. In the six years since the 
cave’s initial discovery, it has undergone extensive degradation, including but not 
limited to speleothem removal. The most obvious factor contributing to this is a lack 
of enforcement, regardless of whether it is due to a lack of enforcement resources 
or is the result of a point of view that places cave protection somewhat lower on the 
list of priorities. 

Hernando County’s groundwater protection ordinance is a reasonable effort to 
fill any gaps in protection left by the state statute. As of this writing, the property 
surrounding the cave remains undeveloped. Three potential development partners 
have withdrawn from the project, and in at least one case the presence of the cave 
was a significant factor in that decision. It seems unlikely that this would be the case 
if this ordinance was not in place; even though the penalties for violating the county 
ordinance are not severe, the ordinance gave the county’s planning department several 
legal justifications for either preventing or delaying the development of the land 
surrounding Brooksville Ridge Cave. 

Hernando County’s experience demonstrates that regulations alone are not enough; 
those with an interest in developing on karst lands will seek to circumvent rules 
when possible. The reason Hernando County’s ordinance is effective may also lie 
beyond the actual text of the law. In Hernando County, all subdivision and commercial 
development reviews must go through the county’s environmental office, where 
staffers have a high level of knowledge of applicable laws and regulations, as well 
as the desire and ability to enforce them. This is particularly critical in the face of 
developer efforts to seek out loopholes in the process and to attempt to circumvent 
the regulation. There may be no better example of this behavior than the successful 
effort of World Woods to get the county commission to reconsider its proposal; 
the company completely ignored established appeals processes and directly lobbied 
the commission for a second chance, a move that has been described by local observers 
as “unprecedented.” This incident suggests very strongly that, regardless of 
the wording of any law or regulation, those in charge of enforcing the rules must 
do so; otherwise the rules are pointless. A dedicated, professional staff is needed to 
ensure the regulations are upheld. 

Another challenge is that all development approvals in Hernando County are 
supposed to be contingent on scientific information supplied by the developer, 


The Apuseni Natural Park (Romania) and the Development of a Protected Area Strategy 

certifying that no adverse impact will occur as a result of the development. One 
issue that immediately arises is that the phrase “adverse impact” is difficult to define 
objectively, in no small part because of the difficulty in obtaining comprehensive 
and accurate scientific data. In Hernando County, the responsibility for hiring and 
paying consultants to assess caves generally falls to the developer. This situation 
may result (either consciously or not) in oversensitivity on the part of the consultant 
to the needs of the developer. This is a direct result of tight budgets at the county 
government level, which are common throughout the country. Regardless of the 
cause, if the burden of cave assessment is placed on the developer, the developer 
will have a natural incentive to make that burden as light as possible. Counties 
should make more of an effort to find money in the budget for this type of environmental 
assessment whenever possible, which admittedly will not be as often as 
one might like. 

Certainly, in this particular incident, the issue of obtaining comprehensive and 
accurate data was complicated by the “dueling experts” phenomenon; county officials 
heard conflicting opinions on the size, sensitivity and significance of the cave 
from at least three consultants or karst experts. The official consulting report to 
World Woods was criticized as being incomplete and inaccurate, and the depth of 
the consultant’s understanding of Florida karst (as opposed to Kentucky caves) was 
called into question (Florea, 2005). Generally, the members of a county commission 
or other similar governing body will lack the detailed scientific knowledge to 
evaluate the claims of experts offering opposing opinions. In this particular case, 
some individuals with first-hand knowledge of the history of BRC say that the political 
dynamics of local caver culture contributed to these disagreements. There is, 
of course, no guarantee that any two consultants will come to basically identical 
conclusions even when in-group politics are not a factor; however, it can be safely 
said that such an influence will rarely make that outcome more probable. It seems 
likely here that the disagreements among experts made it easier for World Woods to 
put forth a credible argument that development of the property should be permitted, 
and more difficult for the county to insist on a higher level of protection for the cave. 

The Apuseni Natural Park (Romania) and the Development 
of a Protected Area Strategy 

The Brooksville Ridge Cave case study described how land use regulations can be 
applied to karst protection in rural locations. In that case, the main technique used 
was not especially different from techniques used in more urbanized areas throughout 
the country. This was feasible because the parcel at issue is relatively small. 
However, in some cases, much larger tracts of open, rural land may require a level 
of protection and management that cannot be achieved through the use of regulatory 
techniques intended for municipal environments. Because of that, governments will 
often establish protected areas in these locations, with the intent of protecting the 
karst from certain human activities. Protected areas are areas in which land use 
restrictions are implemented with the specific purpose of preserving the integrity of 


100 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

the natural resources of an area. In some cases, this protection extends to resources 
not directly related to karst, including forests and surface waters, since applying 
protections to resource bases like these can often have beneficial spillover effects 
for local karst systems. 

It may seem that the protected area management style of karst protection is a 
completely different animal from the techniques examined so far in this book. So 
why examine it here at all? Because, despite the obvious differences in environment, 
there are enough similarities in the implementation process to merit an examination 
of the protected area style. Protected area managers in karst terrains use a common 
toolbox that contains a finite number of regulatory techniques. Just like their municipal 
counterparts, managers of protected areas must identify the appropriate tools 
for their specific location, and often must navigate tricky political hurdles in order 
to implement them at all. In particular, there are often near-intractable challenges 
involved in simply getting the various stakeholders on board with the plan in the 
first place. It is very easy for this part of the process to change the regulation in such 
a way as to render it significantly less effective than intended. In this way, protected 
area management is similar to municipal-level regulation of land use on karst. 

The Apuseni Natural Park 

The Apuseni Natural Park is a near-ideal environment for studying the process of 
initiating and implementing a protected-area style karst protection regime. For one 
thing, the park is a large, non-urbanized area where the interaction between humans 
and the underlying karst system has the potential to adversely affect both the 
karst itself and the local human population. For another, the park is at a pivotal 
stage in its life-cycle, in that it is relatively well established as a nature park, but 
has only recently developed any sort of official management plan that attempts to 
address the issues of human-karst interaction. Finally, because Romania is one of 
Europe’s poorer countries2 (World Bank Development Indicators 2006), any karst 
management approaches implemented by the management plan will have to work 
within strict budgetary and funding constraints; these approaches would therefore 
be more likely to be transferable to other low-wealth countries with significant karst 
resources. 

The Apuseni Mountains are part of the larger Carpathian mountain range, and 
are located in the western part of the country, where much of Romania’s karst can 
be found. This is the location of the Apuseni Natural Park, which contains approximately 
80% of the karstic rocks of the Bihor-Vladeasa range. Overall, Romania is 

2 According to the 2006 edition of the World Bank Development Indicators, Romania is categorized 
as a “lower middle income” country. Seven other European countries—Albania, Belarus, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Macedonia FYR, Serbia and Montenegro, and Ukraine—also 
share this designation. Most of the balance of Eastern Europe can be found in the “upper middle 
income” category, with all of Western Europe categorized as “upper income.” Moldova is the only 
European country found in the “low income” category. 


The Apuseni Natural Park (Romania) and the Development of a Protected Area Strategy 101 

not a highly karstic country. Less than 2% of Romania’s land area is underlain by 
carbonate bedrock and while 13% of the country’s overall water supply comes from 
groundwater, only 2% of that comes from karst lands. These figures are among the 
lowest in Europe (Zwahlen 2003). However, much of the karst that can be found in 
Romania exists in and around the Apuseni Natural Park, which contains dozens of 
significant caves (including the Scarisoara Ice Cave and one of the deepest caves 
in Romania) and countless sinkholes, many of which are used as makeshift trash 
dumps (Mos 2007). The idea of creating a nature park in the Apuseni region was 
first raised in the 1940s by noted Romanian biologist Emil Racovita, as a way to 
protect the area’s karst landforms and features. The park was officially created in 
2003, with the understanding that a park management plan would follow (a draft 
was completed in 2006). This plan would be designed to manage the natural park 
and the natural resources inside it, and would have to balance the twin objectives 
of protecting the natural resources of the park while simultaneously enabling the 
park’s population to develop economically. 

The establishment of the park itself is rooted in the legal authority provided by a 
government order issued in 1990. The park management plan draws upon Romanian 
federal law (Law No. 462/2001) as the legal basis of its authority, with various 
other federal laws, orders and government decisions providing a legal framework 
for day-to-day operations of the park and the implementation of the plan. The plan 
includes a significant cave management component, which will be explored in detail 
later in this chapter. 

Ordinarily, protecting karst landforms within a natural park would be a relatively 
simple matter of restricting access and usage of karstified lands. However, in the 
case of the Apuseni park, the issues are a bit more complex. The reason has to do 
with the area’s human population and its impacts on the park’s karst. As late as 
the 19th century, Apuseni peasants were commonly engaged in low-or no-impact 
industries like handicrafts and trade instead of timbering. But the beginning of the 
railway age at about that same time helped change the nature of the local economy, 
simultaneously contributing to a general overdevelopment of the area and to 
biodiversity changes (new transportation technology made it easier to import alien 
species as well as export timber products). This overdevelopment had historical 
precedent; deforestation has been a recurring ecological theme in the region, dating 
back to occupation by the Romans (Turnock 2002). 

Today, the area of the Apuseni Natural Park has a total population of approximately 
10,000 people, dispersed among the park’s 75,786 hectares. Certainly this 
is not a high population density in an absolute sense. However, Western protected 
areas usually—though there are exceptions—do not contain populations of that size, 
which adds a complicating factor to any analysis of the management plan in place at 
Apuseni. Despite the size of the overall population, the individual settlements themselves 
tend to be quite small—for example, Scarisoara, located at the southern end 
of the park, has only about 600 residents and is characterized by scattered clusters 
of between two and eight houses. Small-scale agriculture is widely practiced; most 
houses are adjacent to at least a small agricultural plot, and the landscape is dotted 
with sinkholes that have been converted to agricultural use. 


102 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

While electricity is available in some areas of the park, access to it is not universal, 
and not all homes that have access are actually connected to power lines. 
Groundwater quality in some areas of the park is poor; however, these problems are 
quite localized, and are not widespread enough to prevent park residents from drinking 
directly from local streams. Some communities have begun using waters from 
the local karst system as the source waters for new, modern water supply systems, 
which are being developed and implemented as a means of modernizing the mountain 
lifestyle and of attracting tourism opportunities. Much of the park lacks direct 
access to sewage services; in some areas, residents just dump their wastes wherever 
they can. This is a tricky problem to solve, as the dispersed population makes it 
difficult to cost-effectively implement any kind of sewage infrastructure. Biological 
pollution of the groundwater has occurred as a result of certain actions on the part 
of tourists and local residents—including inappropriate dumping of wastes—but it 
is not considered a major problem yet. In some areas, fecal contamination is significant 
enough to render the water non-potable. Chemical pollution has not yet been 
encountered, perhaps because there are no potential sources of such contamination 
within the park (Mos 2007; personal observation 2006). Still, the current version of 
the park’s management plan notes that “the majority of water sources in ANP are 
affected by pollution; some of them are even not potable” (Apuseni Natural Park 
2006). 

Roads in the Apuseni Natural Park tend to be very rough, with some being little 
more than trails. The entire park has only a single paved road; for most of the park, 
vehicle access is only possible via potholed dirt roads. Some park personnel and 
local speleologists argue that the lack of paved roads actually works to the park’s 
advantage by limiting access for logging trucks and tourists, which in turn makes it 
easier to preserve the park landscape. Preventing excessive logging and timbering is 
seen by park management personnel as paramount in efforts to preserve the natural 
state of the park, as deforestation has well-documented negative impacts on karst 
systems and landforms (Apuseni Natural Park 2006; personal observation 2006; 
Mos 2007). 

Protecting a karst landscape such as this one would likely be very difficult, if not 
impossible, using the municipal-level regulatory tools commonly found throughout 
the karstic regions of the United States. Instead, park managers have decided to take 
the protected area approach. As the next section demonstrates, this approach is often 
used in isolated, less economically developed landscapes; however, it is not without 
its drawbacks. 

The Protected Area Approach: An Overview 

A protected area is “an area of land and/or sea especially dedicated to the protection 
and maintenance of biological diversity, and of natural and associated cultural 
resources, and managed through legal or other effective means” (World Conservation 
Union 2000). Six different types of protected areas are identified by the World 
Conservation Union (IUCN): the strict nature reserve; the natural park; the natural 


The Apuseni Natural Park (Romania) and the Development of a Protected Area Strategy 103 

monument; a habitat/species management area; protected landscapes and seascapes; 
and managed resource protected areas. All of these area types incorporate different 
levels of protection, from preserving nature in an undisturbed state to protecting the 
sustainability of an area’s natural resources in order to ensure that future use of the 
resource is possible. 

Within protected areas, some sort of federal authority is generally cited by as justification 
for the implementation of karst protection policies. For example, the Grand 
Canyon Recreational Area cites the Federal Cave Protection Act as well as National 
Park Service Management Policies as the source of its authority to regulate the park. 
A set of 1998 revisions to these NPS policies explicitly state that “local and regional 
hydrological systems resulting from karst processes can be directly influenced by 
surface and sub-surface land use practices ...If existing or proposed developments 
such as buildings, roadways and other infrastructure do or will significantly alter or 
adversely impact karst processes, these impacts will be mitigated. If mitigation is not 
possible, alternatives outside of the karstic area will be sought” (U.S. Park Service 
1998). These sources are also cited by management plans published for Carlsbad 
Cavern in New Mexico and Sequoia and Kings Park in California and Nevada. 

The IUCN has published guidelines for cave and karst protection, which are 
intended to boost awareness of karst-related issues within the IUCN and other 
associated agencies. The emphasis here is on national parks and protected areas, 
rather than urbanized environments. The guidelines acknowledge that karst systems 
routinely interact with wider ecological and environmental systems, and that such 
interaction can easily lead to damage or contamination even when stringent protection 
programs are in place. In essence, the guidelines argue, the establishment of 
protected areas is not enough: rather than limiting protection to only those landforms 
located within park boundaries, entire karst systems must be protected. 

Where a karst area as a whole, or any part of such an area, is under consideration, the protection 
strategy chosen should provide for protection of the total catchment wherever possible. 
Where this is not practicable, there should at least be an extensive buffer surrounding the 
key features to be protected. (World Conservation Union 2005, p. 15) 

Accomplishing this will require a holistic approach toward managing water and 
air quality and movement between the surface and karst environments. In some 
countries where karst protection is a pressing issue, the expertise required to do 
so is not present, and must be brought in from abroad. As more and more management 
agencies implement karst-specific management policies, the importance of 
international information exchanges has become magnified. Indeed, such exchanges 
become all the more important in cases where effective, well-recognized policies 
and practices are followed but not formally documented. 

How Protected Area Plans Work to Protect Karst Resources 

Like municipal-level karst land use regulations, protected area plans tend to draw 
from a short list of regulatory tools and techniques as ways to achieve policy 
goals. In a karst context, the most common regulatory techniques include cave 


104 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

classification schemes, natural resource management (like forest stands, for example), 
working with nearby landowners and stakeholders not directly subject to park 
authority, and visitor and local resident education programs. 

In cave classification schemes, public access is usually limited to certain classes 
of caves, with others set aside for scientific purposes or closed due to safety concerns. 
In practice, cave classification schemes wary widely in complexity: 
Kentucky’s Mammoth Cave National Park employs a detailed, well-developed system, 
using six different classes (or “zones”) to differentiate caves on the basis of 
scientific value, fragility and accessibility, while in Australia, both the Mole Creek 
Karst National Park and Conservation Area and Naracoorte Caves National Park 
plans use a three-zone classification system (public caves, special access caves, 
and wild or unclassified caves). In many cases, each classification has further subclassifications, 
and at Naracoorte, different parts of the same cave may have different 
classifications. Mole Creek also caps the total number of visits per year for each 
cave; once that cap is reached, the cave is closed. 

Working with nearby landowners to protect the karst inside protected areas is 
often unavoidable, simply because of the extensive and expansive nature of so many 
karst systems. In any park, the dependence of protected karst on water flowing 
in from areas not subject to protected area plans has the potential to render any 
management plan ineffective from the start. In the early 1970s, Mammoth Cave 
management approached both the owners of the agricultural lands that surrounded 
the park and local land use planners in an effort to block changes in land use that 
might lead to degradation of the cave resources. Mole Creek has a similar problem, 
but because the park lands are not all contiguous, the situation there is somewhat 
more challenging than in most other parks. The park’s disjointed nature simultaneously 
makes it extremely difficult for it to address questions of logging, agriculture, 
waste disposal, and land clearance in the vicinity of the park’s karst features. The 
plan proposes a joint karst management program with the local forestry service, 
and a policy of collaboration and liaison with park neighbors and other users of the 
nearby Mill Creek-Kansas Creek catchment area. One objective of the management 
plan is growing support for the park and its overall goals within the community 
via soliciting stakeholder input, improving communication between stakeholders 
and park officials, and involving local caving clubs in appropriate aspects of park 
management. 

Yorkshire Dales National Park: An Example of Another Approach 
to Protected Area Management 

Not all protected areas in karst terrains rely on cave classification schemes to preserve 
their resources. Instead, some choose to take a more open-ended approach to 
protection, and as a result, they develop significantly different management plans. 
Located in the Pennines, in England, the Yorkshire Dales National Park has some of 
the best examples of limestone karst landscapes in all of Britain; highlights include 


The Apuseni Natural Park (Romania) and the Development of a Protected Area Strategy 105 

several major cave systems and some textbook examples of pavement karsts. The 
park also contains significant limestone-based habitats, including upland pastures, 
limestone pavements, and wooded areas, that merit protection. Like Apuseni, Yorkshire 
Dales is not exclusively a karst park; park management hopes to preserve not 
only geologically significant features, but also the biodiversity found in the park and 
the cultural characteristics of the people living there. 

Also like Apuseni, people live in the Yorkshire Dales National Park—the park 
has nearly 20,000 residents today—and have in fact lived in the area for thousands 
of years, dating back to the Paleolithic era. Traditionally the local economy was 
based on agricultural and pastoral activities, like livestock farming and cheesemaking. 
Agriculture is still important there today, but its viability as a sustainable commercial 
enterprise is threatened by larger forces beyond the park’s control. 

Demand for recreational services in the park has been growing for some time. Demand 
for vacation homes in the area is also growing, which has the effect of pushing 
housing costs beyond the range of affordability for the generally lower-wage inhabitants 
of the park. The park also has problems stemming from the increasing amounts 
of waste generated by individuals and business enterprises, despite the establishment 
of recycling programs. What landfill sites do exist in the park are characterized by 
limited future capacity, making waste reduction a priority. 

The park’s management plan is markedly different from those in place in parks 
like Mammoth Cave, Naracoorte Caves, Mole Creek or Apuseni, in that there are no 
explicit karst or cave management protocols laid out within it. The overarching goal 
of the park, like all national parks in Britain, is to protect and conserve the natural 
beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the park area, as well as to contribute to the 
economic and social well being of any communities located within the park. The 
Yorkshire Dales management plan sets out to accomplish this by broadly addressing 
seven components of the park: landscape, community and culture, access and recreation, 
understanding and enjoyment, nature conservation, historic environment, and 
economy and employment. It is emphasized that no element can really be addressed 
in isolation, due to the large number of connections between them all. However, 
the point that preserving the geology and geomorphology of the park is essential to 
properly understanding the overall landscape is made several times; one of the plan’s 
objectives is to maintain all geologically important sites in “favourable” condition, 
though this term is never defined within the management plan itself. Recurring 
themes throughout the plan include sustainable development and sustainable land 
management (for example, farming using traditional methods is more expensive 
than using modern methods, but should be practiced nonetheless in order to preserve 
the park’s unique cultural qualities) (Yorkshire Dales park management plan 
2007). 

As in Apuseni, park managers in Yorkshire Dales recognize the importance of 
maintaining the traditional lifestyle of park residents, since that is a key component 
of any plan to develop and grow economic activities centered around lowimpact 
tourism. Indeed, the plan objective to develop a wide range of tourism 
initiatives driven by the park’s image and its natural and cultural assets is supported 
by several of the other objectives laid out by the management plan. For 


106 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

example, the plan specifies that large-scale commercial agricultural operations are 
not permitted within the park, so as not to interfere with the more traditional agricultural 
activities practiced by park residents. More generally, the plan stipulates 
that environmentally sustainable economic activity should be actively promoted 
as good business practice and efficient in terms of resource consumption, with at 
least nine hectares of park land set aside for this type of economic development; 
further, the park’s Sustainable Development Fund will be used to support future 
projects that are expected to bring desired economic, social and environmental benefits 
to park communities and their residents. Finally, some of the transportationrelated 
goals of the plan include reducing the impacts of vehicle traffic within the 
park, in particular in the villages, and better integration of community transport 
services. 

Successful implementation of the plan will require cooperation from external 
entities that have interests within the park’s borders. In order to accomplish the 
goals of the plan, park management must develop working partnerships with the 
private entities that control fully 95% of the park’s land. However, the specific nature 
of these partnerships is not spelled out within the plan itself, presumably to allow 
management to retain some flexibility. 

The Yorkshire Dales National Park Management Plan takes a much different 
approach toward landscape and cultural protection than most protected area plans in 
karst areas. The management plan is not detailed, and instead seems to offer broad 
latitude to managers of how the plan’s objectives should be accomplished. It is worth 
noting a second time that there is no section on cave or karst management within the 
plan, despite the fact that the park contains some of Britain’s most important karst 
formations. For reasons that should become apparent later in this chapter, whether 
such an approach would be appropriate for the Apuseni Natural Park is questionable, 
despite the similarities between the parks. 

Does the Protected Area Approach Actually Work? 

Most of the Apuseni Natural Park is rural and undeveloped; it is, after all, a nature 
park. It is often difficult to get to nearby cities, and the rough local topography 
prevents the establishment of large-scale agriculture. The upshot of the geography 
of the park is that economic opportunities are limited for most of the people living 
there. Many area residents see the exploitation of the Apusenis’ natural resources as 
their ticket to prosperity; however, the karstic nature of the area means that it would 
be particularly susceptible to the negative impacts of mining and forestry, which are 
two traditional natural resource-based economic activities in the region. Romania’s 
natural park plan—which includes the Apuseni park—was designed with the intent 
of balancing conservation needs with access to woodlands and grazing. While 
the details are still being worked out, it seems that efforts to achieve this balance 
will focus on promoting the growth of certain low-impact industries (specifically, 
rural/eco-tourism and traditional crafts) and the de-emphasis of other higher-impact 
activities. In general, the land use implications of this approach include a greater 


The Apuseni Natural Park (Romania) and the Development of a Protected Area Strategy 107 

priority for conservation of biodiversity resources, maintenance and possible expansion 
of woodlands, and a reduction in agricultural intensity (Turnock 2002); however, 
in Apuseni, agricultural intensity is already very low. Some experts feel there 
is reason to be optimistic about the prospects for the protection efforts underway 
in the Apuseni Natural Park, mainly due to the connection between a landscape’s 
economic potential and the chance of success for conservation and protection efforts 
there: “Conservation attributes that occur in economically marginal hill and montane 
landscapes are relatively safe from degradation, whereas conservation attributes 
confined to lowland and coastal landscapes are under serious threat and are poorly 
protected” (Jepson et al. 2002). 

However, others argue that the entire protected-area approach is problematic: 
“Considerable controversy surrounds protected area theory—which illustrates a 
positive and worthwhile concept—and practice, where little contextual evidence 
proves that protected areas are effective” (Urich et al. 2001). There is little argument 
that the effectiveness of protected-area and conservation legislation fluctuates 
widely from region to region. Approximately 12% of the world’s karst landscape 
enjoys protection via designation as a protected area of some form; however, this 
amount is not distributed evenly. For example, approximately 18% of Central American 
karst lands are covered by protected area legislation, but as much as 86% of Belize’s 
karst enjoys such protection. Specific levels of protection vary from country to 
country, which is often a reflection of population, economic and political conditions. 
Even when karst protection is available, conditions within the federal government 
have a noticeable impact on whether or not the protection is actually meaningful: 
does the federal government have the capacity, in terms of budget, manpower, and 
central authority, to plan and enforce large-scale natural resource management programs? 
Are attitudes toward conservation favorable or unfavorable? Asking these 
and similar questions may help gauge the potential for success of a protected area 
program before it begins (Day and Urich 2000; Urich et al. 2001; Kueny and Day 
2002; Day 1996). 

While the trend in karst protection policy is toward global and national protected 
areas, the act of establishing protected areas is almost always a local affair, with effects 
and impacts borne primarily by local residents. A case in point is the establishment 
of a protected area in the Chocolate Hills region of the Philippines—home to 
one of the world’s best-known kegelkarst environments—which has led to conflicts 
between the federal government and local populations. In general, one problem with 
these kinds of conservation issues is that management rights and responsibilities can 
rest with either the central government or the local people. Government intrusion 
into land use practices and regulations often extends beyond the boundaries of the 
protected area itself. More ominous is the fact that, in the past, protected area creation 
has led to forced relocation of indigenous populations, impoverishment, and 
the collapse of traditional resource management systems. Other issues that must be 
addressed before protected areas in the Philippines can become a standard fixture of 
natural development planning include improving relations between protected area 
managers and local communities, improving protected area management practices; 
increasing international involvement and cooperation, and making these areas a 


108 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

standard and accepted part of society via education, training and research (Urich 
et al. 2001). 

Criticisms of the approach notwithstanding, administrators at the Apuseni Natu-
ral Park in Romania have pressed ahead with developing a park management plan 
that is heavily rooted in the protected area approach. With Romania’s recent admission 
to the European Union, the next several years promise to be a time of significant 
change for the entire country, as it attempts to transition from a struggling economy 
with strong structural ties to the old Communist system to a country that is, in terms 
of economics and governance, a peer of western European nations. To that end, the 
management plan for Apuseni Natural Park should be examined in a more western 
context, compared to existing plans from karstic areas in western nations. 

The Management Plan for Apuseni Natural Park 

In the summer of 2006, managers at Apuseni Natural Park published a draft management 
plan that outlines strategy and tactics for implementing a protected area 
approach to park land management. While the plan does include a set of karstrelated 
components that, on paper, appears to be adequate, the main goal of the park 
itself is to manage the forest resources it contains. The karst protection aspects of 
the plan work by dividing the park into various “management zones,” with each 
zone having a different level of acceptable access and use. Zone 1—the Scientific 
Reserve zone—is the most restrictive, with the only permissible human impact coming 
from scientific observation and monitoring activities. No other activities are allowed. 
Much of the significant karst lands in the park are classified as Zone 2 Special 
Conservation Zones. All activities permitted in Zone 1 areas are also permitted in 
Zone 2 areas. Other Zone 2-acceptable activities include controlled tourism, mostly 
limited to the use of visitor trails; pasturing with domestic animals under certain 
controlled conditions; and vehicular access. Specifically forbidden activities include 
anything that involves the construction of permanent buildings, other than those necessary 
for the administration of the park, and mass tourism; there is also a sweeping 
catch-all clause that says any activities not specifically approved for the zone are 
forbidden. 

However, not all the karst areas in the park are contained in areas labeled as zone 
1 or 2. This is apparent from a walk through the park itself, because there are people 
living adjacent to dolines in the vicinity of Scarisoara. These lands and others like 
them are most likely contained in Zone 3, the landscape protection zone, or zone 4, 
the socioeconomic development zone. Zone 3 contains lands reserved for traditional 
land uses, like forestry, pasturing, or temporary dwellings, and in which visitor 
access is encouraged. Zone 4 includes building areas of the communities spread 
across the park’s territory, and more types of land use are permitted here (though 
construction and development is restricted in the vicinity of the Padis tourist zone, 
due to the sensitivity of the surrounding area). There are, however, still restrictions 
on the development of new residential and industrial buildings that go beyond the 


Threats and Solutions 

capacity of the local ecosystem to accommodate them, or that are inconsistent with 
park management objectives. 

Beyond this large-scale zoning system, the Apuseni plan contains a cave classification 
system similar to those discussed earlier in this chapter. In the Apuseni 
system, there are four categories of caves, ranging from Class A to Class D. Class 
A caves are those with “exceptional value,” and all activities other than scientific 
research and monitoring are prohibited. Newly discovered caves are automatically 
classified as Class A caves until further study permits a more appropriate reclassification. 
Class B and C caves are also protected, due to national or local importance, 
respectively; organized tourism or explorations are permitted in both classes with 
park approval. Class D caves are described as those that lack the specific qualifications 
to be placed in any of the other three categories. 

Park management plans like this one are often difficult to implement because of 
conflicts with or between stakeholders. Here, those stakeholders encompass more 
than those individuals wishing to use or preserve the landscape. The park itself is 
actually split between three of Romania’s counties, and there are 21 villages or 
communes that are stakeholders in the park; perhaps 15 of these are directly involved 
with park business, with the others simply owning property within the park. This 
adds an extra layer of administrative stakeholders that must be navigated, making 
the plan development process all the more difficult. 

Threats and Solutions 

The karst within the Apuseni Natural Park faces threats from several different 
sources; however, the plan itself concludes that the state of conservation of the 
park’s karst is “at a rather satisfying level.” This is attributed directly to the remote 
locations and lack of convenient access routes for a large number of the park’s caves 
(Apuseni Natural Park 2006). Still, any future alterations to the park’s physical and 
human landscape could result in a dramatic change in that assessment. 

As discussed earlier, sinkholes in agricultural areas often lead to nitrate contamination 
of local groundwater supplies. However, in the Apuseni Natural Park, agriculture 
within sinkholes is not actually a significant threat to the local karst aquifer, 
despite the fact that the general lack of arable land makes the interiors of dolines 
and other karstic depressions more attractive for agricultural activities like growing 
potatoes. That is due in part to the fact that the agriculture here is very small-scale, 
mostly subsistence-level; generally, the agriculture practiced in the park was often 
intended to supplement the food supply brought in via trade with lowland farmers, 
who needed timber from the Apuseni forests. Additionally, chemical fertilizers are 
generally not used because they are too expensive for most park residents (Mos 
2007). That said, in Section 3.2.1.2 of the plan, farming is nonetheless identified as 
one of the major contributing factors to the area’s degraded aquifer. In addition to 
threats from fertilizers, intensive grazing can have an indirect negative impact on the 
karst aquifer by removing the vegetation that acts as natural filtering mechanisms for 


110 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

surface water prior to entering the karst system (Apuseni Natural Park 2006). This 
is a perfect illustration of the potential conflict between different objectives of the 
management plan (in this case, preservation of traditional ways of life vs. protection 
of the karst and groundwater resources) discussed earlier. 

Illegal logging, on the other hand, is indisputably a major problem within the 
park. Large companies conduct timbering operations within the park and profit from 
the exploitation of the park’s natural resources; however, because the logging takes 
place in a national forest, park residents do not control the timber resources, and 
little if any of this money ever makes its way into their pockets. Some park residents 
are unable to resist the profitable nature of forestry and continue to make their living 
from the trees, without official supervision or approval. Even so, these small-scale 
timbering operations do not pose the threat to the forest resource that is posed by 
larger corporations. Timbering issues in general have become a focal point for a bureaucratic 
turf war within the Apuseni Natural Park. There is a conflict between the 
park administration and the national forestry service, which now supervises the park 
administration. The park service sees its role as preserving the landscape, including 
the forest; the forestry service sees its role as encouraging and managing the use of 
the forest resources—in other words, to promote logging and timbering within the 
park (Mos 2007; Persoiu 2007). 

The development of summer homes also threatens the park’s karst systems. Illegal 
construction was once common in the area near the Cabana Padis, located toward 
the center of the park. While the newer cabins and seasonal homes under construction 
there in the summer of 2006 were being built legally, there were several others 
nearby for which no permits or approval papers were ever issued. Since the park’s 
lands have been inhabited for centuries, buildings and settlements long predated the 
legal establishment of the park. However, much of the construction that has taken 
place since then has been illegal, and the park ultimately has no recourse against 
illegal construction. At most, violators are fined a nominal amount, but are never 
actually required to remove any illegally built structures. Park rangers in Romania 
have very little power, which is a sharp contrast to other countries in the region like 
Poland; because the park lacks sufficient enforcement authority, the highly profitable 
nature of illegal development means that nature and ecological concerns within the 
park are often ignored (personal observation 2006; Mos 2007). 

Nearly all the park’s natural systems are threatened by the aggressive and 
unchecked development of tourist infrastructure (Mos 2007). This is not to say 
that park managers wish to prohibit development within the park, or envision such 
a prohibition as part of the park management plan. In fact, quite the opposite is 
true: they recognize that some development is necessary to provide an economic 
framework for the park’s residents. The real question is one of how to accommodate 
economic growth while simultaneously preserving as much of the park’s landscape 
as possible. For both social and ecological reasons, the most widely desired type 
of development is small-scale, sustainable rural tourism, which is often thought to 
be a potential gold mine for places like Apuseni. However, many southeastern European 
countries, including Romania, have also proved either unwilling or unable 
to invest in tourism development, or to secure outside investment for such ventures. 


Threats and Solutions 

But other countries in the region have seen investments in tourism infrastructure pay 
off; national parks in Poland and Slovakia, for example, have experienced booming 
business (Buza et al. 2001; Hall 2004; Turnock 2002). 

The draft management plan is clearly intended to position the Apuseni Natu-
ral Park for a transition to a major tourist attraction within the region, while still 
maintaining and protecting the park’s natural environment. The plan’s goals were 
determined with input from stakeholder workshops, as well as by the core team 
in charge of developing the plan. Stakeholders in the Apuseni Natural Park area 
include: 

• 
Romanian national government agencies, like the Ministry for Environment and 
Water Management, the Ministry for Agriculture, Forests and Sustainable Development, 
the Ministry for European Integration, and Romsilva, the Romanian 
forestry administration; 
• 
Administrators from the three county governments with land inside the park 
boundaries (the counties of Alba, Bihor and Cluj); 
• 
Various control and regulatory agencies at the federal and county levels, including 
the forestry directorates, environmental protection agencies and building inspection 
agencies from each of the three counties; 
• 
Various partner parks in Hungary and Italy; 
• 
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs), including speleological clubs and 
societies, ornithological societies, bat protection organizations, and ecotourism 
organizations; 
• 
Local land owners, including communes, churches, schools, and private owners, 
as well as owners of weekend homes within the park; and 
• 
Various schools, universities, museums, and research institutions. 
This list is not an all-inclusive list, but does provide a representative description 
of the largest stakeholders in the development of the park and the writing of 
the management plan. According to the draft management plan, these stakeholders 
had input in the writing of the plan in general, and in the setting of park goals in 
particular. These goals are summed up on page 86 of the draft management plan: 

Apuseni Natural Park will be: an internationally important area of mountain karst landscape, 
with well-conserved biodiversity, specific and quality tourism, sustainable use of resources, 
and an infrastructure designed for sustainable development; and with local communities 
that maintain their unique traditions and a good standard of life. 

Specific objectives are wide-ranging, as the park contains resources other than 
karst and the plan itself is obligated to address these resources as well. However, 
objectives relating directly or indirectly to karst formations within the park include 
the following: 

• 
Conservation of the park’s karst, and protection of the karst from damage and 
pollution; 
• 
Increasing scientific understanding of karst; 
• 
Boosting visitor awareness of, and improving visitors’ experience with, the 
park’s karst; 

112 
5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

• 
Protection and restoration of aquatic habitats within the park, as well as prevention 
and reduction of pollution of the park’s surface water and groundwater; 
• 
Promote ecotourism and “nature-oriented recreation,” as long as those activities 
are compatible with and appropriate for the park’s karst formations; 
• 
Promote and protect the local traditional lifestyle and cultural heritage of the 
Apuseni Mountains; 
• 
Promote the development of “sustainable economic activities.” 
There are potential internal conflicts here; in particular, protecting resources like 
karst formations and groundwater can very easily come into conflict with the objectives 
of protecting traditional lifestyles and promoting sustainable economic development. 
Of course, that is probably why the word “sustainable” is included in that 
particular objective, with the implication that any sustainable development would, 
almost by definition, be compatible with the resource-related objectives. 

Growing Tourism and Protecting the Natural Environment: 
Are They Mutually Exclusive? 

Establishing a thriving tourism sector faces a problem from the lack of infrastructure, 
especially water and roads. Nearly all roads in the park are unpaved forestry 
roads; some formerly paved roads within the Apuseni Natural Park have reverted to 
an unpaved condition due to a long-term absence of maintenance. Waste disposal is 
another segment of infrastructure that will have to be improved to support a strong 
push into the ecotourism sector. While there are trash-collecting sites for tourists 
using the four approved camping locations within the park, there are no actual trash 
removal services because the park claims removal is the responsibility of the towns, 
which generally lack the money needed to actually provide the service (Persoiu 
2007; personal observation 2006). The success of any strategy with an emphasis 
on private farming and expanding tourism would depend on improvements to these 
public services. Transportation in particular is critical, since the very roads that are 
needed to bring tourists to these locations have proved to be especially difficult to 
maintain since the end of the Communist era. Provision of other services is made 
all the more difficult by the settlement pattern of dispersed, “hamlet-style” villages 
scattered across rugged terrain. Some of these hamlets are not accessible to vehicle 
traffic at all. Perhaps these problems of accessibility offer a partial explanation of 
why relatively few Apuseni farmers participate in the young agrotourism industry, 
even though many of them consider growth of the industry to be highly desirable 
(Abrudan and Turnock 1998). 

If the park is to develop a thriving tourism industry, the park management plan 
will be the tool that provides the blueprint for it. The plan outlines specific acts that 
will be taken to achieve the twin goals of tourism development and environmental 
protection. First, the plan describes four broad objectives related to protecting 
and preserving the park’s karst: conserving the “patrimony” of the karst, increasing 
scientific knowledge and understanding of karst, facilitating and improving visitor 


Threats and Solutions 

awareness of karst, and reducing damage and pollution to the park’s karst features 
and landforms. Each objective is connected to a list of the specific management 
actions that will be taken to achieve these goals. Each of these management actions 
has a priority indicator of 1, 2 or 3, where 1 is the highest level of priority. An 
examination of these priority indicators can help illuminate what aspects of the plan 
are considered most important by park management and the other stakeholders. The 
“facilitating and improving visitor awareness” objective has five management actions 
with a priority of 1 (out of nine total actions); reducing damage and pollution 
has only one action (out of seven) with as high a priority. Likewise, the objective 
of increasing scientific knowledge has only one top-priority action, out of a total of 
five (Apuseni Natural Park 2006). 

The top priority management action relating to reducing damage and pollution 
to the park’s karst is an educational campaign to inform residents about the consequences 
of polluting and littering upon the karst system. Two other actions listed 
in this category are designed to “promote” changes in infrastructure or in park resident 
behavior (specifically, to promote the application of organic fertilizer, and to 
promote installation of rural wastewater collection and treatment systems, respectively); 
these are given a priority of 2. In the former case, this lower priority might be 
because the poverty of park residents makes organic fertilizer a choice often made 
from necessity; likewise, the lower priority for promotion of wastewater systems 
could reflect the awareness that the cost of installing such a system is very high 
and essentially out of reach. The one action likely to yield more immediate and 
visible results—clearing trash out of sinkholes—also has a priority of 2. Under the 
“facilitate and improve visitor awareness” category, the park administration seems 
intent on walking a fine line between increasing access to the park’s karst, and simultaneously 
imposing better controls on that access. High priority management 
actions include improving visitor access via thematic, self-guiding karst trails and 
developing a more comprehensive agreement relating to access to karst sites within 
the park. 

At this point, the park’s infrastructure is likely inadequate to support a profitable 
ecotourism sector. The Romanian government has attempted to help shore up the 
area’s infrastructure with an 8000 billion lei program that also attempts to grow the 
region’s tourist trade by providing “seed money” investments for local handcrafts 
and other businesses likely to reinforce the industry. Government-sponsored grants 
and financing for the promotion of ecotourism and nature preservation are crucial 
for the success of the project, because most developers and investors are reluctant 
to invest their own money in what is admittedly a very risky venture at this stage. It 
is hoped that, as development continues, word will spread throughout Europe about 
the recreation opportunities available in the park, which will then lead to an increase 
in visitors and a justification of further investment in the park, perhaps even without 
the inducements of grants. Other proposals for boosting tourism in the area—not 
specifically tied to this federal grant program—include improving mountain activities 
and establishing a Large Animal Center that would make it easier to observe 
large animals in their natural environment. The park administration is also trying to 
promote and support the development of other sustainable economic opportunities 


114 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

for park residents. These include sustainable production of natural medicines using 
plants found in the park and sustainable use of forestry products in the production 
of handcrafts. These activities are already occurring in the park, but on very small 
scales; still, they do provide potential investors with an example of the types of 
non-tourism economic initiatives that are considered suitable by park management. 
Even with the scale of financial assistance offered by the government, however, 
agrotourism in the Apuseni Natural Park would find itself competing for dominance 
with mining for bauxite, copper and limestone—all traditional economic activities 
that hold very little appeal for the average pleasure traveler. On the other hand, there 
is also a strong conservation movement afoot in the region, with 35 environmental 
non-governmental organizations (ENGOs) active in the Apuseni Mountains as of 
2001. This movement could potentially hamper attempts at any type of economic 
and industrial development, perhaps by seeking the implementation of regulatory 
tools like controls on grazing and woodcutting (Abrudan and Turnock 1998; Mos 
2007; Turnock 2002; Buza et al. 2001). 

Apuseni Park officials clearly believe that the promotion of ecotourism in the 
region is important. In fact, tourism and possible ways to promote it are discussed 
at length within the plan itself. The section of the plan addressing the managing 
of visitors, tourism and recreation is well developed and detailed, with significant 
attention devoted to the image of the park, promotion of the park as a tourist destination, 
and general public relations. The very first goal is to develop a separate 
visitor management plan; both this and the development of a visitor infrastructure 
are listed as top-priority items. Clearly, this section has received a good deal of 
thought, and reflects park management’s emphasis on developing ecotourism as an 
economic base for the park. In addition to ecotourism, administrators have been 
willing to encourage any other activities that simultaneously carry a minimal impact 
on the landscape, while also providing maximum income to park residents. In any 
case, planners will have to take care to avoid the great paradox of rural tourism: 
the growth and development of a successful rural tourism industry may very easily 
destroy the features and qualities that made such tourism possible in the first place. 

It is this very realization that has led to some resistance to the promotion of 
ecotourism as an engine of economic development for the people of the Apuseni 
Natural Park. Some cavers argue that there is an inherent contradiction in attempting 
to protect caves by introducing them to the tourist circuit and exposing them to 
larger numbers of visitors. Park management claims that any caves opened to the 
tourist circuit would still enjoy a significant amount of protection, since no lights or 
footpaths would be installed; speleologists counter that any promotion of caves for 
tourism will by definition lower the level of protection provided, due simply to the 
increased human contact (Persoiu 2007). 

It is interesting to note that none of the management actions listed in the “Sustaining 
and Promoting Local Culture and Traditions” section are given top-priority 
billing. This, combined with what we see in the section on managing visitors, 
strongly suggests that developing the tourist trade is more important to park administrators, 
and could very easily crowd out the development and growth of small-scale 
traditional economic activities (Apuseni Natural Park 2006). 


Threats and Solutions 

Authority and Attitudes 

Earlier in this chapter, the role of enforcement capabilities and attitudes toward 
preservation in protected area establishment and management was discussed (see 
Day 1996; Jepson et al. 2002; Kueny and Day 2002). Judging from the plan itself, 
and from discussions with stakeholders, the Apuseni Natural Park may find itself 
in the same situation as countless other protected areas around the world: unable to 
actually provide protection to the park’s natural resources, regardless of what the 
management plan says. 

In a park with as large a population as Apuseni, winning over the residents is 
critical to the success of any management plan. The size of the park’s population 
made it impossible to consult each individual resident when attempting to incorporate 
their priorities into the park management plan; additionally, the sheer number 
of stakeholders other than park residents makes it necessary to work with representatives 
of each stakeholder group (major stakeholders are listed earlier in this 
chapter). Representatives of each stakeholder group then come together to form a 
workgroup, which was selected by park management; indeed, the entire process of 
collecting input from stakeholders seems to have been strongly guided by the park 
administration (Mos 2007). 

Park residents were initially hostile to the idea of a management plan. This was 
due to residents’ misunderstandings of the intentions of the park’s administration, 
most of which were related to restrictions on permissible activities and access to 
natural resources for park residents. These misunderstandings were apparently capitalized 
upon and encouraged by interest groups who opposed the development and 
implementation of a management plan. Ultimately, it took two full years of work 
to turn these hostile and reluctant attitudes around. Park administrators conducted 
workshops, informal meetings, and organized exchanges between other European 
natural parks in their efforts to convince the residents of Apuseni Natural Park of 
the benefits of implementing a management plan (Mos 2007). 

However, even as the idea of preservation has gained acceptance, the concept 
of a tourism-based economy has been slower to gain approval from park residents. 
It has been suggested that the park residents find forestry easier, largely because 
the paperwork required for tourism can be challenging; additionally, forestry is still 
far more profitable. This is related to the general problem with enforcement and 
with bureaucratic issues; many park residents seem to be waiting for these things to 
change before moving to the tourism trade. Additionally, some villagers are simply 
not motivated to start businesses and become entrepreneurs, particularly in a new 
and exotic field like ecotourism. This can potentially be overcome by convincing 
one person to establish a tourism business and helping him succeed; his neighbors 
may then attempt to emulate his success. 

While park administration seems to have been successful in their efforts to bring 
about more favorable attitudes toward preservation among park residents, other 
stakeholders have not been as receptive. In particular, RomSilva (the Romanian forest 
service) is more focused on exploitation than preservation of the park’s forested 
lands and has resisted buying into the application of the protected area management 


116 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

concept to the Apuseni Natural Park. The draft management plan itself, however, 
aggressively promotes resource preservation rather than resource exploitation. The 
nature of RomSilva’s official mission and the high potential economic value of timber 
products made from park trees suggest that the forestry service’s institutional 
attitude toward preservation in the park will be difficult to change; for this reason, 
some park administrators are actively pursuing the possibility of severing the park’s 
official (and subordinate) relationship with RomSilva. However, such an approach 
could be counterproductive, especially if the park management lacks RomSilva’s 
access to the various levers of Romania’s federal government. Romania’s forests 
are an important natural resource; RomSilva’s control over them (and, by extension, 
the revenue they would generate) is in and of itself a source of significant political 
power. It seems unlikely that, in the event of a separation, a newly independent 
park administration would have the political resources to prevent RomSilva from 
doing as they like in the park. For that reason, a more constructive engagement with 
RomSilva should be considered, though it seems that the forestry service has little 
enthusiasm for that approach (Mos 2006; Persoiu 2007). 

Enforcement authority is also a significant obstacle to the success of the management 
plan. Some stakeholders have raised the issue of whether the plan can 
actually be put into practice and enforced. The lack of enforcement authority is 
a key problem from the standpoint of cave and resource protection. Even if the park 
administration tells people not to cut down the forest, the management plan and Romanian 
law do not provide the authority to actually prevent anyone from doing so. 
Certainly, the park management plan carries with it the imprimatur of the Romanian 
government. The establishment of the park itself is rooted in the legal authority provided 
by a government order issued in 1990. The park management plan draws upon 
Romanian federal law as the legal basis of its authority, with various other federal 
laws, orders and government decisions providing a legal framework for day-to-day 
operations of the park and the implementation of the plan. Unfortunately, without 
the ability to impose significant fines or other penalties, the park is not likely to 
have much success in preventing illegal timbering operations or illegal resort home 
construction within its boundaries (Apuseni Natural Park 2006; Persoiu 2007). 

Another example of the difficulty faced by park administration can be found in a 
disagreement between park management and the Romanian speleological clubs that 
operated within the park. Traditionally, the discovery of a new cave in the park did 
not result in the cave becoming the private property of the discoverer. Instead they 
remained (with some exceptions) in the public domain, which meant that anyone 
could access them. Management of these caves fell to the caving clubs. Each club 
had its own “territory” within the park, and each club was responsible for the caves 
within its territory. Speleologists affiliated with one club could still enter caves in 
other clubs’ territories; however, by convention they mapped only the caves within 
their clubs’ territory. Currently, the Romanian Academy of Sciences grants permission 
to enter protected area caves. Previously, when the park was first established, 
the park administration wanted to take control of all caves; this naturally would have 
included handing over the keys. The speleological clubs disputed the legal right of 
the park to do this, based on a different interpretation of the relevant Romanian law. 


Threats and Solutions 

The dispute was resolved by permitting the clubs to retain control over the keys, 
with the clubs agreeing to notify park management when they decide to enter a 
particular cave. The arrangement seems to be a workable one, but periodically the 
park administration suggests it might prefer to increase the level of control they are 
able to exert over the caves (Persoiu 2007). 

How the Apuseni Experience Relates to Karst Regulations 
in Municipalities 

Planners working in urban areas can take valuable lessons from the Apuseni Natural 
Park’s experiences in writing and implementing a management plan, despite the very 
rural and undeveloped character of the park. For one thing, it can often be much 
more difficult than expected to achieve acceptance from stakeholders, especially in 
cases where they may have interests that conflict with each other, or with the idea of 
karst protection itself. In the case of Apuseni, one large group of stakeholders—park 
residents—have historically perceived it to be in their interests to allow exploitation 
of the park’s natural resources, like timber and ore. This perspective, combined with 
the belief that a park management plan would place excessive restrictions on access 
and land use, led to two years’ worth of opposition and hostility from park residents 
toward the very idea of a plan. And RomSilva, the Romanian forestry service, is 
a major stakeholder in the park because of the vast timber resources located there. 
However, protection of the karst system requires these resources to be carefully 
managed—remember, it was rapid deforestation that led to the destruction and loss 
of western Ireland’s karst aquifer centuries ago—and the whole point of RomSilva’s 
existence is to promote timber harvesting. 

Attempting to satisfy multiple policy goals can also lead to major problems, particularly 
if those goals happen to come into conflict. In Apuseni, we have a situation 
where the goals of certain segments of the management plan—specifically, protection 
of the park’s karst resources—conflict with the goals (better exploitation of the 
park’s forestry resources) laid out elsewhere in the same document. Because of the 
mechanics of karst aquifers, it is very unlikely that both goals can be met—either 
the trees must remain largely in place, or the karst must suffer as the landscape is 
denuded. What seems most likely is that natural environment protection will suffer 
at the hands of economic development. Certainly we can already see an example of 
this in the fact that RomSilva does not abide by the spirit of the plan and continues 
to exploit the forest resources in a way that is not consistent with the protected 
area concept (according to Section 3.2.4.1 of the Apuseni draft management plan, 
forestry issues are addressed in separate Forestry Plans, which had yet to be revised 
at the time the draft was published). This activity is the result of two factors: 
the inherent conflict that exists between the plan’s main goals and from a lack of 
enforcement authority over RomSilva, which in fact has authority over park management. 
These do not appear to be issues that can be resolved through future drafts 
of the park management plan; intervention at higher levels of government may be 


118 5 Karst Land Use Regulation in Rural Settings 

necessary (i.e., either separating the park service from RomSilva or more constructively 
engaging the forestry service; improving the park service’s ability to enforce 
its own rules). 

This last point—that enforcement authority is a critical component of any set of 
karst land use regulations—cannot be overemphasized. The existing literature repeatedly 
points out the importance of enforcement, and the experience of Apuseni’s 
park service professionals bears it out; indeed, the importance of enforcement ability 
was also demonstrated in the Brooksville Ridge Cave case study earlier in this chapter. 
Unless karst regulations can be vigorously enforced, they will be ignored. This 
can actually be a worse situation than not implementing regulations in the first place, 
because the failure of the regulations to halt degradation of a karst system could then 
be used to dismiss the effectiveness of the regulatory approach altogether. 

This chapter demonstrates that even across landscapes that are superficially similar 
(in this case, a pair of rural landscapes with noteworthy karst feature development 
and vulnerable groundwater supplies), there is no one-size-fits-all approach to 
implementing regulations that are simultaneously effective at protecting the karst 
and appropriate to the local natural and human environments. Factors that should 
influence the final form of any regulations include the amount of land that requires 
protection, the nature of the threat in question, and local culture, which certainly 
includes the political culture, the consideration of traditional occupations and economic 
activity, as well as a more general understanding of the population’s historical 
relationship to the landscape. Because of the complex way in which human systems 
and karst systems interact with each other, any attempt at regulation that forgoes 
consideration of these—and perhaps other—factors is not likely to succeed. 

References 

Abrudan, I.; Turnock, D. 1998. A rural development strategy for the Apuseni Mountains, Romania. 

GeoJournal, v. 46, pp. 319–336 
Apuseni Natural Park draft management plan, 2006 
Buza, M.; Dimen, L.; Pop, G.; Turnock, D. 2001. Environmental protection in the Apuseni 

Mountains: The role of Environmental Non-Governmental Organisations. GeoJournal, v. 54, 
pp. 631–653 
Coastal Engineering 2005. Response to objections, recommendations and comments report. Hernando 
County 05-1. Proposed Comprehensive Plan Amendment. August 11, 2005 
Day, M. 1996. Conservation of karst in Belize. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, v. 58, no. 2, 
pp. 139–144 
Day, M.; Urich, P. 2000. An assessment of protected karst landscapes in Southeast Asia. Journal 
of Cave and Karst Science, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 61–70 
Florea, L. 2005. Comments to the Hernando County Commission Regarding Replies to CPAM05-
01, August 23, 2005 
Gulley, J.; Veni, G.; Schneider, K. 2005. Mapping Survey of Brooksville Ridge Cave, Hernando 
County, Florida. Report prepared for World Woods Corporation. Submitted July 8, 2005 
Hall, D. 2004. Rural tourism development in southeastern Europe: Transition and the search for 

sustainability. International Journal of Tourism Research, v. 6, pp. 165–176 
Interview with Alin Mos, Apuseni Natural Park management, 2007 
Interview with Aurel Persoiu, speleologist in the Apuseni Natural Park, 2007 


References 119 

Interview with Tom Turner, co-discoverer of Brooksville Ridge Cave, 2008 

Interview with Dawn Velsor, planner for Hernando County, Florida, 2008 

Interview with Colleen Werner, biologist at Withlacoochee State Forest, 2008 

Jepson, P.; Momberg, F.; van Noord, H. 2002. A review of the efficacy of the protected area system 
of East Kalimantan province, Indonesia. Natural Areas Journal, v. 22, no. 1, pp. 28–42 

Kueny, J.A.; Day, M.J. 2002. Designation of protected karstlands in Central America: A regional 
assessment. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, v. 64, no. 3, pp. 165–174 

Personal observation, 2006 

St. Petersburg Times, February 16, 2005. County Reverses Stance on Resort. 

Turnock, D. 2002. Ecoregion-based conservation in the Carpathians and the land use implications. 
Land Use Policy, v. 19, pp. 47–63 

United States Park Service Management Policy Revision, 1998 

Urich, P.B.; Day, M.J.; Lynagh, F. 2001. Policy and practice in karst landscape protection: Bohol, 
the Philippines. The Geographical Journal, v. 167, no. 4, p. 307 

World Conservation Union, 2000. Application of IUCN Protected Area management Categories, 
Draft Australian Handbook, p. 12 

World Conservation Union, 2005. Guidelines for Cave and Karst Protection. IUCN World Commission 
on Protected Areas. IUCN Publication Services Unit, Cambridge, UK, p. 15 

Yorkshire Dales park management plan, 2007 

Zwahlen, F. (ed.) 2003. Vulnerability and risk mapping for the protection of carbonate (karst) 
aquifers: scope, goals, results. European Commission for Science, Research and Development. 
Luxembourg 


Chapter 6 
Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land 
Use Regulations 

Abstract This chapter draws upon the conclusions and data generated in the 
previous five chapters to begin the construction of a framework of karst land use 
regulation. The framework is loosely based in perspective of system theory, in that 
the issues discussed and explored throughout the rest of the book all stem from the 
interaction of karst systems with human systems, like cities and economies. Relative 
influences of various factors on the entire regulatory process are examined; through 
that, the beginnings of a framework are generated. Factors that receive particular 
emphasis include enforcement authority, attitudes of planners toward karst regulations, 
regulatory actions taken by neighboring jurisdictions, and technical expertise. 
The framework itself accounts for inputs into the regulatory process, the effectiveness 
and restrictiveness of various forms of regulation, and what the outcomes of 
these regulations are likely to be. However, due to the highly complex nature of the 
political systems discussed in this book, a quantitative model is elusive. Instead, this 
framework is highly qualitative. 

Keywords Human/karst interaction · Regulatory framework · System theory 

In the preceding chapters, we have attempted to sort through a large amount of data 
and information on karst related land use policies and regulations in an effort to 
lay the foundation for the development of a framework we can use to understand 
how these policies work, and how external forces can influence the final form taken 
by those policies. This process has incorporated both quantitative and qualitative 
data and has focused in particular on three study areas and on the input of land use 
professionals from across the United States. Conclusions drawn from the analyses 
conducted in these chapters are wide-ranging; however, the most pertinent findings 
include the following: 

• 
In the United States, local karst-related land use regulations are often similar, if 
not identical, to other regulations found elsewhere in the same state. This suggests 
that municipalities may be more concerned with implementing regulations 
that will withstand legal challenges within their own states than they are with 
developing regulations that are carefully suited to the specific physical nature of 
the karst system below. 
S. Fleury, Land Use Policy and Practice on Karst Terrains, 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9670-9 6, C
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009 


122 
6 Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 

• 
There does not seem to be any relationship between levels of urbanization and 
regulatory methods used, or indeed between urbanization and the very existence 
of karst regulations or ordinances. Several large, highly urbanized areas on karst 
have nothing more than rudimentary karst protections on the books; in many 
cases there are no regulations whatsoever. Conversely, some rural municipalities 
have taken more proactive approaches to regulating development on karst 
terrains. However, it should be noted that the data do not support the presence 
of an inverse relationship between government sophistication and regulatory 
sophistication. 
• 
Stormwater runoff ordinances are a very common way—indeed, perhaps the 
most common way—to regulate land use on karst terrains in the United States. 
Reasons for this seem to include the visibility of the problems the ordinances are 
intended to address as well as its near-universal application in non-karst contexts 
as well. 
• 
Overlay zones can be found in rural settings as well as urban areas. This is surprising, 
as it seems reasonable to expect that issues of human-karst interaction in 
less-populated areas could be resolved with less intrusive regulatory tools than 
the overlay zone. 
• 
Employing mandatory setbacks as a regulatory tool is a more common choice 
for municipalities with more extensive karst formations. Setback or “no-build” 
ordinances can be an effective way to limit or control structural density when 
applied to areas where sinkholes are prevalent. 
• 
Planners’ attitudes toward karst land use regulation seem to be related to whether 
or not such regulations are implemented in the first place. However, it should be 
noted that it is difficult to get a fix on the direction of causality here: is the lack of 
regulations a result of the planners’ negative expectations of such regulations, or 
are those expectations and attitudes a result of the absence of such regulations? 
• 
The expected results of karst regulation, particularly “secondary effects” like 
changes in population density or growth rates, often are not observed in municipalities 
where such regulations are implemented. 
• 
Higher levels of input into the regulation process from non-elected, technical 
professionals (for example, geologists, engineers, hydrologists) do not lead to 
inherently more restrictive regulations. 
• 
No clear relationship can be identified between the restrictiveness of the regulations 
and the identity of the initiator of the regulation implementation process. 
• 
“Reactive” regulations—in other words, those that are implemented to address 
a specific problem that is already occurring—tend to be more restrictive than 
preventative regulations. 
• 
Often, planners believe that karst regulations are effective methods of achieving 
a particular goal, even if they haven’t actually witnessed it. 
• 
Strategic behavior does not seem to be an issue in the process of deciding whether 
or not to implement karst land use regulations. Indeed, analysis suggests that 
there is no rational reason to engage in such strategic behavior in the first place, 
since the presence of karst-aware land use regulations does not appear to put a 

6 
Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 123 

municipality at an economic disadvantage relative to neighboring towns that do 
not employ such regulations. 

• 
In areas where local populations are more heavily dependent on natural resource 
exploitation as an economic foundation, attempts to manage and protect the local 
karst could very easily interfere with economic development for the local 
population. Successfully achieving both goals may well require an approach that 
differs from the traditional protected area approach. 
Ultimately, the role of regulation in karst terrains is twofold: first, to protect 
human-built structures from damage caused by some of the more hazardous aspects 
of karst terrains, like sinkholes or flooding; and second, to mitigate and prevent 
damage to local karst systems and the resources (for example, groundwater supplies 
or tourist attractions) that they provide. The previous chapters show that there is no 
single, unified approach to the implementation of this type of regulation, and that 
these differences cannot be completely explained by factors such as region, population, 
the extent of the local karst system, or the nature of the specific karst-related 
issues. Nor are the impacts of karst regulations clear and unambiguous: this book 
also suggests that the results of implementing karst-aware land use regulations are 
often not the results expected by planners or other land use professionals. 

By examining a wide range of karst-aware regulatory techniques in diverse settings, 
this book connects much of the existing research on land use in karst terrains 
under a single, unifying umbrella, while simultaneously offering new insights into 
the development of these regulations and their impacts on the human settlements that 
choose to implement them. Most of the prior research into karst land use regulation 
focused on a single type of regulation or a particular environment, like protected 
area management, and generally has produced a great deal of valuable knowledge 
about karst management under specific conditions: In protected area management, 
see Urich et al. (2001), who describe how conflicts between federal governments 
and local populations can develop in lands subject to protected area management 
plans; or Jepson et al. (2002), who note the inverse correlation between a landscape’s 
economic potential and the likelihood that resource protection efforts will 
be successful. Likewise, Dinger and Rebmann (1986), Butler (1987), Dougherty 
(1993), Fischer (1997), Davis (1997), Reese et al. (1997) and Barner (1999) all 
examine karst-aware land use regulations in specific locations, each studying different 
stages of the regulatory process as it unfolded in different locations. Several of 
these authors examine karst land use regulations from a historical or developmental 
perspective: motivations ranged from protecting local groundwater supplies to flood 
prevention to a desire to reduce legal action against the city. None of these motivating 
factors are unique to any of the locations in which these studies were conducted, 
and each author treats each case study as an isolated incident, without placing the 
regulation in the wider context of karst land use regulation. Davis (1997) conducted 
a wider-ranging study, in geographical terms; however, his study was limited to 
regulations governing landfills in karst terrains. Fischer (1997) used his vantage 
point as a land use planning practitioner to evaluate several different approaches 


124 6 Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 

to karst land use regulation in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and determined that 
the NNJRC& D model ordinance was best able to balance competing demands 
(economic and environmental), and therefore offered the best chance of success. 
It is worth noting that Fischer’s and Davis’ approach differs from the others in that 
theirs were more broadly defined study areas. Other authors, like Rubin (1992), 
LaMoreaux et al. (1997), and Richardson (2003), have undertaken analyses of karst 
land use regulation on a regional or nationwide level; however, out of necessity these 
efforts tend to take a very broad view, and do not generally delve into the details of 
karst land use regulation. 

This pattern—narrowly focused, detailed studies of a single location existing side 
by side with broad, general analyses of the state of karst regulation on a regional or 
national level—is repeated throughout the karst policy literature; however, to date 
there has been little effort to integrate this knowledge into a broader understanding 
of karst land use regulation in general. This book represents an effort to begin to 
bridge that gap by combining both types of studies; indeed, in doing so we are 
presented with a muddier picture than we might have expected, with some results 
that are at first unclear, or even seem to contradict each other. Many of these results 
provide promising avenues for future research, which are briefly discussed at the 
end of this chapter. 

Karst regulations are not developed and implemented in a vacuum. There must 
be a perceived threat, either to or from the karst formations underlying a municipality 
that chooses to regulate land use in this way. The results discussed here 
offer insight into the role of humans in generating or exacerbating threats to karst 
landscapes, or reacting to threats posed by those landscapes. In this chapter, these 
results will be described and analyzed in such a way that a clearer understanding 
of karst-aware land use regulations can emerge. On a practical level, the idea is to 
identify and discuss the contributions of various inputs into the land use regulation 
process in a way that enables planners or other land use professionals to make 
sensible, research-based decisions on how such legislation or regulation should be 
constructed in their own jurisdictions. But the larger goal is to further develop our 
understanding of how humans react and how human settlements change in response 
to both the presence of karst, and to the use of this particular type of land use 
regulation. 

Indeed, it should be emphasized that what is presented in this chapter is not 
intended to be viewed as a completed framework, and instead should be considered 
a work-in-progress or a starting point, as there is certainly much work yet 
to do. For example, there are almost certainly some variables that are not examined 
within this book that may warrant inclusion once more research has been 
conducted. Also, it should be clarified that it is not the intent of this book to offer 
a step-by-step recipe for implementing karst-aware land use regulations, or a 
“fill-in-the-blanks” template for such regulations, along the lines of the Northern 
New Jersey Resource Conservation and Development Council document discussed 
in Chapter 2 of this book. That document is successful because it is intended for 
communities in a particular region, where geologic conditions and other variables 
do not differ widely between towns. On the other hand, throughout this book it is 


Karst Systems, Human Systems, and Where They Meet 

argued that communities located in karst areas in different regions will have different 
needs to consider, as well as different initial conditions and different influences 
on the policy process. 

Karst Systems, Human Systems, and Where They Meet 

In the end, the subject of this book is really a system of systems: it is the interaction 
of karst systems and two types of human systems—specifically urban systems, or 
at the very least clustered settlements, and policymaking systems. The components 
of karst systems include limestone or carbonate bedrock, precipitation, temperature, 
and carbon dioxide derived from organic material (this is usually found in the overburden, 
but not always) (Fig. 6.1). Urban system components include people, land, 
artificial structures, economic inputs, outputs, and byproducts (including fertilizers, 
industrial wastes and pollution, trash generated by packaged consumer goods), and 
other wastes. When urban systems are located above or very near to karst systems, 
the two systems interact to become a single system—for example, groundwater is 
withdrawn to help fuel growth; land subsidence damages human-made structures 
and opens new pathways from the surface to the aquifer; more surface-level pollutants 
end up in the groundwater. Urban systems are also usually at least partially 
governed by constraints and rules. These constraints are produced by the local policymaking 
system, the nature of which can differ greatly from locality to locality. In 
general, inputs include public opinion, business and economic interests, ambitions 
and goals of the policymakers themselves, and specialized technical analysis. This 
is a very broad generalization, of course; in many places, the local policymaking 
system is quite complex. Ultimately, these constraints can be produced by policymaking 
systems to govern or regulate the ways in which an urban system interacts 
with a karst system. 

Certainly, urban systems, karst systems and policy systems meet several of the 
traditional definitions of systems. The system under examination in this book includes 
the components and interrelationships of all three of these systems. As von 
Bertalannfy points out, all living systems are open systems; the system under examination 
here is as well. Forces and entities external to the system are able to 
provide inputs and influence the end state. Beyond the simple open/closed system 
dichotomy, this system meets the definition of a mechanical system (systems that are 
driven by changes to a set of relatively simple parameters). It could also be argued 
that it meets the definition of a social system as well; however, while social systems 
do address the interaction of humans with their physical artifacts, they also tend to 
emphasize symbolic artifacts as well, which are not as important here. The most 
significant difficulty in applying system theory to this research is that the most important 
component of the system—humans—is also its least predictable component. 
However, this is perhaps the single most common difficulty in conducting research 
in any of the social sciences, and should not stand in the way of drawing sound 
conclusions from the data gathered here (von Bertalannfy 1973). 


126 6 Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 


Fig. 6.1 A karst system (not to scale) 

Inputs 

In the preceding chapters, this text examined the effects of certain inputs into the 
karst land use regulating process and their impacts on both the regulations themselves 
and the human systems to which they were applied. Specifically, this research 
explored how setback-style sinkhole ordinances affect residential structural density 
in sinkhole-prone areas; it examined whether there were economic incentives 


Inputs 127 

for policy makers in Pennsylvania to engage in strategic behavior when deciding 
whether or not to implement karst-aware land use regulations; and it looked at 
the challenges facing karst protection efforts in Romania’s Apuseni Natural Park, 
in particular those relating to a lack of enforcement authority. It also examined 
the perceived impacts of karst-aware land use regulations, as viewed from the 
perspective of planners, geologists and other land use professionals in the United 
States. 

Figure 6.2 depicts a general conceptual framework of the process of karst-aware 
land use regulation; it is highly generalized, and the specifics will vary widely from 
locality to locality. This section will begin with an examination of a group of inputs 
into the regulation development process. The discussion is limited to a handful of 
inputs that were considered important for one of two reasons: each input was either 
a significant factor in the process of writing and developing these regulations, or it 
seems to have an unexpectedly weak impact on the process. Precisely quantifying 
the significance of each input to the system is almost certainly an impossible task; 
indeed, it is challenging enough to simply identify each input. However, based on 
the results of the research described in the preceding several chapters, we can see 
that some inputs generally seem to have greater impact on the regulatory process 
and results than others. Some of the more interesting inputs from both groups are 
described in this section. 

Technical expertise: In Chapter 3, input from non-elected professionals like geologists 
and hydrologists was cited by a large number of respondents as being a 
critical factor in the development of karst-related land use regulations. This is not 
surprising, as Sabatier emphasized the importance of specialist knowledge (“policyoriented 
learning”) in his Advocacy Coalition Framework of the policy process 
(Sabatier and Jenkins-Smith 1988). Results suggest that consulting technical experts 
has significant benefits (i.e., acquisition of the theoretical and practical knowledge 
required to target and design effective karst-related regulations) that are not accompanied 
by significant drawbacks (these professionals do not seem to be inclined to 
promote excessively restrictive regulations, even as their influence over the process 
increases). But because of the generally intangible nature of the benefits of technical 
expertise, its impact on the regulation writing and implementation process is almost 
impossible to quantify. There do seem to be some tangible results of higher levels 
of influence from non-elected professionals: Survey results also show that the use 
of extra steps in the permitting process, of dumping and waste disposal regulations, 
and of fertilizer and chemical application regulations is more frequent in municipalities 
where non-elected professionals were more influential on the karst land use 
regulation process. 

Attitudes of planners and land use professionals: The survey results in 
Chapter 3 demonstrated that the attitudes of land use professionals are critical in the 
process of crafting and implementing karst land use regulations. Most, generally feel 
that regulating development on karst or near karst features is appropriate; opinions 
diverge on the question of what will happen as a result of any such implementation. 
Counties, cities and towns without karst-aware land use regulations on the books are 
more likely to employ land use professionals who expect karst land use regulations 


128 6 Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 

Inputs 

Extent of karst system

Attitudes of planners 

Stakeholder input

Enforcement authority 

Availability of developable land

Technical expertise 

Regulatory actions of neighboring

Nature of problem 

cities/towns 

Writing and 
implementation 
process 
Form of regulations 

Stormwater mgt/runoff 
Setbacks/no-build areas 


Regulatory strength 

Extra steps in the process 

or restrictiveness 
Dumping/waste disposal 
Fertilizer/chemical appl. 
Zoning overlay 


Outcomes and impacts 

Population/structural density 
Groundwater quality 
Subsidence damage 
Lawsuits filed 
Lost economic opportunities 


Perceptions of 
regulatory 
effectiveness 
Fig. 6.2 The karst regulatory process 

to result in mostly negative outcomes than are municipalities where such regulations 
can be found. Planners and land use professionals must be convinced that benefits 
will accrue, or the regulations are highly unlikely to get off the ground; this is almost 
certainly due to their role as “gatekeepers” in the process. 


Inputs 129 

Enforcement authority: There are repeated examples of the importance of enforceability 
throughout this book; these include the Apuseni Natural Park, 
Brooksville Ridge Cave, and the responses of land use professionals to the survey 
described in Chapter 3. Without the ability to enforce karst protections, stakeholders 
with an incentive (particularly a financial incentive) to ignore your regulations are 
very likely to do exactly that. There is a strong existing literature that details the 
importance of enforcement in a protected area context. Even beyond that context, 
both the existing literature and interviews suggest that enforcement authority is also 
a factor in karst land use regulation in non-protected areas in the United States; for 
example, a comprehensive plan that attempts to control growth in carbonate areas 
is not likely to be effective absent a zoning ordinance to implement and enforce 
the priorities of the comprehensive plan (Day 1996; Jepson et al. 2002; Kueny and 
Day 2002). Additionally, subdivision and land development ordinances with karstrelated 
components are easier to waive than zoning ordinances, and thus do not 
provide the same level of protection or enforcement authority. 

In the study of Brooksville Ridge Cave, we saw that the county environmental 
office’s ability to affect development plans for the land above the cave hinged on its 
ability to enforce the comprehensive plan and the groundwater protection ordinance; 
in this particular case, that was achieved by granting the environmental office the 
responsibility for conducting reviews of all residential and commercial development 
proposals, and to at least temporarily hold up projects that do not conform to 
local ordinance requirements. Enforcement-related issues may also have come into 
play in the case studies conducted in Kentucky, Missouri, and Pennsylvania that are 
described in Chapter 4. The weak results obtained in Pennsylvania suggest that this 
may be a particular problem there; due to the presence of the “strength” variable, it 
is reasonable to conclude that any enforcement issue is likely completely separate 
from the issue of regulatory stringency. This in itself is not proof of the existence of 
such an effect, but does provide ample reason to pursue it further. 

Nature and “framing” of the problem: There are always more worthwhile pub-
lic policy goals than there are resources to implement them. Different policy ideas 
are always in completion with each other for those resources; to that end, persuasive 
communication becomes paramount. “Framing” the discussion by defining the 
problem at hand in the terms that are more difficult to argue against will go a long 
way toward passing some sort of karst land use regulation. 

Of course, effective framing should not be deceptive; ethical questions aside, 
this would conceivably result in regulations that did not address the important karst 
issues at hand. The nature of the specific karst problem quite naturally has a strong 
influence on the character of the land use regulations; addressing a groundwater 
contamination issue, for example, would require a different (if partially overlapping) 
set of tools than addressing a land subsidence problem. Results from the 
survey suggest that developing and implementing karst regulations is more likely 
to succeed if the underlying problem is highly visible, and if the proposed regulations 
can be readily connected to that specific problem. But even when the 
problem is visible and urgent, regulation-based solutions can easily fail to win approval 
if they are not properly framed. Contamination of groundwater resources 


130 6 Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 

and structural damage from land subsidence seem to be effective ways to frame the 
problem. 

Stakeholder input: In this case, the term “stakeholder” is given a broad definition, 
and includes both local residents and those with an economic interest in the 
location (i.e., the construction industry, or resource users). The influence of each 
group of stakeholders varies widely. The results suggest that, for the most part, local 
residents do not seem to have a major influence on the development and implementation 
of karst regulations; the ones who do, are generally the ones who are both 
well-informed and most likely to be affected by such regulations. This group may 
not be representative of the general population. Data collected from follow-up interviews 
indicate that this can change with time, through public education programs; 
one respondent argues that such education programs can help preserve the regulation 
itself by mitigating any shifts in political priorities that occur with changing administrations 
(for example, a new mayor may be more sympathetic to the perspective of 
the construction industry than her predecessor; in that case, a voting public with a 
well-developed understanding of karst and the need for its protection can act as an 
obstacle to weakening existing regulation). 

Follow-up interviews indicate that the construction industry is generally hostile 
to such regulations; however, the survey results suggest the industry is not always 
able to exert a significant amount of influence over the process (whether this is by 
choice or not is unclear). According to the survey, in some cases (less than 20%) 
construction interests are the most influential group in the process of developing 
regulations, but the construction industry was one of the least-frequently selected 
responses for the question of which group or entity had the most influence on the 
process. This strongly suggests that construction industry opposition can be overcome 
by those wishing to implement karst-related land use regulations, and fear of 
such opposition should not be a major factor in the process of developing karstaware 
land use regulations. 

Extent of the karst system: The size of the underlying karst system seems to 
play a role in determining the form of the karst-aware land use regulations that 
are ultimately implemented, but not on the restrictiveness of those regulations. According 
to the survey results in Chapter 3, municipalities with more extensive karst 
systems were more likely to employ mandatory setbacks/non-buildable areas and 
dumping/waste disposal regulations than those with less extensive karst; simultaneously, 
there is no strong connection between the extent of a particular karst system 
and the strength of the karst regulations that are ultimately implemented. 

Of course, there are often difficulties in determining exactly how extensive a 
local karst system is, as demonstrated in the Brooksville Ridge Cave case study 
in Chapter 5. In that instance, the Hernando County Planning Department and the 
Board of County Commissioners found themselves trying to evaluate two conflicting, 
expert-generated estimates of the cave’s size. It is a simple matter to imagine 
that most municipalities would lack accurate and reliable information on the size of 
the karst systems below the city limits; in some cases, there are simply not enough 
resources to conduct the appropriate tests, while in others city officials may not want 
to know specific details about the karst system, for fear that such knowledge could 


Outcomes 131 

constrain them from pursuing plum projects. And even if city officials are able to 
get high-quality data, they often need assistance interpreting and understanding it. 

“Keeping up with the neighbors,” or the need for strategic behavior: It is appropriate 
to take into consideration what neighboring municipalities have done with 
regard to regulating development on karst terrains, but only to a point. Follow-up 
interviews with planners and land use professionals suggest that the experiences of 
other towns can be illuminating in identifying effective regulatory techniques for 
preventing karst degradation and aquifer damage. One reason for this is that towns 
in close proximity to each other are more likely to be subject to the same external 
influences (geologic, economic, political, etc). However, results from Chapter 4 suggest 
that there is little reason to consider the mere existence of such regulations in 
neighboring towns as a factor in deciding whether to implement karst-aware regulations 
or not, as they seem to have no statistically detectable impact on indicators of 
economic growth and health; additionally, results from the survey confirm that this 
is generally understood by land use professionals to be the case. This contradicts 
expectations rooted in economics and game theory, and may indicate that karst regulations 
are generally not sweeping enough to have a widespread impact on growth 
and development patterns. 

Outcomes 

This book does not examine the effectiveness of karst-aware land use regulations 
with respect to karst protection, or at least not directly (i.e., through water quality 
tests, or quantifiable measures of cave protection). Instead, it looks at indirect measures 
of the effectiveness of karst protection, generally in terms of regulatory impact 
on human systems and human behavior. This includes settlement patterns, density, 
and economic considerations, among others. This section includes discussion of 
these outcomes and their implications. 

Expectations and perceived outcomes: Survey results and follow-up interviews 
indicate that the most commonly observed outcomes of implementing karst regulations 
are a decline in damage from subsidence, and an improvement in groundwater 
quality. However, as was shown in Chapter 3, these outcomes are expected to occur 
more frequently than they are actually reported to occur. Whether this is due to 
inadequate methods of regulation or something else is not yet known; indeed, it 
is not even known if these perceptions are in fact accurate. It is entirely possible, 
for example, that groundwater quality improves far more frequently than survey respondents 
reported. This suggests that expectations for the benefits of implementing 
karst-related land use regulations may be too high, perhaps leading to an eventual 
consensus that the regulatory route is not adequate for managing development on 
karst, and that the benefits of these regulations are not worth the time and effort of 
implementation. 

Lawsuit prevention: According to survey results and follow-up interviews, 
karst-sensitive land use regulations seem to be an effective way to discourage 


132 6 Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 

lawsuits filed against the city or county. Typically, these lawsuits arise from unanticipated 
land subsidence activity that significantly damages property. In Lexington-
Fayette County, for example, reducing lawsuits filed against the county was an 
explicit goal of the development and implementation of the county’s sinkhole ordinance 
(the ordinance takes the form of a minimum setback/non-buildable area 
restriction); the ordinance has been successful in this goal (Rebmann 2006). The 
presence of such ordinances or similar regulations may make it more difficult for 
potential plaintiffs to successfully argue that any subsidence damage to structures 
built near a sinkhole is actually the city’s fault for negligently issuing a building 
permit for an unsafe area. 

Economic growth and development: Higher housing costs and lost development 
opportunities were both cited by several respondents to the survey as expected 
outcomes of implementing karst regulation. However, the same survey results indicate 
that these outcomes are not often observed. While it is true that both of these 
outcomes are difficult to quantify, or at least present difficulties in identification 
of the primary cause, it is still possible to draw some conclusions from the data 
gathered for this book. Data from karstic areas in Pennsylvania suggest that the 
implementation of karst regulations does not, in fact, have a statistically significant 
impact on median housing value within the community. As for lost opportunities 
for development, these can be directly tied to karst regulations only via anecdotal 
evidence at best. However, if we use the total number of residential building permits 
issued by each town as a proxy variable for development opportunities, we see 
there is once again no statistically significant difference in the number of permits 
issued between municipalities that regulate development on karst and those that 
do not. 

What are the implications of this finding? There are several possibilities. First, the 
fact that karst regulations do not seem to affect median housing value suggests that 
perhaps the “amenity factor” of more open space that should result from implementation 
and enforcement of karst land use regulations is generally not an important 
consideration in a market-based determination of home values. Conversely, the land 
use restrictions imposed by karst land use regulations do not seem to act as a drag on 
home values either. Residential building permit data suggests that karst regulations 
do not generally dampen demand for new housing, or encroach on the profitability 
of new residential projects. Perhaps the residential construction industry is better 
able to adapt to external conditions and forces than is widely assumed; it is also 
possible that the regulations are generally ineffective, go unenforced, or have only 
limited geographic applicability (and therefore only limited impact). 

Population and structural density: Responses from the survey suggest that 
even though a sizable minority of respondents expected to see population density 
decrease as a result of implementing karst regulations, very few actually observed 
this outcome. However, if one looks at block-level data from municipalities in 
Kentucky and Missouri, one sees the expected relationships between sinkholes with 
mandatory setbacks and population/structural density (i.e., areas with lots of sinkholes 
are less dense). There is a counter-intuitive component to these results, namely 
the positive correlation between sinkhole density and residential structural density; 


Outcomes 133 

however, there are several potential explanations for this phenomenon (discussed at 
the end of Chapter 4). 

The results from Chapter 4 suggest very strongly that, up to a point, setback and 
non-buildable area ordinances do act as a drag on density growth rates in sinkholeprone 
areas. So, why wasn’t this outcome reported more frequently in the survey 
results? The answer to that question may lie in the fact that these effects are simply 
too localized to be widely noticed, or that changes in density are perhaps too subtle 
and occur over too long a time period to be accurately perceived by most casual observers 
on the ground. Densities take a long time to change, especially in American 
urban areas where zoning codes are often strongly focused on maintaining a particular 
density level. In those cases, densities can drop quickly as people move out and 
buildings are demolished, but adding significant amounts of people and structures 
take a bit more time. Densities are more likely to change rapidly on the outskirts on 
an urban area, where there is generally more available land and often government 
policies in place that are aimed at attracting new residents and businesses. 

Regulatory strength and restrictiveness: Most survey respondents describe 
their local regulations as either “not very restrictive” or “somewhat restrictive.” 
There is some relationship between perceived restrictiveness and the increased rates 
of implementation of many commonly applied regulatory tools (this relationship 
does not apply to stormwater runoff regulations, which are almost universally applied); 
however, whether or not regulatory restrictiveness has any tangible impact 
on the urban system itself is an open question. Using a consistently applied, even if 
somewhat subjective, definition of regulatory restrictiveness and applying it to data 
from Pennsylvania, we see that restrictiveness (represented by the strong binary 
variable) had no impact on either median home values or on the number of residential 
construction permits issued. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, this fact 
suggests the possible existence of an issue with enforcement, which may almost 
alone explain the results obtained from the Pennsylvania data set. 

Form of regulations: Survey results suggest that stormwater runoff regulations 
are the easiest type of karst-related land use regulation to get implemented; followup 
interviews indicate that the reason for this is the straightforward nature of the 
problems they generally address, as well as the straightforward nature of the regulations 
themselves. The fact that stormwater runoff laws are also needed in non-karstic 
terrains is significant as well; city residents understand the general problems that 
uncontrolled surface water flow can cause and are generally open to the implementation 
of such an ordinance. Respondents seem to generally feel that, if done 
properly, stormwater runoff and management ordinances can be effective tools in 
karst land use regulation. They are extremely common in Pennsylvania local land 
use regulation, possibly the most common. 

While mandatory setbacks/non-buildable areas are based on a similarly straightforward 
idea, interviews suggest that it can be difficult to make these effective, 
unless it is difficult for developers and landowners to get variances. In order for 
that to occur, the body responsible for issuing variances must be sympathetic to 
the goals of regulating land development and use in karst areas; it also must have 
the ability to resist political pressure to grant variances in cases where a variance 


134 
6 Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 

would be inappropriate (Rebmann 2006). However, statistical analysis conducted in 
Chapter 4 suggests otherwise, that in fact these ordinances can have some effect on 
human density near sinkholes. 

Follow-up interviews suggest that zoning ordinances may often be too blunt a 
tool for karst-related land use regulation. This is due to the oft-localized nature of 
karst landform development; regulations intended to manage development near such 
landforms may not be appropriate for all development in a given area. Instead, it may 
be best to simply require developers working in a vulnerable area to hire a geologist 
for a site-specific analysis. 

Possible Future Directions 

At the beginning of this chapter, it was emphasized that these conclusions should 
not be considered a comprehensive, finished framework for developing karst land 
use regulations. There is still plenty of work to be done in our goal of understanding 
the relationship between karst systems, urban systems and policy systems. Some 
potentially promising avenues for future study include: 

• 
A more generalized approach to the understanding of how karst regulations are 
affected by constraints on the availability of developable land. While the results 
from Lexington-Fayette County are fairly clear, it is by no means obvious if 
those results are applicable to other cities where land availability is constrained. 
It is generally accepted that local real estate markets can be highly affected by 
extremely localized conditions; it would therefore be particularly useful to look 
at cities where any such constraints are the result of the surrounding natural landscape, 
for example, as opposed to artificially imposed constraints like an urban 
growth boundary. This would enable us to better model the effects of restrictive 
karst land use regulations on any localized pool of available land. 
• 
A more detailed exploration of the economic impacts of implementing karstaware 
land use regulation. The results discussed in earlier chapters of this book 
are interesting but by no means definitive. These sorts of analyses are particularly 
sensitive to questions of data and modeling; certainly, pursuing other approaches 
to asking this question will provide a more robust understanding of the issue. In 
particular, a study of whether and how such regulations affect commercial and 
industrial development projects would be illuminating. 
• 
An examination of the effectiveness of different types of land use regulations, in 
terms of how well those regulatory tools protect karst landforms and aquifers. 
While it is true that this type of study was beyond the scope of this book, that 
in no way lessens its importance as a subject for future study. An objective 
measurement of the protective potential of various regulatory approaches, and 
the conditions under which they are most effective and least effective, would 
provide planners and regulators with a critical piece of information that would 
enable them to more rapidly develop and deploy appropriate, effective land use 
regulation for local karst terrains. 

References 
135 

• 
An examination of how well karst-aware land use regulations are actually enforced. 
One of the most significant conclusions of this research is the importance 
of enforceability of any regulations that are implemented to control land use 
near karst landforms. We currently lack any detailed understanding of the issues 
involved in effective enforcement of karst regulations, or even of whether enforcement 
is generally attempted in the first place. By systematically studying 
the factors that influence the ability or desire of local governments to enforce 
karst regulations, we can begin to develop better strategies for enforcement that 
would lead to more effective protection of karst landforms and the underlying 
aquifers. 
Ultimately, this framework is intended to address questions of balance between 
human needs and nature’s needs. How far can humans go in exploiting their natural 
resources—like karst systems, for example—before they are destroyed? What 
society-level lifestyle choices will we have to make in order to protect our underground 
drinking water supplies? And are we even willing or able to make those 
changes? 

Answering these questions will take more research, both into karst itself and into 
the myriad questions surrounding land use regulation in karst terrains. That is why 
the further development of this framework is important: it will act as a tool that will 
give us the opportunity to build on previous research and existing knowledge and 
find the answers to these questions. However, the questions outlined above are only 
a starting point. Given the critical importance of karst resources to both scientific 
research (especially with regard to climate change) and water accessibility for about 
a billion people and counting worldwide, it is clear that human–karst interaction is 
a vital policy question that humankind will have to address more thoroughly in the 
very near future. 

References 

Barner, W.L. 1999. Comparison of stormwater management in a karst terrane in Springfield, 
Missouri—case histories. Engineering Geology, v. 52, pp. 105–112 
Butler, K.S. 1987. Urban growth management and groundwater protection: Austin, Texas. In Planning 
for Groundwater Protection. Academic Press, Inc, MA 

Davis, S.B. 1997. Interstate assessment of governmental regulations on landfills in karst areas. 
In The Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology of Karst Terranes: Proceedings of the sixth 
multidisciplinary conference on sinkholes and the engineering and environmental impacts of 
karst (Beck, B.F.; Stephenson, J.B. eds.) Springfield, Missouri, 6–9 April 1997, pp. 433–438, 

A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam 
Day, M. 1996. Conservation of karst in Belize. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, v. 58, no. 2, 
pp. 139–144 
Dinger, J.S.; Rebmann, J.R. 1986. Ordinance for the control of urban development in sinkhole 
areas in the Blue Grass Karst region, Lexington, Kentucky. In Proceedings of the Conference 
on Environmental Problems in Karst Terranes and Their Solutions, pp. 163–180 

Dougherty, P.H. 1983. Valley tides—land use response floods in a Kentucky karst region. In Environmental 
Karst, pp. 3–15, Geospeleo Publications, Cincinnati, OH 


136 6 Moving Toward a Framework for Karst Land Use Regulations 

Fischer, J.A. 1997. Limestone ordinances of New Jersey and Pennsylvania: A practitioner’s experiences. 
In The Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology of Karst Terranes, pp. 473–476 

Interview with James Rebmann, senior environmental planner for the Lexington-Fayette Urban 
County Government, 2006 

Jepson, P.; Momberg, F.; van Noord, H. 2002. A review of the efficacy of the protected area system 
of East Kalimantan province, Indonesia. Natural Areas Journal, v. 22, no. 1, pp. 28–42 

Kueny, J.A.; Day, M.J. 2002. Designation of protected karstlands in Central America: A regional 
assessment. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, v. 64, no. 3, pp. 165–174 

LaMoreaux, P.E.; Powell, W.J.; LeGrand, H.E. 1997. Environmental and legal aspects of karst 
areas. Environmental Geology,v.29 1/2, pp. 23–36 

Reese, A.J.; Cantrell, A; Scarborough, J. 1997. Sinkhole and drainage planning in Johnson City, 
Tennessee. In The Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology of Karst Terranes (Beck, B.F. and 
Stephenson, B. eds.) Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 265–271 

Richardson, J.J., Jr., 2003. Local land use regulation of karst in the United States. In Sinkholes and 
Engineering/Environmental Impacts of Karst (Beck BF ed.) ASCE special publication 112, 
pp. 492–501 

Rubin, P.A., 1992. Land use planning and watershed protection in karst terranes. In Proceedings 
of the Third Conference on Hydrogeology, Ecology, Monitoring and Management of Ground 
Water in Karst Terranes, pp. 769–793 

Sabatier, P.A.; Jenkins-Smith, H.C. 1988. The advocacy coalition framework: an assessment. In 
Theories of the Policy Process (Paul Sabatier, ed.) Westview Press, Boulder, CO, pp. 117–166. 

Urich, P.B.; Day, M.J.; Lynagh, F. 2001. Policy and practice in karst landscape protection: Bohol, 
the Philippines. The Geographical Journal, v. 167, no. 4, p. 307 

von Bertalanffy, L. 1973. General System Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications. Fourth 
Edition. George Braziller, Inc., New York City 


Appendix A 
A Glossary of Karst Terminology 

Aquifer – an underground layer of earth or bedrock that stores and supplies water. 


Calcite – the primary component of limestone and the most common of the calcium 
carbonate minerals. 
Catchment – an area in which surface water collects and eventually drains into a 


water feature, like a river or spring. 


Cave – a natural subterranean opening or void that is large enough for a human to 
enter. Often, but not always, formed by karstic processes. 
Column – a speleothem that extends from the floor to the ceiling of a cave. 
Conduit – an underground opening in the bedrock through which groundwater is 


conducted. 


Decoration – cave features like stalactites, stalagmites, helictites and popcorn. 
Usually formed via calcite precipitation. 
Discharge – outflow drainage from aquifers. In a karst context, can be manifested 


through caves or springs. 
Doline –see sinkhole. 
Dolomite – a mineral commonly found in carbonate rocks. Some karst landscapes 


are composed primarily of dolomite. 
Epikarst – a layer of karstified carbonate rock found directly beneath the topsoil. 
Fissure – a narrow crack or opening in the bedrock. 
Groundwater – water stored below ground in the aquifer, generally below the level 


at which all voids and openings are saturated. 
Helictite – an irregularly-shaped speleothem that can grow both vertically and in 
an angular form. Helictites are generally smaller formations, and specimens longer 
than four inches are rare. 



138 Appendix A 

Karst – a type of landscape formed by solution processes on carbonate bedrock. 
Development of a karst landscape requires warm temperatures, adequate precipitation, 
a source of carbon dioxide in the topsoil, and carbonate bedrock. They are 
characterized by landforms that include sinkholes, springs and caves. 

Karstification – the process of forming a karst landscape. 

Paleokarst – fossilized, inactive karst features. 

Permeability – a property of rock that describes the ability of water to pass 
through it. 

Porosity – a property of rock that refers to the number of small voids existing 
within it. 

Pseudokarst – a landscape with karst-like features that have not been created via 
karstification. 

Recharge – the process of intake of water into an aquifer. 

Sinkhole – a common type of karst landform, created by the subsidence of soils and 
rock at or near the land surface into empty spaces below. 

Solution – in a karst context, a water-driven process by which karst landforms are 
created. Occurs when a weak carbonic acid solution reacts with carbonate bedrock, 
resulting in the gradual widening of cracks and fissures in the rock. 

Speleothem – a vertical cave feature formed by the precipitation of calcite. Includes 
both stalactites and stalagmites. 

Spring – a surface-level representation of the aquifer. 

Vadose zone – an area where voids in the bedrock are filled with air and through 
which surface water travels on its way to the aquifer. 


Appendix B 
Results of a Survey of Land Use Professionals 
Working in Karstic Areas of the United States 

Conducted between October 2006 and January 2007, and administered online via 
SurveyMonkey.com. 

1 Are you familiar with karst? 

Response total Percent 

Yes 59 89.39 
No 710.61 


Total Respondents 66 
(skipped this question) 0 

2 By which type of organization are you employed? 

Response total Percent 

Local government 47 82.46 
State government 6 10.53 
Federal government 1 1.75 
Private consulting/contracting 1 1.75 
Other 2 3.51 

Total Respondents 57 86.36 
(skipped this question) 9 

3 This survey deals with local land use regulations. Please enter the name of 
the city or county on whose regulations you will be commenting. 

Total Respondents 55 
(skipped this question) 11 


140 Appendix B 

4 In which state do you work? 

Response total Percent 
Florida 24 42.11 
Kentucky 6 10.53 
Missouri 8 14.04 
New Jersey 2 3.51 
Pennsylvania 13 22.81 
Tennessee 4 7.02 

Total Respondents 57 86.36 
(skipped this question) 9 

5 What is your job title? 

Total Respondents 55 
(skipped this question) 11 

6 To the best of your knowledge does your city or town currently have any 
form of karst-related land use regulations on the books? 

Response total Percent 
Yes 32 56.14 
No 21 36.84 
Not applicable -I work at the state or federal level 4 7.02 

Total Respondents 57 86.36 
(skipped this question) 9 

7 In your opinion why has your city or town declined to enact karst-related 
land use regulation? (Select all that apply) 

Response total Percent 
Philosophical opposition to regulation in general 3 16.67 
Fear of lawsuits 0 
Pressure from developers 3 16.67 
Fear of losing opportunities for growth to neighboring towns 1 5.56 
without such regulations 
There is no karst within the town limits 2 11.11 
Citizen input 0 
Other (please specify) 11 61.11 
Total Respondents 18 27.27 
(skipped this question) 48 


Appendix B 141 

8 Were you involved in the creation or implementation of karst-related land 
use regulations in your jurisdiction? 

Response total Percent 

Yes 16 45.71 
No 1954.29 


Total Respondents 35 53.03 
(skipped this question) 31 

9 Approximately how long ago were these karst regulations implemented? 

Response total Percent 

Within the last two years 5 14.29 
Between two and five years ago 5 14.29 
Between five and ten years ago 6 17.14 
More than ten years ago 16 45.71 
I don’t know/I don’t remember 3 8.57 

Total Respondents 35 53.03 
(skipped this question) 31 

10 In your opinion how serious in your community are the following karstrelated 
issues? 

Total Pct Total Pct Total Pct 

Somewhat Response 
Very serious serious Not serious average 

Groundwater contamination 18 51.43 13 37.14 3 8.57 1.56 
Flooding 11 31.43 15 42.86 8 22.86 1.91 
Subsidence and property 15 42.86 14 40.00 5 14.29 1.71 

damage from sinkholes 
Karst ecosystem protection 12 34.29 13 37.14 10 28.57 1.94 
Cave protection 6 17.14 12 34.29 16 45.71 2.29 

Total Respondents 35 53.03 
11 Please rank the following five karst-related issues in order of seriousness: 


Total Pct How serious? Total Pct 

Response 
Most serious ‹- -› Least serious average 

Groundwater 17 48.57 10 3 4 0 0.00 1.82 
contamination 
Subsidence and property 8 22.86 11 6 5 4 11.43 2.59 
damage from sinkholes 
Karst ecosystem 2 5.71 6 14 6 4 11.43 3.13 
protection 
Flooding 7 20.00 6 7 12 2 5.71 2.88 
Cave protection 1 2.86 0 4 6 22 62.86 4.45 
Total Respondents 35 53.03 
(skipped this question) 31 


142 Appendix B 

12 In your opinion how extensive is the karst system in your area? 

Response total Pct 
Not at all extensive – less than 10% of the total land area 2 5.71 
contains karst 
Not very extensive – between 10% and 30% 6 17.14 
Somewhat extensive – between 31% and 50% 15 42.86 
Very extensive – more than 50% 11 31.43 
I don’t know 1 2.86 

Total Respondents 35 
(skipped this question) 31 

13 Which of the following karst landforms are present in your area? (Select all 
that apply.) 

Response total Pct 
Springs 33 94.29 
Sinkholes 35 100.00 
Caves 26 74.29 
Sinking or disappearing streams 26 74.29 
Other (please specify) 1 2.86 

Total Respondents 35 53.03 
(skipped this question) 31 

14 In your opinion how restrictive are the karst-related land use and development 
regulations in your jurisdiction? 

Response total Pct 
Very 4 11.43 
Somewhat 15 42.86 
Not very 12 34.29 
Not at all 2 5.71 
I don’t know 2 5.71 
Total Respondents 35 53.03 
(skipped this question) 31 
15 (question removed) 


Appendix B 143 

16 To the best of your knowledge which of the following karst-related regulatory 
components are present in your jurisdiction’s land use and development 
regulations? (Select all that apply.) 

Response total Pct 
Mandatory setbacks from karst features 19 57.58 
An extra step in the permit approval process (for example, the county 17 51.52 
geologist is required to do an analysis and provide a 
recommendation) 
Multiple extra steps in the permit approval process 9 27.27 
A moratorium on new construction in areas where karst features are 0 0.00 
present 
Stormwater drainage rules 30 90.91 
Dumping and waste disposal rules 18 54.55 
Fertilizer and chemical application rules 6 18.18 
Other (please specify) 6 18.18 

Total Respondents 33 
(skipped this question) 33 

17 Which of the following factors was a goal of regulating development in karst 
areas? (Select all that apply.) 

Response total Pct 
Environmental protection 22 64.71 
Groundwater protection 30 88.24 
Cave protection 7 20.59 
Desire to prevent property and structural damage 28 82.35 
Desire to limit the legal liability of local government 11 32.35 

Total Respondents 34 
(skipped this question) 32 

18 Prior to the implementation of these karst-related land use regulations had 
there been any actual problems with some or all of the factors listed in 
the previous question or were these regulations implemented as strictly a 
preventative measure? 

Response total Pct 
Strictly preventative 11 33.33 
Intended to address actual existing problems (please specify) 22 66.67 
Total Respondents 33 50.00 
(skipped this question) 33 


144 Appendix B 

19 Who initiated the process of developing these regulations? 

Response total Pct 
Branch or department within local government 13 39.39 
Branch of state or federal government 7 21.21 
County or city commission, or local equivalent 5 15.15 
Mayor or county administrator, or local equivalent 0 0.00 
Environmental or science groups 1 3.03 
Local residents 0 0.00 
Other (please specify) 6 18.18 
Total Respondents 32 48.48 
(skipped this question) 34 
20 Who ultimately approved these regulations? 
Response total Pct 
Elected body (for example, county commission) 21 61.76 
Elected official (for example, mayor or county administrator) 7 20.59 
Appointed official 1 2.94 
Career civil service official 1 2.94 
Other (please specify) 4 11.76 

Total Respondents 34 
(skipped this question) 32 

21 How much time elapsed between the point at which the idea of regulating 
development on top of karst was first seriously proposed and the time those 
regulations were finally enacted? 

Response total Pct 
0–2 years 
2–4 years 
5–7 years 
Longer 
I don’t remember 
13 
4 
3 
2 
11 
39.39 
12.12 
9.09 
6.06 
33.33 
Total Respondents 
(skipped this question) 
33 
33 
50.00 


Appendix B 145 

22 Which of the following entities or groups had an influence on the process of 
designing the karst-related land use and development regulations in your 
jurisdiction? (Select all that apply.) 

Response total Pct 
Federal government 5 15.15 
State government 19 57.58 
Local elected officials 18 54.55 
Local government departments (like the Water Department, for 27 81.82 
example) 
Environmental or scientific groups (non-governmental) 14 42.42 
Members of the building or real estate industries 6 18.18 
Local residents 14 42.42 
Other (please specify) 6 18.18 

Total Respondents 33 
(skipped this question) 33 

23 To what degree were these regulations influenced by non-elected professionals 
(i.e., scientists or engineers for example) working for or in conjunction 
with local government? 

Response total Pct 
Not at all 0 0.00 
Slightly 4 11.76 
Moderately 7 20.59 
Strongly 16 47.06 
I don’t know 7 20.59 

Total Respondents 34 51.52 
(skipped this question) 32 

Please describe the nature of this influence if any: 

By using educated professionals who believe in the protection of karst features we 
were able to gain (I feel) a greater influence. 
Regulations reflected credible engineering and geologic knowledge and experience. 
Engineering community had input. 
Home-owners association meetings where county commissioners were invited. 
Giving testimony to the Planning Commission 
Such professionals on staff and via participation from citizens and special environ


mental interest groups having this professional background 
Stormwater Taskforce involved professionals from the community 
Mapping of potential karst areas and development of requirements for design of 


ponds, swales and underground utilities in proximity to these areas. 



146 Appendix B 

Input from developers and contractors 

Report on Karst areas subject to flooding (USGS, FEMA mapping w/TVA and City 

Permanent, full-time, professional Planning Staff drafted ordinance, City Engineer 
and Solicitors reviewed. Planning Commission resolved to recommend to City 
Council adoption of ordinance. City Council adopted subdivision and land development 
regulations including land suitability requirements. 

County staff doing research on the problem 

Provision of the science base for understanding groundwater, the aquifers in the 
state, the rate of recharge, etc., affected decisions prioritizing areas that are karst 
sensitive and in developing the land use regulations to protect them. 

Township (city) Engineer was instrumental in working on our Karst Regulations. 

In our case our organization worked by committee (of non-elected professionals) to 
develop a model ordinance. This ordinance has been adopted by many communities 
in our region. 

This occurred 16 years ago 

Direct meetings with the local TDEC office to develop stormwater regulations and 
coordination between county and state on injection well permits for stormwater. 
More codes to follow soon. 

Very important 

Input came from: City Planning (staff wrote ordinance), State Water Management 
district engineers, some public input from local residents with engineering/natural 
sciences backgrounds, and local real estate/development interests. 

Geologist, soil scientist, hydro geologist, biologist, and others all have had a significant 
role in conducting solid science to be used in development of the rule. 

Local land use planners and elected officials rely on authoritative opinions from 
geoscientists and engineers, published studies and other documentation from the 
USGS, FDEP, etc. 

Some professionals in the region had identified karst topography as potential problem 
for septic field related ground water contamination. 

Professional opinions were sought and provided to the BOCC (Educational). 

Total Respondents 23 
(skipped this question) 43 


Appendix B 147 

24 To what degree were these regulations influenced by pre-existing regulations 
relating to land use and development (like for example the presence of 
an urban growth boundary or other environmental regulations)? 

Response total Pct 
Not at all 13 39.39 
Slightly 8 24.24 
Moderately 5 15.15 
Strongly 2 6.06 
I don’t know 5 15.15 

Total Respondents 33 50.00 
(skipped this question) 33 

25 Please describe the nature of this influence if any. 
Karst regulations represented a new field of regulation. 
Knowledge of related state regulations was used in pressuring the local elected 

officials to push for adopting similar regulation 
New developments going into karst areas. 
State regulation interface needs 
States Inject Well Regs...TDEC is asked to review impacts in sinkhole areas 
Part of comprehensive plan 
City had previously passed Creek regulations governing increased setbacks. City 


was one of first in Florida to pass Stormwater Utility fee for city-wide stormwater 
improvements, including retrofitting storm drains, upgrading wastewater 
plant water disposal, etc. 


State already had regulations about setback of septic systems from karst areas 


(sink holes etc.) which were incorporated in development reviews. 
Previous goals and objectives of our earlier comp plan and land development 
regulations. 


Total Respondents 9 
(skipped this question) 57 

26 To what degree were these regulations influenced by local residents? 

Response total Pct 
Not at all 6 18.18 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Strongly 
I don’t know 
11 
8 
3 
5 
33.33 
24.24 
9.09 
15.15 
Total Respondents 
(skipped this question) 
33 
33 
50.00 


148 Appendix B 

27 Please describe the nature of this influence if any. 

Residents who are concerned for the general quality of the county’s environment 
always have a voice in the decision making process. 

Home owners association meetings where commissioners were invited, also 
news paper articles 

Local residents participated in the process; were generally supportive. 

Public hearings were held where the public spoke 

The reporting of the various incidents provided sufficient documentation to warrant 
investigation of appropriate regulations and safeguards. 

Concerns raised relative to stormwater damage and the adverse impact on local 
drainageways, streams and existing infrastructure. 

Where houses have been subject to flooding, there was major clamoring to solve 
problems...buy-outs and identification of flood limits around sinkholes 

Clearly, the public is concerned about the occurrence of sinkholes as it is a regular 
‘phenomenon’ due to subsurface conditions, location between three bodies 
of water, and the early, dense urban development of the City pre-federal, state 
or local land use regulation. City Planning, Zoning and Engineering personnel 
took the lead develop and enforce regulations in the interest of the public health, 
safety and welfare. 

Constant complaints on the failure of government requiring permits up front educational 
process on all parties 

Public forums, strong opinions voiced 

City has small vocal environmental movement. 

Some in community reflected same information as regional professionals, and 
general concern with ground water contamination. 

A few residents are affiliated with environmental groups, which put on educational 
presentations. 

Public input was a continuing part of the process of developing land use regulations, 
through the comprehensive planning review process. 

Total Respondents 14 
(skipped this question) 52 


Appendix B 149 

28 In your opinion which of the following entities or groups had the most influence 
on the process of developing and implementing karst-related land 
use regulations? 

Response total Pct 

Federal government 0 0.00 
State government 6 18.18 
Local elected officials 1 3.03 
Local government departments (like the Water Department, for example) 17 51.52 
Environmental or scientific groups (non-governmental) 2 6.06 
Members of the building or real estate industries 1 3.03 
Local residents 1 3.03 
Other (please specify) 5 15.15 

Total Respondents 33 
(skipped this question) 33 

29 In your opinion which of the following entities or groups had the least 
amount of influence on the process? 

Response total Pct 
Federal government 17 51.52 
State government 1 3.03 
Local elected officials 2 6.06 
Local government departments (like the Water Department, for 1 3.03 
example) 
Environmental or scientific groups (non-governmental) 1 3.03 
Members of the building or real estate industries 10 30.30 
Local residents 1 3.03 

Total Respondents 33 
(skipped this question) 33 

30 In your opinion is it appropriate for a municipality to attempt to regulate 
or manage development near karst landforms? 

Response total Pct 
Yes 32 96.97 
No 0 0.00 
Don’t know/no opinion 1 3.03 

Total Respondents 33 50.00 
(skipped this question) 33 

31 In your opinion are the karst-related land use regulations in your jurisdiction 
effective? 

Response total Pct 
Yes 
No 
Don’t know/no opinion 
23 
6 
5 
67.65 
17.65 
14.71 
Total Respondents 
(skipped this question) 
34 
32 
51.52 


150 Appendix B 

32 In your opinion which of the following are likely outcomes of implementing 
karst-related development restrictions in a city of town? (Select all that 
apply.) 

Response total Pct 
An increase in residential land values 9 18.37 
An increase in housing costs 17 34.69 
A decline in new development projects 9 18.37 
A decline in population and structural density 7 14.29 
A decline in development-related lawsuits filed against the city 8 16.33 
An improvement in groundwater quality 37 75.51 
Some other outcome (please specify) 14 28.57 

Total Respondents 49 
(skipped this question) 17 

33 In your opinion to what extent did the existence of karst-related land use 
regulations (or lack thereof) in neighboring towns affect the process of developing 
and implementing karst regulations in your municipality? 

Response total Pct 
It was the most important consideration 0 0.00 
It was an important consideration, but not the only one, and not 4 8.70 
necessarily the most important one 
It had some impact, but not a significant amount 10 21.74 
It had no impact whatsoever 32 69.57 

Total Respondents 46 
(skipped this question) 20 

34 From the following list please select the impacts your town or city actually 
experienced after enacting karst-related land use regulations. ***Please 

***

select ONLY impacts that you personally can attest to. (select all that 
apply): 

Response total Pct 
Higher housing costs 3 11.11 
Lost opportunities for growth, as new development projects 2 7.41 
migrated to neighboring towns without regulation 
An increase in lawsuits filed by landowners and developers 0 0.00 
against the city 
An improvement in groundwater quality 5 18.52 
A decrease in damage to structures from new sinkholes 9 33.33 
A decrease in population density 2 7.41 
I haven’t witnessed any impacts of the karst development 8 29.63 
regulations 
Some other outcome (please specify) 11 40.74 
Total Respondents 27 40.91 
(skipped this question) 39 


Appendix B 151 

35 In your opinion can anything be done to improve the effectiveness of karst 
land use regulation in your jurisdiction? 

Response total Pct 
No 10 29.41 
Yes (please elaborate, if possible) 24 70.59 
Total Respondents 34 51.52 
(skipped this question) 32 


Color Plates 



Plate 1 Big Mouth Cave, Withlacoochee State Forest, Brooksville, Florida. Photo by Jason Polk 


154 Color Plates 


Plate 2 Crayfish in Ocala Caverns, Ocala, Florida. Photo by Jason Polk 


Plate 3 Blowing Hole Cave, Withlacoochee State Forest, Brooksville. The gate was designed 
specifically to allow for bats to access the cave. Photo by Jason Polk 


Color Plates 155 


Plate 4 Harney Road sinkhole, Hillsborough County, Florida. This was caused by an underground 
rupture of a sewage pipe. Photo by Jason Polk 


Plate 5 Sabertooth Sinks, Lecanto, Florida. These sinks are a pair of large solution tubes that 
eventually lead down to a cave. Photo by Jason Polk 


156 Color Plates 


Plate 6 Epikarst landscape on the Ozello Karst Plain, near Crystal River, Florida. Photo by Spencer 
Fleury 


Color Plates 157 


Plate 7 Epikarst formation near Crystal River, Florida. Photo by Spencer Fleury 


Plate 8 Uvala in Kentucky, near Mammoth Cave. Photo by Jason Polk 


158 Color Plates 


Plate 9 An appearing stream discharging from the side of Cedar Sink, Kentucky. Photo by 
Jason Polk 


Color Plates 159 


Plate 10 Interior of Cedar Sink. Note the flowing water. Photo by Jason Polk 


160 Color Plates 


Plate 11 Bottom of Cedar Sink. Photo by Jason Polk 


Color Plates 161 


Plate 12 A sinking stream at the bottom of Cedar Sink. The stream feeds into the nearby Green 
River. Photo by Jason Polk 


162 Color Plates 


Plate 13 A bat in Mammoth Cave, Kentucky. Photo by Jason Polk 


Color Plates 163 


Plate 14 A karstic landscape near the Danube River, southwestern Romania. Photo by Jason Polk 


164 Color Plates 


Plate 15 A cave opening in southwestern Romania. Photo by Jason Polk 


Color Plates 165 


Plate 16 A karst landscape near Scarisoara, Romania, in the Apuseni Mountains. Photo by 
Jason Polk 


166 Color Plates 


Plate 17 The entrance to the Ice Cave at Scarisoara. Photo by Jason Polk 


Color Plates 167 


Plate 18 A stream exiting a cave opening near Scarisoara. Photo by Jason Polk 


168 Color Plates 


Plate 19 Bones inside Ursilor Cave, Romania. Photo by Jason Polk 


Color Plates 169 


Plate 20 A tufa deposit on the bank of Cedar Creek, near Front Royal, Virginia. Photo by 
Jason Polk 


Plate 21 Blue Springs, near Strasburg, Virginia. Photo by Jason Polk 


170 Color Plates 


Plate 22 The entrance to Ogden’s Cave, Strasburg, Virginia. Photo by Jason Polk 


Color Plates 171 


Plate 23 A soda straw inside Ogden’s Cave. Photo by Jason Polk 


172 Color Plates 


Plate 24 A sinkhole-pocked landscape in Romania’s Apuseni Mountains. Photo by Monica Exner 


Color Plates 173 


Plate 25 Formations inside Scarisoara’s Ice Cave. Photo by Monica Exner 


174 Color Plates 


Plate 26 Stream flowing out of a cave opening, western Romania. Photo by Monica Exner 


Color Plates 175 


Plate 27 Interior of the Scarisoara Ice Cave. Photo by Monica Exner 


176 Color Plates 


Plate 28 Cave decorations in Ursilor Cave, Romania. Photo by Monica Exner 


Color Plates 177 


Plate 29 Formations in Ursilor Cave, Romania. Photo by Monica Exner 


178 Color Plates 


Plate 30 Helectites in Brooksville Ridge Cave, Hernando County, Florida. Photo by Tom Turner 


Color Plates 179 


Plate 31 Exploring Brooksville Ridge Cave. Photo by Tom Turner 


180 Color Plates 


Plate 32 Helectites, Brooksville Ridge Cave. Photo by Tom Turner 


Color Plates 181 


Plate 33 Calcite formations, Brooksville Ridge Cave. The moisture on the formations gives them 
the appearance of being made of ice. Photo by Tom Turner 


182 Color Plates 


Plate 34 Various cave formations in Brooksville Ridge Cave. Photo by Tom Turner 


Color Plates 183 


Plate 35 Mapped karst points in the six counties of the Pennsylvania study area 


184 Color Plates 


Plate 36 Distribution of karst and regulation practices in selected Pennsylvania municipalities 


Index 


A 

Agriculture, 14, 35, 76, 97, 101, 104, 105, 106, 
109, 111 

Alachua County, Florida, 22, 29, 30 

Allentown, Pennsylvania, 2, 12, 14, 25, 26, 74, 
75, 78, 80 

Apuseni Natural Park, 2, 99–109, 110, 111, 
112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117 

Aquifer drawdown, 12, 13, 15, 93 

Austin, Texas, 23, 36, 37, 38, 39 

B 

Bedrock, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 74, 
75, 76, 77, 101, 125 

Bowling Green, Kentucky, 12, 31, 65 

Brooksville Ridge Cave, 91, 92–99, 118, 129, 
130 

Burren, 5 

C 

Carbonate, 2, 5, 8, 9, 11, 13, 25, 26, 27, 47, 74, 
76, 78, 84, 101, 125, 129 

Carbonic acid, 2, 3, 5 

Caribbean, 5 

Cave, 2, 3, 5, 7–8, 11, 13, 15–16, 22–23, 28, 
30, 37, 46, 50, 52, 65, 67, 75, 92–99, 
101, 103, 104, 105, 106, 109, 114, 116, 
117, 129, 130, 131 

China, 1, 5, 7, 10, 13 

Climate, 4, 8, 10, 11, 15, 135 

Comprehensive plans, 21, 23, 32, 48, 66, 72, 
77, 94, 95, 96, 97, 129 

Contaminants, 1, 3, 7, 13, 14, 15, 21, 31, 32, 
33, 36, 63, 76 

D 

Deforestation, 1, 2, 13, 101, 102, 117 

Density, 11, 29, 31, 36, 49, 50, 59, 61, 62, 63, 
64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 88, 

93, 97, 101, 122, 126, 128, 131, 132, 
133, 134 

Denudation, 117 

Development, 4, 5, 7, 11, 12, 14, 15, 19, 20, 
21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 
52, 53, 55, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 
66, 72, 73, 74, 75, 77, 78, 79, 81, 82, 
83, 84, 85, 87, 88, 91, 92, 93, 95, 97, 
98, 99, 100, 101, 103, 105, 106, 107, 
108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 
117, 121, 122, 123, 124, 127, 129, 130, 
131, 132, 133, 134 

Dissolution, 5, 8 

Doline, 6–7, 13, 108, 109 

Drainage, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 20, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 46, 47, 
51, 52, 54, 57, 58, 62, 65, 66, 75, 81, 
93, 94 

Dumping, 2, 19, 23, 31, 34, 35, 46, 50, 52, 54, 
57, 58, 59, 87, 96, 97, 102, 127, 128, 
130 

E 

Economic growth, 74, 82, 110, 131, 132 

Ecosystem, 8, 15, 109 

Edwards Aquifer, 23, 36, 37, 38 

Enforcement, 19, 28, 33, 35, 50, 85, 97, 98, 
110, 115, 116, 117, 118, 121, 127, 128, 
129, 132, 133, 135 

F 

Fertilizer, 14, 35, 52, 54, 57, 58, 59, 76, 97, 
109, 113, 125, 
127, 128 

Fillmore County, Minnesota, 34, 35 

Floridan Aquifer, 13, 93, 97 

Free rider problem, 77 


186 Index 

G 

Gainesville, Florida, 29 

Groundwater, 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 
15, 19, 20, 23, 24, 28, 31, 32, 34, 40, 
46, 47, 49, 50, 52, 53, 55, 59, 60, 61, 
66, 75, 81, 93, 96, 97, 98, 101, 102, 
109, 110, 112, 118, 123, 125, 128, 129, 
131 

H 

Hernando County, Florida, 30, 91, 92, 94, 95, 
96–98, 99, 130 

High Springs, Florida, 22, 30, 39 

Huntsville, Alabama, 22, 32, 40 

I 

Indonesia, 10 
Ireland, 1, 2, 5, 13, 117 

J 

Johnson City, Tennessee, 22, 23, 28 

K 

Karst 
landforms, 1–16, 20, 23, 30, 31, 32, 45, 64, 
65, 66, 74, 78, 81, 82, 101, 
134, 135 
landscapes, 2, 3, 4, 5–11, 16, 19, 20, 78, 
91, 102, 107, 124 
ordinances, 23, 25, 43, 64, 66, 69, 70, 78, 
81, 83, 85, 87 
regulations, 23, 26, 27, 28, 32, 36, 43, 44, 
46, 48–50, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 
62, 63–88, 117–118, 122, 123, 124, 
129, 130, 134 
Kentucky, 12, 15, 24–28, 31–33, 39, 44, 64–73, 
95, 99, 104, 129, 132 

L 

Landfills, 3, 14, 23, 24, 28, 30, 31, 33, 66, 105, 
123 

Lehigh Valley, Pennsylvania, 27, 74, 77, 78, 
81, 82 

Leon County, Florida, 29 

Limestone, 2, 7, 9, 10, 11, 63, 66, 75, 92, 104, 
105, 114, 125 

Lower Macungie, Pennsylvania, 22, 25, 26, 27, 
75, 78, 80 

Lower Saucon, Pennsylvania, 22, 26, 64, 78, 
80, 82 

M 

Marion County, Florida, 29 
Missouri, 23, 31–33, 44, 64–73, 75, 129, 132 

N 

Nitrates, 14, 15, 35, 47, 50, 76, 93, 95, 109 

O 

Orlando, Florida, 30 
Overlay zones, 22, 28, 29, 40, 78, 122 
Overpumping, 13, 15 

P 

Pasco County, Florida, 22, 30, 64 

Pennsylvania, 2, 12, 14, 24–28, 44, 64, 73–88, 
124, 127, 129, 132, 133, 140 

Pollutants, 1, 6, 13, 14, 36, 37, 93, 125 

Protected area, 4, 91, 99–109, 115, 116, 117, 
123, 129 

R 

Recharge, 1, 7, 31, 36, 37, 47, 49, 60, 93, 97 

Retention ponds, 2 

Romania, 2, 14, 91, 99–109, 110, 116, 127 

Runoff, 4, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 27, 
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 37, 40, 54, 
57, 62, 65, 66, 75, 76, 81, 93, 95, 122, 
133 

S 

SALDO (subdivision and land development 
ordinances), 20, 26, 45, 77, 78, 79, 80, 
81, 83, 84, 129 

Setbacks, 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 
33, 34, 35, 36, 40, 43, 46, 48, 50, 51, 
54, 62, 64–73, 84, 88, 122, 126, 130, 
132, 133 

Sinkhole, 2, 3, 5, 6–7, 12, 20, 27, 28, 32, 34, 
35, 43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 51, 64–73, 75, 
77, 82, 87, 88, 92, 93, 97, 101, 109, 
113, 123, 126, 132, 134 

Spring, 3, 5, 8–9, 22, 24, 27, 28, 30, 33, 37, 38, 
45, 49, 60, 66, 72, 75, 80, 81, 93, 95 

Springfield, Missouri, 22, 32, 33, 64, 65, 66, 
68, 69, 72 

Stormwater, 12, 20, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 40, 46, 47, 49, 
50, 51, 52, 54, 57, 62, 65, 66, 78, 80, 
81, 93, 122, 133 

Strategic behavior, 50, 62, 73, 81, 84, 
127, 131 

Subdivision ordinances, 20, 21, 23, 26, 
66, 77 

Subsidence, 3, 6, 12, 13, 14, 19, 21, 60, 61, 81, 
125, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132 

T 

Tallahassee, Florida, 29 


Index 187 

UY 

Urbanization, 12, 15, 23, 29, 32, 36, 39, 63, 65, Yucatan Peninsula, 2, 10, 13 
66, 78, 83, 93, 122 

Z 

Zoning, 20, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 52, 54, 
W 55, 66, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 84, 94, 
Wellhead, 26, 30, 31, 36, 97 109, 129, 133, 134 


