


Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology

Derek Ford, McMaster University, Canada
and
Paul Williams, University of Auckland, New Zealand
















Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology






Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology

Derek Ford, McMaster University, Canada
and
Paul Williams, University of Auckland, New Zealand














Copyright © 2007	John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,  West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England

                   Telephone (þ44) 1243 779777

First Edition published in 1989 by Unwin Hyman Ltd.
Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk   Visit our Home Page on www.wiley.co.uk or www.wiley.com

All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any         means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except under the terms of the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London            W1T 4LP, UK, without the permission in writing of the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher should be addressed to the Permissions       Department, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England, or emailed to permreq@wiley.co.uk, or faxed to (þ44) 1243 770620.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used                in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The Publisher is not                associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is        required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Other Wiley Editorial Offices
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 42 McDougall Street, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop # 02-01, Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809       John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 6045 Freemont Blvd, Mississauga, Ontario, L5R 4J3, Cananda
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Ford, Derek (Derek C.)
Karst hydrogeology and geomorphology / Derek Ford and Paul Williams. – [Rev. ed.]
p. cm.
ISBN: 978-0-470-84996-5 (HB : alk. paper) ISBN: 978-0-470-84997-2 (PB : alk. paper)
1. Karst. 2. Hydrology, Karst. I. Williams, P. W. (Paul W.)
II. Title. GB600.F66 2007
551.447–dc22	2006029323

Anniversary Logo Design: Richard J. Pacifico

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library  ISBN 978-0-470-084996-5 (HB)
ISBN 978-0-470-84997-2 (PB)
Typeset in 9/11 pt Times by Thomson Digital, India
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham, Wiltshire
This book is printed on acid-free paper responsibly manufactured from sustainable forestry          in which at least two trees are planted for each one used for paper production.




We dedicate this book to our wives, Margaret Ford and Gwyneth Williams,   who have sustained us throughout our student years
and professional careers.






Contents

Preface	xi
Acknowledgements	xiii
1 Introduction to Karst	1
1.1 Definitions	1
1.2 The Relationships of Karst with General Geomorphology and Hydrogeology	4
1.3 The Global Distribution of Karst	5
1.4 The Growth of Ideas	6
1.5 Aims of the Book	8
1.6 Karst Terminology	8
2 The Karst Rocks	9
2.1 Carbonate Rocks and Minerals	9
2.2 Limestone Compositions and Depositional Facies	12
2.3 Limestone Diagenesis and the Formation of Dolomite	18
2.4 The Evaporite Rocks	24
2.5 Quartzites and Siliceous Sandstones	27
2.6 Effects of Lithological Properties upon Karst Development	28
2.7 Interbedded Clastic Rocks	31
2.8 Bedding Planes, Joints, Faults and Fracture Traces	31
2.9 Fold Topography	35
2.10 Palaeokarst Unconformities	36
3 Dissolution: Chemical and Kinetic Behaviour of the Karst Rocks	39
3.1 Introduction	39
3.2 Aqueous Solutions and Chemical Equilibria	41
3.3 The Dissolution of Anhydrite, Gypsum and Salt	44
3.4 The Dissolution of Silica	45
3.5 Bicarbonate Equilibria and the Dissolution of Carbonate Rocks in Normal Meteoric Waters	45
3.6 The S–O–H System and the Dissolution of Carbonate Rocks	53
3.7 Chemical Complications in Carbonate Dissolution	57
3.8 Biokarst Processes	61
3.9 Measurements in the Field and Laboratory: Computer Programs	62
3.10 Dissolution and Precipitation Kinetics of Karst Rocks	65
4 Distribution and Rate of Karst Denudation	77
4.1 Global Variations in the Solutional Denudation of Carbonate Terrains	77
4.2 Measurement and Calculation of Solutional Denudation Rates	82

viii   Contents
4.3 Solution Rates in Gypsum, Salt and Other Non-Carbonate Rocks	90
4.4 Interpretation of Measurements	92
5 Karst Hydrogeology	103
5.1 Basic Hydrogeological Concepts, Terms and Definitions	103
5.2 Controls on the Development of Karst Hydrological Systems	116
5.3 Energy Supply and Flow-Network Development	124
5.4 Development of the Water Table and Phreatic Zones	129
5.5 Development of the Vadose Zone	132
5.6 Classification and Characteristics of Karst Aquifers	134
5.7 Applicability of Darcy’s Law to Karst	136
5.8 Freshwater–Saltwater Interface	140
6 Analysis of Karst Drainage Systems	145
6.1 The ‘Grey Box’ Nature of Karst	145
6.2 Surface Exploration and Survey Techniques	146
6.3 Investigating Recharge and Percolation in the Vadose Zone	153
6.4 Borehole Analysis	163
6.5 Spring Hydrograph Analysis	173
6.6 Polje Hydrograph Analysis	181
6.7 Spring Chemograph Interpretation	182
6.8 Storage Volumes and Flow Routing Under Different States of the Hydrograph	187
6.9 Interpreting the Organization of a Karst Aquifer	189
6.10 Water-Tracing Techniques	191
6.11 Computer Modelling of Karst Aquifers	203
7 Speleogenesis: The Development of Cave Systems	209
7.1 Classifying Cave Systems	209
7.2 Building the Plan Patterns of Unconfined Caves	214
7.3 Unconfined Cave Development in Length and Depth	222
7.4 System Modifications Occurring within a Single Phase	231
7.5 Multiphase Cave Systems	233
7.6 Meteoric Water Caves Developed Where There is Confined Circulation
or Basal Injection of Water	236
7.7 Hypogene Caves: Hydrothermal Caves Associated Chiefly with CO2	240
7.8 Hypogene Caves: Caves Formed by Waters Containing H2S	243
7.9 Sea-Coast Eogenetic Caves	246
7.10 Passage Cross-Sections and Smaller Features of Erosional Morphology	249
7.11 Condensation, Condensation Corrosion and Weathering in Caves	261
7.12 Breakdown in Caves	265
8 Cave Interior Deposits	271
8.1 Introduction	271
8.2 Clastic Sediments	271
8.3 Calcite, Aragonite and Other Carbonate Precipitates	281
8.4 Other Cave Minerals	292
8.5 Ice in Caves	294
8.6 Dating of Calcite Speleothems and Other Cave Deposits	298
8.7 Palaeoenvironmental Analysis of Calcite Speleothems	306
8.8 Mass Flux Through a Cave System: The Example of Friar’s Hole, West Virginia	320

Contents   ix
9 Karst Landform Development in Humid Regions	321
9.1 Coupled Hydrological and Geochemical Systems	321
9.2 Small-Scale Solution Sculpture – Microkarren and Karren	321
9.3 Dolines – The ‘Diagnostic’ Karst Landform?	339
9.4 The Origin and Development of Solution Dolines	342
9.5 The Origin of Collapse and Subsidence Depressions	346
9.6 Polygonal Karst	351
9.7 Morphometric Analysis of Solution Dolines	353
9.8 Landforms Associated with Allogenic Inputs: Contact Karst	358
9.9 Karst Poljes	361
9.10 Corrosional Plains and Shifts in Baselevel	365
9.11 Residual Hills on Karst Plains	370
9.12 Depositional and Constructional Karst Features	377
9.13 Special Features of Evaporite Terrains	381
9.14 Karstic Features of Quartzose and Other Rocks	388
9.15 Sequences of Carbonate Karst Evolution in Humid Terrains	391
9.16 Computer Models of Karst Landscape Evolution	395
10 The Influence of Climate, Climatic Change and Other Environmental Factors
on Karst Development	401
10.1 The Precepts of Climatic Geomorphology	401
10.2 The Hot Arid Extreme	402
10.3 The Cold Extreme: Karst Development in Glaciated Terrains	410
10.4 The Cold Extreme: Karst Development in Permafrozen Terrains	421
10.5 Sea-Level Changes, Tectonic Movement and Implications for Coastal Karst Development	427
10.6 Polycyclic, Polygenetic and Exhumed Karsts	434
11 Karst Water Resources Management	441
11.1 Water Resources and Sustainable Yields	441
11.2 Determination of Available Water Resources	442
11.3 Karst Hydrogeological Mapping	445
11.4 Human Impacts on Karst Water	449
11.5 Groundwater Vulnerability, Protection and Risk Mapping	460
11.6 Dam Building, Leakages, Failures and Impacts	464
12 Human Impacts and Environmental Rehabilitation	471
12.1 The Inherent Vulnerability of Karst Systems	471
12.2 Deforestation, Agricultural Impacts and Rocky Desertification	473
12.3 Sinkholes, Induced by Dewatering, Surcharging, Solution Mining and other Practices on Karst	478
12.4 Problems of Construction on and in the Karst Rocks – Expect the Unexpected!	485
12.5 Industrial Exploitation of Karst Rocks and Minerals	489
12.6 Restoration of Karstlands and Rehabilitation of Limestone Quarries	494
12.7 Sustainable Management of Karst	499
12.8 Scientific, Cultural and Recreational Values of Karstlands	502
References	505
Index	554





Preface



This is a substantial revision of our earlier book Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology, which was published in 1989. It has been recast, updated and largely rewritten, taking care to keep what we judge to be the better features of the earlier version, particularly its systems- oriented approach and its integration of hydrology and geomorphology. We have not repeated some historical material in Chapter 1 and have not cited some early authorities, because this information is still accessible to readers in the earlier book.
  In Chapter 2 we review pertinent features of the medium, that is the karst rocks and their geological structure. In the following two chapters we attempt comprehensive description of the physics and chemistry     of dissolution processes and global dissolution rates. In the past two to three decades the study of hydrogeology   and groundwater management has become of major importance in the academic world and in practical man- agement. This is recognized in Chapters 5 and 6 with detailed consideration of the karst hydrogeological sys- tem, emphasizing here and throughout the later text the  most important fact that, in karst, the meteoric waters are routed underground by dissolutionally enlarged channels. Our understanding of the genesis of those channel pat- terns, i.e. of underground cave systems, has been much improved in the past two decades by broader international discussion and powerful computer modelling, which is considered in Chapter 7. Cave systems may also function   as giant sediment traps, retaining evidence of all natural environmental processes occurring in the soil and vegeta- tion above them and in their hydrological catchments. Increasingly it is recognized that caves are important natural archives that  contain information on continental   and marine climate change and rates of change. These are now being studied intensively because of their relevance     to global warming concerns, so a broad review of recent advances in understanding is presented in Chapter 8. Chapters 9 and 10 then consider the variety of dissolutional and depositional landforms created by karst processes on   the Earth’s surface, first in humid temperate and tropical environments and then in the arid and cold extremes. The book concludes with broad sketches of the practical applications of karst study and the information presented    in the previous chapters. Karst water resources are becoming increasingly important globally, and are the focus of Chapter 11. We consider the delineation and management of karst water supplies and the problem of groundwater pollution, which can proceed with horrific rapidity should there be spillage of the many dangerous substances being moved around the land by road, rail and pipeline. In the final chapter we review hazards arising   from the juxtaposition of human activities and karst terrain. The very existence of karst forms and processes may pose hazards to construction and other economic activity and, conversely, human activity poses hazards to fragile karst ecosystems, aquifers and landform features. The chapter concludes with a consideration of environmental restora- tion, sustainable management and conservation.
  During the past 25 years, for a variety of reasons, there has been an explosion of interest in all aspects of karst research on the part of earth scientists, other environ- mental scientists, civil engineers, and even in legal prac- tice. As a consequence, there has been a huge increase in  the number of relevant publications. We find it impossible  to read all that is published each year in the English language alone, not to mention the large volumes of important and well-illustrated findings published in other languages. Nevertheless, in this book we have attempted a broad international perspective both in the selection of examples that we present and in the literature that we cite. By necessity, because there is limitation to the number of pages  we  can  use  if  this  volume  is  to  be  available  at  a reasonable price, we have had to work within space constraints, and so we apologize in advance to colleagues where we have not cited – or worse, overlooked – one or more of their favourite publications.






Acknowledgements



Today the international community of karst scholars is large in number, broad in its intellectual scope, vigorous   and exciting. We are indebted to a great many individuals whose research, writings, discussions, company in the field and underground, have helped us. The late Joe Jennings (Australia) and Marjorie Sweeting (UK) were our mentors; their enthusiasm, scholarly example, scien-  tific integrity and wise counsel helped set our standards    and inspired our academic careers. We continue to build    on the foundations they laid for us.
  
We deeply regret the passing, in recent years and before their time, of Jim Quinlan (USA) and Song Lin Hua (China) and recall with gratitude what they taught us. Especial appreciation to Henry Schwarcz for 40 years of collaborative study of speleothems, to Peter Crossley for    30 years technical support above and below ground, and to Steve Worthington for critical reading of the groundwater hydrology chapters and much else. Amongst the many others whose research and friendship have enriched our study and experience of karst, we wish especially to thank:



Slava Andreichouk Tim Atkinson Michel Bakalowicz Pavel Bosak
Yuan Daoxian Wolfgang Dreybrodt
Victor and Yuri Dubljansky Ralph Ewers
Paolo Forti Amos Frumkin
Franci Gabrovsˇek Ivan Gams
John Gunn Zupan Hajna Russell Harmon Carol Hill
Julia James
Sasha Klimchouk Andrej Krancj Wieslawa Krawczyk

Stein-Erik Lauritzen Joyce Lundberg Richard Maire
Alain Mangin Andrej Mihevc Petar Milanovic´ John Mylroie Jean Nicod Bogdan Onac
Art and Peggy Palmer Jean-Noel Salomon Jacques Schroeder Yavor Shopov
Chris and Peter Smart Tony Waltham
Bette and Will White Zhu Xuewen and Nadja Lu Yaoru
Laszlo Zambo




1

Introduction to Karst



Karst is the term used to describe a special style of landscape containing caves and extensive underground water systems that is developed on especially soluble rocks such as limestone, marble, and gypsum. Large areas  of the ice-free continental area of the Earth are underlain    by karst developed on carbonate rocks (Figure 1.1) and roughly 20–25% of the global population depends largely or entirely on groundwaters obtained from them. These resources are coming under increasing pressure and have great need of rehabilitation and sustainable management.    In the chapters that follow, we show the close relation-    ship between karst groundwater systems (hydrogeology)   and   karst   landforms   (geomorphology),   both   above  and below the surface. And we explain the place of karst within the general realms of hydrogeology and geomorphology.
  Experience shows that many hydrogeologists mista- kenly assume that if karst landforms are absent or not obvious on the surface, then the groundwater system will  not be karstic. This assumption can lead to serious errors    in groundwater management and environmental impact assessment, because karst groundwater circulation can develop even though surface karst is not apparent. Diag- nostic tests are available to clarify the situation. The prudent default situation in carbonate terrains is to assume karst exists unless proved otherwise.
  We found in our first book (Ford and Williams 1989)   that hydrological and chemical processes associated with karst are best understood from a systems perspective. Therefore we will continue to follow this approach here. Karst can be viewed as an open system composed of two closely integrated hydrological and geochemical subsys- tems operating upon the karstic rocks. Karst features above and below ground are the products of the interplay    of processes in these linked subsystems.
1.1 
DEFINITIONS
The word karst can be traced back to pre-Indoeuropean origins (Gams 1973a, 1991a, 2003; Kranjc 2001a). It stems from karra/gara meaning stone, and its derivatives are found in many languages of Europe and the Middle  East. The district referred to as the ‘Classic Karst’, which is the type site where its natural characteristics first received intensive scientific investigation, is in the north-western corner of the Dinaric Karst, about two- thirds being in Slovenia and one-third in Italy. In Slovenia the word kar(r)a underwent linguistic evolution via kars    to kras, which in addition to meaning stony, barren ground also became the regional name for the district inland of Trieste. In the Roman period the regional name appeared as Carsus and Carso but, when it became part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, it was germanicized as the Karst. The geographical and geological schools of Vienna during that time exercised a decisive influence on the word as an international scientific term. Its technical use started in the late 18th century and by the mid-19th century it was well-established. The unusual natural features of the Kras (or Karst) region became known as ‘karst phenomena’ and so too, by extension, did similar features found elsewhere in the world.
  We may define karst as comprising terrain with dis- tinctive hydrology and landforms that arise from a combination of high rock solubility and well developed secondary (fracture) porosity. Such areas are character- ized by sinking streams, caves, enclosed depressions, fluted rock outcrops, and large springs. Considerable rock solubility alone is insufficient to produce karst. Rock structure and lithology are also important: dense, massive, pure and coarsely fractured rocks develop the best karst. Soluble rocks with extremely high primaryporosity (~30–50%) usually have poorly developed karst. Yet soluble rocks with negligible primary porosity (<1%) that have later evolved a large secondary porosity support excellent karst. The key to the expression of karst is the development of its unusual subsurface hydrol- ogy, the evolution of which is driven by the hydrological cycle – the ‘engine’ that powers karst processes.  The distinctive surface and subterranean features that are  a hallmark of karst result from rock dissolution by natural waters along pathways provided by the geological structure.
  The main features of the karst system are illustrated in Figure 1.2. The primary division is into erosional and depositional zones. In the erosional zone there is net removal of the karst rocks, by dissolution alone and by dissolution serving as the trigger mechanism for other processes. Some redeposition of the eroded rock occurs      in the zone, mostly in the form of precipitates, but this is transient. In the net deposition zone, which is chiefly offshore or on marginal (inter- and supratidal) flats, new karst rocks are created. Many of these rocks display evidence of transient episodes of dissolution  within them. This book is concerned primarily with the net erosion zone, the deposition zone being the field of sedimentologists (e.g. see Alsharhan and Kendall 2003).
  
Within the net erosion zone, dissolution along ground- water flow paths is the diagnostic characteristic of karst. Most groundwater in the majority of karst systems is of meteoric origin, circulating at comparatively shallow depths and with short residence times  underground. Deep circulating, heated waters or waters originating in igneous rocks or subsiding sedimentary basins mix with    the meteoric waters in many regions, and dominate the karstic dissolution system in a small proportion of them.    At the coast, mixing between seawater and fresh water can be an important agent of accelerated dissolution.
  In the erosion zone most dissolution occurs at or near the bedrock surface where it is manifested as surface karst landforms. We refer to forms as being small scale where their characteristic dimensions (such as diameter) are commonly less than ~10 m, intermediate scale in the range of 10 to 1000 m, and large scale where dimensions  are greater than 1000 m. In a general systems framework most surface karst forms can be assigned to input, throughput or output roles. Input landforms predominate. They discharge water into the underground and their mor- phology differs distinctly from landforms created by fluvial or glacial processes because of this function. Some dis- tinctive valleys and flat-floored depressions termed poljes convey water across a belt of karst (and sometimes other rocks) at the surface and so serve in a throughput role. Varieties of erosional gorges and of precipitated or con- structional landforms, such as travertine dams, may be created where karst groundwater is discharged as springs,
i.e. they are output landforms. Residual karstic hills, some- times of considerable height and abruptness may survive on the alluvial plains below receding spring lines and beside rivers.
  Some karsts are buried by later consolidated rocks and  are inert, i.e. they are hydrologically decoupled from the contemporary system. We refer to these as palaeokarsts. They have often experienced tectonic subsidence and frequently lie unconformably beneath  clastic  cover rocks. Occasionally they are exhumed and reintegrated into the active system, thus resuming a development that  was interrupted for perhaps tens of millions of years. Contrasting with these are relict karsts, which survive within the contemporary system but are removed from the situation in which they were developed, just as river terraces – representing floodplains of the past – are now remote from the river that formed them. Relict karsts have often been subject to a major change in baselevel. A high-level corrosion surface with residual hills now located far above the modern water table is one example; drowned karst on the coast another. Drained upper level passages in multilevel cave systems are found in perhaps   the majority of karsts.
  
Karst rocks such as gypsum, anhydrite and salt are so soluble that they have comparatively little exposure at the Earth’s surface in net erosion zones, in spite of their widespread occurrence (Figure 1.3). Instead, they are protected by less soluble or insoluble cover strata such as shales. Despite this protection, circulating waters are   able to attack them and selectively remove them over large areas, even where they are buried as deeply as 1000 m. The phenomenon is termed interstratal karsti- fication and may be manifested by collapse or subsidence structures in the overlying rocks or at the surface. Inter- stratal karstification occurs in carbonate rocks also, but is   of less significance. Intrastratal karstification refers to       the preferential dissolution of a particular bed or other unit within a sequence of soluble rocks, e.g. a gypsum bed in a dolomite formation.
  Reference is often made in European literature to exokarst, endokarst and cryptokarst. Exokarst refers to      the suit of karst features developed at the surface. Endo- karst concerns those developed underground. It is often divided into hyperkarst, in which the underground dis- solution is by circulating meteoric waters, and hypokarst – dissolution by juvenile or connate waters (Figure 1.2). Some Russian authors further differentiate hypokarst into that dissolved in the soluble rocks by waters that are ascending into them from deeper formations, and that created entirely within a soluble formation by the process






Figure 1.3 The global distribution of evaporite rocks (after Kozary, M.T. et al, Incidence of saline deposits in geologic time, Special Paper 88 © 1968 Geological Society of America). See Klimchouk and Andrejchuk (1996) for a global map of areas of gypsum and anhydrite deposition during the Precambrian and through the Palaeozoic.

of pressure solution that utilizes its contained water. Cryptokarst refers to karst forms developed beneath a blanket of permeable sediments such as soil, till, periglacial deposits and residual clays. Karst barre´ denotes an iso- lated karst that is impounded by impermeable rocks. Stripe karst is a barre´ subtype where a narrow band of limestone, etc., crops out in a dominantly clastic sequence, usually with a stratal dip that is very steep or vertical. Recently  there has been an emphasis on contact karst, where water flowing from adjoining insoluble terrains creates excep- tionally high densities or large sizes of landforms along the geological contact with the soluble strata (Kranjc 2001b). Karst-like landforms produced by processes other than dissolution or corrosion-induced subsidence and collapse

are known as pseudokarst. Caves in glaciers are pseu- dokarst, because their development in ice involves a change in phase, not dissolution. Thermokarst is a related term applied to topographic depressions resulting from thawing of ground ice. Vulcanokarst comprises tubular caves within lava flows plus mechanical collapses   of the roof into them. Piping is the mechanical washout      of conduits in gravels, soils, loess, etc., plus associated collapse. On the other hand, dissolution forms such as karren (see section 9.2) on outcrops of quartzite, granite   and basalt are karst features, despite their occurrence on lithologies of that are  of low solubility when compared  with typical karst rocks.
  The extent to which karst develops on lithologies other than carbonate and evaporite rocks depends largely on the efficiency of the processes that are competing with dis- solution in the particular environment. If the competitors   are very weak, the small-scale (karren) solutional land- forms such as flutes, pits and pans can develop on mono- minerallic rocks of lower solubility and even on polyminerallic rocks such as granite and basalt, although rates of development appear to be lower. Quartzites and dense siliceous sandstones can be viewed as transitional, occupying part of the continuum between karst and normal fluvial landscapes. In thermal waters their solubility approaches that of carbonate rocks and regular solutional caves may form. Given sufficient time, under normal environmental temperatures and pressures intergranular dissolution of quartz along fractures and bedding planes can permit penetration of meteoric waters underground. When there is also a sufficient hydraulic gradient, this can give rise to turbulent flow capable of flushing the detached grains and enlarging conduits by a combination of mechanical erosion and further dissolution. Thus in some quartzite terrains vadose caves develop along the flanks of escarpments or gorges where hydraulic gradients are high. The same process leads to the unclogging of embryonic passages along scarps in sandy or argillaceous limestones. Development of a phreatic zone with significant water storage and permanent water-filled caves is generally precluded. The landforms and drainage characteristics of these siliceous rocks thus can be regarded as a style of fluvio-karst, i.e., a landscape and subterranean hydrology that develops as a consequence of the operation of both dissolution and mechanical erosion by running water.
1.2 THE RELATIONSHIPS OF KARST WITH GENERAL GEOMORPHOLOGY  AND HYDROGEOLOGY
Geomorphology is concerned with understanding the form of the ground surface, the processes that mould it,




and the history of its development. Carbonate and evaporate lithologies displaying at least  some  karst occur over ~20% of the Earth’s ice-free continental area and occupy a complete range of altitude and latitude. Thus karsts  around  the  world  are  exposed  to  the  full  suite  of geomorphological  processes  –  aeolian,  coastal,  fluvial, glacial, physical and chemical weathering, etc. Hence to understand karst we must consider the same set of natural processes that affect all other rocks and landscape styles, including plate tectonics and climatic change. However, we must also recognize that dissolution is of paramount importance in developing karst compared with its rela- tively minor role in other lithologies. Chemical solution of karst rocks develops a distinctive suite of features (above and below ground) that reflect the dominance of dissolu-  tion and dissolution-induced processes, such as collapse, compared with other processes. Even so, under extreme climatic conditions other processes, such as frost-shatter- ing, can totally mask the effects of dissolution. Thus in high mountains, glacial, periglacial, and mass-movement processes are the principal landscape-forming agents. No karst has been reported on Mount Everest (Jolmo Lungma), for example, even though it consists mainly of carbonate rocks, although karst circulation may occur in the more stable regime underground.
  Karst groundwater circulation can occur only if sub- terranean connections are established between uplands and valley bottoms; otherwise runoff will simply flow across the surface. Where bedrock is porous, as in many sandstones, water will infiltrate and circulate under- ground via  interconnected pores,  later  to discharge  at the surface as springs. In such rocks, the movement of water is by laminar flow and chemical solution has no significant effect on storage capacity and transmission of groundwater. Further, long-term circulation of water has    no effect on the ultimate transmissivity or storage capa-   city of the groundwater system. This is not the case in karst, despite the fact that karst rocks are affected by exactly the same set of forces that drive subterranean groundwater circulation in other lithologies. This is because dissolution plays a fundamental role in karst. The very act of groundwater circulation causes progres-   sive solutional enlargement of void space and a com- mensurate increase in permeability. Thus although initial groundwater flow in karst is laminar, it becomes progres- sively more turbulent. The karst groundwater system evolves over time, distinguishing it from other ground- water systems. Consequently, the equations that can be used to describe laminar water flow in typically porous aquifers become inapplicable to karst as the flow through large subterranean conduits becomes turbulent and dom- inates the groundwater throughput.
  
The progressive evolution of karst groundwater net- works and the development of turbulent flow conditions    are intimately related to the evolution of karst landforms. Although karst rocks may have primary intergranular porosity and secondary fracture porosity, most water flow through them is transmitted by conduits (tertiary porosity) developed by solution. These systems receive most of their inputs from point recharge sites at the surface, such as enclosed depressions (dolines, etc.) and stream- sinks, which also evolve over time as a consequence of dissolution. Thus both surface landscape and subterranean conduit system evolve together, an unusual circumstance applicable only to karst. For this reason, if one is to understand karst hydrogeology it is also necessary to understand karst geomorphology, and vice versa. This reality determines the structure and content of this book.
1.3 THE GLOBAL DISTRIBUTION OF KARST
The distribution of the principal karst rocks is shown in Figures 1.1 and 1.3. In the aggregate their surface and near-surface outcrops occupy ~20% of the planet’s dry ice-free land. Regional detail depicted on these maps is of variable quality depending on the information available.   The mapping is also generalized and approximate; many very small outcrops are omitted, and possibly some large ones. Thus many sites shown on Figure 1.1 in Russia, for example, are areas in which carbonates are common, but   not necessarily continuous in outcrop. Carbonates are particularly abundant in the Northern Hemisphere. The old Gondwana continents expose comparatively small outcrops except around their margins, where there are some large spreads of Cretaceous or later age carbonates (post break-up of the supercontinent), such as the Nullarbor Plain in Australia. Not all carbonates display distinctive karst landforms and/or significant karst groundwater circu- lations because some are impure and their insoluble resi- dues clog developing conduits; thus we estimate carbonate karst to occur over 10–15% of the continental area.
  Figure 1.3 shows the maximum aggregate of gypsum, anhydrite and salt known to have accumulated over geological time. Most of it is now buried beneath later carbonate or clastic (detrital) rocks. Also, many occur- rences have been partly removed by dissolution or much reduced in geographical extent by folding and thrusting,
e.g. in the Andes. More than 90% of the anhydrite/ gypsum and more than 99% of the salt displayed here does not crop out; nevertheless, there is gypsum and/or     salt beneath ~25% of the continental surfaces. Gypsum    and salt karst that is exposed at the surface is much smaller in extent than the carbonate karst, but interstratal karst is of the same order of magnitude. Hydrologically




active karst within these evaporite rocks probably covers    an area comparable to active carbonate karsts.
1.4 THE GROWTH OF IDEAS
The Mediterranean basin is the cradle of karstic studies. Although ancient Assyrian kings between 1100 BC and 852 BC undertook the first recorded (in carvings and bronzes) explorations of caves in the valley of the Tigris River, Greek and Roman philosophers made the first known contributions to our scientific ideas on karst, as well as contributing to a mythology that, like the River  Styx, lives on in the place names given by cavers and others. Pfeiffer (1963) identified five epochs in the development  of  ideas  about  karst  groundwaters,  from  the interval 600–400 BC until the early 20th century. Thales (624–548? BC), Aristotle (385–322 BC) and Lucre- tius (96–45 BC) formulated concepts on the nature of water circulation. Flavius in the first century AD described  the first known attempt at karst water tracing, in the River Jordan basin (Milanovic´ 1981). A Greek traveler and geographer of the second century AD, Pausanias, also reported  experiments  that  were  interpreted  as  proving  the connection between a stream-sink beside Lake Stym- phalia and Erasinos spring (Burdon and Papakis 1963). The conceptual understanding of hydrology established by Greek and Roman scholars remained the basis of the subject until the 17th century, when Perrault (1608–70), Mariotte (1620–84) and Halley (1656–1742) commenced its transformation into a quantitative science, showing the relationships between evaporation, infiltration and streamflow. Also in the 17th century, the understanding      of karst caves was being advanced by scholars such as Xu Xiake in China (Yuan 1981; Cai et al. 1993) and Valvasor in Slovenia (Milanovic´ 1981; Shaw 1992).
  By the end of the 18th century, the role of carbonic acid in the dissolution of limestones was understood (Hutton 1795). Experimental work on carbonate dissolu-  tion in water followed a few decades later (Rose 1837).   The concept of chemical denudation was advanced in 1854  by  Bischof’s  calculation  of  the  dissolved  calcium carbonate load of the River Rhine and in 1875 by Good- child’s estimation of the rate of surface  weathering of limestone in northern England from his observations of gravestone corrosion (Goodchild, 1890).  By 1883, the first modern style study of solution denudation had been completed by Spring and Prost in the Meuse river basin in Belgium.
  The mid- to late 19th century was a very significant period for the advancement of our understanding of limestone landforms. In Britain, Prestwich (1854) and Miall (1870) investigated the origin of swallow-holes,

while on the European continent impressive progress was made in the study of karren by Heim (1877), Chaix (1895) and Eckert (1895), amongst others. But truly outstanding among the many excellent contributions of that time was the work of Jovan Cvijic´. His 1893 exposition, Das Karstpha¨nomen, laid the foundation of modern ideas in karst geomorphology, ranging over landforms of every scale from karren to poljes. His contribution to our understanding of dolines is rightly considered  of  ‘benchmark’  significance  by   Sweeting (1981): his thorough investigation of them provides the first instance of morphometry in geomorphology, and his conclusion that most dolines have a solutional origin has withstood the test of time.
  The role of lithology became a more explicit theme in some of Cvijic´’s later work, best expressed in his 1925 paper in which he introduced the terms holokarst and merokarst. Holokarst is pure karst uninfluenced by other rocks, and is developed on thick limestones extending well below baselevel. It contains the full range of karst landforms and is exemplified by the Dinaric area. By contrast, merokarst (or half karst) is developed on thin sequences of limestones interbedded with other rocks, as well as on less pure carbonate formations. The landscape thus contains both fluvial and karstic elements and may be thickly covered with insoluble residues. The Mammoth Cave–Sinkhole Plain karst of Kentucky is a good exam- ple. Cvijic´ also identified transitional types, such as found in the French Causses, where there is extensive karstic development in thick carbonates above underlying impermeable rocks. Viewed from the perspective of our greater worldwide knowledge in the 21st century it appears that most karsts can be assigned to Cvijic´’s transitional type; hence his tripartite division is not particularly helpful. It is clear that as the carbonate sequence becomes thinner and perhaps overlain by and interbedded with clastic lithologies, so transitional land- forms on the spectrum between karst and normal fluvial landscapes become more common. Roglic´ (1960) called such landscapes fluvio-karst. These early ideas are dis- cussed more fully by Sweeting (1972), Roglic´ (1972) and Jennings (1985). Much of Cvijic´’s writing is now avail- able  in  English  translation  in  Stevanovic´  and  Mijatovic´ (2005), together with his publications in  French, and reviews by others.
  The mid-19th century was also a time of notable advance in our understanding of groundwater flow. Although the experiments of Hagen (1839), Poiseuille (1846) and Darcy (1856) were not specifically related to karst, they nevertheless provided the theoretical founda-   tion for later quantitative explanation of karst ground- water movement. And in 1874 the first attempt was made




to analyze the hydrogeology of a large karst area. This was an investigation by Beyer, Tietze and Pilar of the ‘lack of water in the karst of the military zone of Croatia’. Herak and Stringfield (1972) considered their  ideas to be the forerunners of those that emerged more clearly in the early 20th century. In particular, they foreshadowed the heated and long-lasting debate that  erupted on the relative importance of isolated conduit flow as opposed to integrated regional flow.
  In 1903 Grund proposed that groundwater in karst terrain is regionally interconnected and ultimately con- trolled by sea level (Figure 1.4a). He envisaged a saturated zone within karst, the upper level of which coincides with sea level at the coast, but rises beneath the hills inland (today we call this surface the water table).   Only water above sea level in the saturated zone was considered to move, and that was termed Karstwasser.     The water body below sea level was assumed stagnant and was called Grundwasser. It was conceived to con-    tinue downwards until impervious rocks were ultimately encountered. Grund had a dynamic view of the karst water zone and imagined that its upper surface would rise following recharge by precipitation. Should recharge   be particularly great, the saturated zone would in places   rise to the surface and cause the inundation of low-lying areas. In this way he explained the flooding of poljes.
  However, field evidence showing the lack of synchro- nous inundation in neighbouring poljes of about the same altitude was used by Grund’s critics to argue against the

Figure 1.4 (a) Essential features of the karst groundwater system according to Grund (1903). He envisaged a fully inte- grated circulation, although with stagnant water below sea level.
(b) The karst water system according to Katzer (1909), who
stressed the operation of essentially independent subterranean river networks.

mechanism he proposed. Katzer (1909) observed, for example, that when springs are at different heights, it is    not always the upper one that dries up first. He also noted that the responses to rainfall of springs with intermittent  flow are unpredictable; some react, others appear not to.    On the phenomenon of polje inundation, he stated that during their submergence phase water may sometimes still be seen flowing into adjacent stream-sinks (ponors)  even when the flooding of the polje floor is becoming deeper; thus a general explanation of polje inundation through rising Karstwasser cannot hold. Katzer did not accept the division of Karstwasser and Grundwasser. Instead he interpreted karst as consisting of shallow and  deep types. In the former, karstification extends down to underlying impermeable rocks, while in the latter it is contained entirely within extensive carbonate formations. Katzer was apparently influenced by results of the impressive subterranean explorations of the Czech spe- leologist/geographer, Schmidl (1854), and the French speleologist, Martel (1894), who exposed considerable new information on the nature of cave rivers. Deep within karst Katzer imagined water circulation to occur in essentially independent river networks  (Figure  1.4b) with different water levels and with separate hydrological responses to recharge. His work therefore represents an important integration of the emerging ideas of ground- water hydrology and speleology.
  One may imagine that Cvijic´ was stimulated by this controversy, as well as by the extra dimension added by Grund’s (1914) publication on the cycle of erosion in karst. Thus we see the appearance in 1918 of another of Cvijic´’s   now   famous   papers   that   drew   together   his maturing ideas on the nature of subterranean hydrology and its relation to surface karst morphology. He too rejected the division of underground water into Karst- wasser and Grundwasser, although he implicitly accepted  the occurrence of groundwater as we now understand it.    He believed in a discontinuous water table, the level of which was controlled by lithology and structure, and he    put forward the notion of three hydrographic zones in karst: a dry zone, a transitional zone, and a saturated zone with permanently circulating water. He maintained that the characteristics of these zones would change over time, the upper zones moving successively downwards and replacing those beneath as the karst develops. The idea of a dynamically evolving karst groundwater system was thus born. The very circulation of water enhances permeability and thereby progressively and continuously modifies the hydrological system. This characteristic in now recognized as an essential and unique feature of karst. Thus over a few decades around the turn of the previous century Cvijic´ (Figure 1.5) laid the theoretical






Figure 1.5   Jovan Cvijic´ (1865–1927) was a graduate of Belgrade University and a post-graduate of Vienna where he was super- vized by A. Penck. The importance of his insights into  karst geomorphology and hydrology revealed in his 1893 and  1918 publications were so profound, comprehensive and far-reaching that he is widely regarded as the father of modern karst science. (Photograph provided by Karst Research Institute, Postojna.)


foundation of many of our current ideas. He synthesized   the critical observations of his contemporaries with his own keen insights and thereby became the outstanding figure in the field. Without doubt he must be regarded as   the father of modern karstic research.
1.5 AIMS OF THE BOOK
The main aim of this book is to demystify karst, which is often perceived to be a separate, difficult or minor (and hence conveniently dismissed) branch of hydrogeology and geomorphology, and to show its place and contribu-  tion within the wider fields of hydrology, geomorphol- ogy, and environmental science. We set about this by demonstrating that karst is explainable in terms of the

same set of natural laws and processes that apply to other landscapes and hydrogeological systems, albeit in a mix     in which dissolution has an unusually important role. We place a major emphasis on understanding processes, and show how surface and subsurface karst can be linked within  a  systems  framework.  In  the  course  of  doing  this we aim to reconcile linkages between ‘normal’ hydrogeology and karst hydrogeology, and show when karst aquifers can and should not be analysed using conventional techniques. Nevertheless, our emphasis is on the science and explanation of karst rather than on the technical aspects of its resource exploitation and manage- ment,  which  are  expertly  covered  in  other  texts (e.g. Milanovic´ 2004; Waltham et al. 2005).
  We are well aware from the abundance of modern publications that we will have missed some excellent research, especially when they have been published in languages with which we are not familiar. So we apol- ogize, especially to readers in the non-English speaking world, if we have inadvertently overlooked fundamental work from your country and have failed to discover important data and diagrams. We still have plenty to learn about karst and are well aware of the limitations of   our world view.
  There has been a vast increase in interest in karst over   the past decade  or so and a  corresponding explosion in    the number of publications. It is impossible for one to read all that is relevant in English, let alone the large volumes of work in other languages. Nevertheless, col- lected essays on karst from many regions of the world edited by Yuan and Liu (1998), and regional studies on  karst in China (Yuan et al. 1991, Sweeting 1995), Siberia (Tsykin 1990), and Slovenia (Gams 2003) permit further insight into the rich international literature.
1.6 KARST TERMINOLOGY
Karst resources, especially perennial springs, caves for shelter, and shallow (readily accessible) placer mineral deposits became important in human affairs long before    the advent of writing. It is no surprise that there are many different words in many different languages for a given feature such as a doline. New terms are also being introduced from time to time by writers unfamiliar with    the older ones. The international karst terminology thus    can be very confusing. Recent dictionaries that attempt to provide brief definitions of features, processes, etc., and    list the names used for them in some of the major languages  include  Ko´sa  (1995/6),  Panosˇ  (2001)   and Lowe and  Waltham  (2002).  The  US   Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has also  published a general lexicon, in English only (Field 1999).


2

The Karst Rocks



2.1 CARBONATE ROCKS AND MINERALS
Carbonate rocks crop out over approximately 10% of the ice-free continental areas and underly much more. They   can accumulate to thicknesses of several kilometres and volumes of thousands of cubic kilometres, accounting for about 20% of all Phanerozoic sedimentary rocks. They are forming today in tropical and temperate seas and are known from strata as old as 3.5 Ga. They host roughly 50% of the known petroleum and natural gas reserves, plus bauxite, silver, lead, zinc and many other economic deposits, even gold and diamonds. They supply agricul-  tural lime, Portland cement, fine building stones, and are   the principal source of aggregate for highways, etc. in many regions. As a consequence they are studied from many different perspectives. There are innumerable descriptive terms and many different classifications.
  Figure 2.1 gives a basic classification. Carbonate rocks contain >50% carbonate minerals by weight. There are    two common, pure mineral end-members, limestone (composed of calcite or aragonite) and dolostone (dolo- mite). Most authors neglect ‘dolostone’ and describe both the mineral and the rock as dolomite; we shall follow this practice.
  Carbonate rocks are distinctive because their accumu- lation is highly dependent upon organic activity and they   are more prone to post-depositional alteration than other sediments. Ancient carbonate rocks preserved on the continents are mainly deposits of shallow marine plat- forms (<30 m depth), including wide tracts of ‘knee deep’ and inter- to supratidal terrain. In areal terms 95% of modern carbonates are accumulating on deeper oceanic slopes and floors (to maximum depths as great as    4 km, below which (the lysocline) calcite is dissolved as  fast as it settles from above), but sedimentation rates are highest on the platforms.
  
Carbonate deposits that are accumulating today consist   of approximately equal proportions of calcite and arago- nite, plus minor amounts of primary dolomite. Lithified carbonates as young as mid-Tertiary age have little aragonite remaining; it has inverted to calcite. In bulk terms, calcite:dolomite ratios are about 80:1 amongst Cretaceous strata, 3:1 in rocks of Lower Palaeozoic age    and ~1:3 in the Proterozoic. However, the ratio is about    1:1 in Archaean rocks, negating any simple time trend.

2.1.1 Calcite, aragonite and dolomite mineralogy
Some important characteristics of the principal karst minerals are given in Table 2.1. In nature there is a continuous range between pure calcite or aragonite, and dolomite. These are the abundant and important carbo- nate minerals. Blends between dolomite and magnesite do not occur. Dolomite may become enriched in iron to  form ankerite (Ca2FeMg(CO3)4  but this is rare. Also rare  are pure magnesite, iron carbonate (siderite), and more than 150 other pure carbonates that have been recognized (Railsback 1999).
  In carbonate structures the CO2— anions can be con- sidered as three overlapping oxygen atoms with a small carbon atom tightly bound in their centre. In pure calcite,  the anions are in layers that alternate with layers of calcium cations (Figure 2.2). Each Ca2þ ion has six CO2— anions in octahedral co-ordination with it, building hexagonal crystals. Divalent cations smaller than Ca2þ may substitute randomly in the cation layers; larger cations such as Sr2þ can be accepted only with difficulty (Table 2.2). The basic calcite crystal forms are rhombo- hedrons, scalenohedrons, prisms, pinacoids or dipyramids (Figures 2.2 and 2.3). These may combine to create more than 2000 variations, associated with differing


Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd



Figure 2.1   A bulk compositional classification of carbonate rocks. Reproduced with permission from Leighton, M.W. and C. Pendexter, Carbonate rock types, Mem. 1, 33–61.© 1962 American Association of Petroleum Geologists.

Table 2.1   Properties of the principal karst rock minerals


Chemical
Specific

Type
Mineral
composition
gravity
Hardness
Description
Carbonates
Calcite
CaCO3
2.71
3
Trigonal subsystem; rhombohedral. Habit: massive,
scalenohedral, rhombohedral. Twinning is rare. >2000
varieties of crystals reported. Colourless or wide range     of colours. Effervesces vigorously in cold, dilute acids
Aragonite	CaCO3	2.95	3.5–4	Orthorhombic system; dipyramidal. Habit: acicular,
prismatic or tabular. Frequent twinning. Metastable polymorph of calcite. Colourless, white or yellow. Effervesces in dilute acids
Dolomite	CaMg(CO3)2	2.85	3.5–4	Hexagonal system; rhombohedral. Habit: rhombohedrons,
massive, sugary (saccharoidal) or powdery. Colourless, white or brown, usually pink tinted. Effervesces       slightly in dilute acid
Magnesite   MgCO3	3.0–3.2	3.5–5	Hexagonal system; rhombohedral. Habit: usually massive.
                                                           White, yellowish or grey. Effervesces in warm HCl Sulphates	Anhydrite    CaSO4	2.9–3.0	3–3.5	Orthorhombic system. Habit: crystals rare, usually
massive; tabular cleavage blocks. White; may be pink, brown or bluish. Slightly soluble in water
Gypsum	CaSO4–2H2O	2.32	2	Monoclinic system. Habit: needles, or fibrous or granular
or massive. Colourless, or white and silky, grey. Slightly soluble in water
Polyhalite     K2Ca2Mg(SO4)4.	2.78	3–3.5	Triclinic system. Habit: granular, fibrous or foliated.
2H2O	White, grey, pink or red. Bitter taste
Halides	Halite	NaCl	2.16	2.5	Cubic euhedral crystals. Habit: usually massive or coarsely
                                              granular. Colourless or white. Very soluble in water Sylvite	KCl	1.99	2	Cubic system. Habit: cubic and octahedral crystals or
                                              massive. Colourless or white. Very soluble in water Carnallite	KCl.MgCl2.6H2O	1.6	1	Orthorhombic system. Habit: massive or granular.
White. Bitter taste
Silica	Quartz	SiO2	2.65	7	Trigonal. Habit: prismatic crystals with rhombohedral
terminations most common; also massive or granular. Colourless, white, yellow, pink, brown or black; transparent
Opal	SiO2	2–2.25	5.5–6	Crystallites. Habit: random structure ranging from near
amorphous to low cristobalite. Many different colours  due to trace elements; transparent or opaque





Figure 2.2    Unit cell configurations of calcite, dolomite, gypsum and halite. Unit cell refers to the basic building block, e.g one Ca         plus one CO3  in the case of calcite or aragonite. Calcite units can be assembled in five different configurations, pinacoid, prism,     dipyramid, scalenohedron and rhombohedron. The numbers are the Miller indices, which measure the orientation of a crystal face               to the a, b, c orientation axes. Dipyramids, scalenohedrons and rhombohedrons may be found in their pure forms or in combination          with the others. Pinacoids and prisms are open-ended and so must combine with others. Combinations of these basic shapes in varying proportions create the more than 2000 different calcite crystal habits that are known.


concentrations of trace elements in the solid or foreign ions in the source solution (e.g. Huizing et al. 2003). Calcite may also be massive.
  In aragonite the Ca and O atoms form unit cells     in cubic co-ordination, building orthorhombic crystal
Table 2.2   Crystal cationic radii (a˚ngstro¨ms)
Ba2þ 1.34 Fit into orthorhombic structures Kþ 	1.33
Pb2þ 	1.20

structures. These will not accept cations smaller than Ca. The most common substitute atom is Sr and U is also important. Aragonite is only metastable. In the presence     of water it may dissolve and reprecipitate as calcite, expelling most Sr and U ions. Aragonite is 8% less in volume than calcite. Inversion to calcite therefore nor- mally involves a reduction of porosity. Aragonite crystals display acicular (needle-like), prismatic or tabular habits; there is frequent twinning.
  In ideal (or stoichiometric) dolomite (Figure 2.2) equimolar layers  of  Ca2þ  and  Mg2þ  ions  alternate  reg-

Sr2þ	1.12

ularly between the CO2—

planes. The reality is more

Ca2þ	0.99
Naþ	0.97	Fit into rhombohedral structures Mn2þ	0.80
Fe2þ	0.74
Zn2þ	0.74

complex. Some Ca atoms substitute into the Mg layers and trace quantities of Zn, Fe, Mn, Na and Sr atoms may   be present in either Ca or Mg planes. Most dolomites are slightly Ca-rich so that the formula is properly written:
2þ

Mg2þ

0.66

Cað1þxÞMg 1—xÞðCO3Þ2. In addition, because Fe

is inter-

 		mediate in size it fits readily into either Ca or Mg layers.





Figure 2.3   Scanning electron microscope images of a rhombohedral calcite crystal forming on a raft of calcite floating in a pool in  Gorman Cave, Texas. Scale bars are in micrometres. (Images courtesy of Penny Taylor and Dr Henry Chafetz, Houston University.)

As a result, dolomite typically contains more iron than does calcite. This is why it often weathers to a pinkish or buff colour, Fe2þ being oxidized to Fe3þ. In the past such disordered dolomites have been termed  ‘protodolomite’ or ‘pseudodolomite’ but these  names are now out of favour. As disorder increases so does solubility.
  Dolomite may be massive or powdery or sugary crystalline (sucrose or saccharoidal) in texture. The crystals are rhombic and opaque. Staining with alizarin red is the standard means of distinguishing it from calcite (Adams et al. 1984).
  The proportions of Ca and Mg ions within a given crystal can vary between the ideal calcite and dolomite extremes, with a few per cent of Sr and Fe being substituted in as well. It follows that at the larger scale   there may be variations between adjoining crystals, or larger patches of rock. This latter scale of variation tells much about initial depositional conditions in an ancient   rock and so is carefully classified: calcite with zero weight per cent MgCO3 is pure calcite; >0 <4% is ‘low-Mg calcite’;  >4 <25%  is  ‘high-Mg   calcite’, which, like aragonite, is unstable and thus  more likely to recrystallize during diagenesis. Some  representative

bulk compositions for carbonate rocks are given in Table 2.3.
2.2 LIMESTONE COMPOSITIONS AND DEPOSITIONAL FACIES
Limestones are the most significant karst rocks. Here we consider the nature and environmental controls of their deposition. These determine much of the purity, texture,   bed thickness and other properties of the final rock.
  Some calcium carbonate can accumulate in almost every  environment  between  high  mountains  and  the  deep sea. It forms transient crusts on alpine cliffs, in arctic soils and even beneath flowing glaciers. It accu- mulates  in warmer, humid to arid, soils  and can  attain    the status of major rock units in desert and some other lacustrine basins. At sea it precipitates locally in shallow arctic waters, in temperate waters, and can accumulate        as ooze at depths as great as —4000 m in the tropical oceans. However, most that survives as consolidated older rocks was formed in shallow tropical to warm temperate  marine  environments,  especially  platforms    and ramps. Figure 2.4a shows the settings and 2.4b is



Table 2.3   Some representative limestone and dolomite percentage bulk chemical compositions


Material

Oxides
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CaO
56.0
55.2
40.6
42.6
37.2
54.5
30.4
29.7
34.0
MgO
—
0.2
4.5
7.9
8.6
1.7
21.9
20.3
19.0
Fe, Al oxides
—
—
2.5
0.5
1.6
—
—
0.2
0.2
SiO2
—
0.2
14.0
5.2
8.1
0.2
—
1.5
—
CO2
44.0
44.0
35.6
41.6
43.0
41.8
47.7
46.8
46.8
1, ideally pure limestone; 2, Holocene Coral, Bermuda; 3, average of 500 building stones; 4, average of 345 samples from Clarke 1924; 5, Hostler     Limestone (Ordovician), Pennsylvania; 6, Guilin limestones (Devonian); 7, ideally pure dolomite; 8, Niagaran dolomite, Silurian; 9, Triassic dolomite, probably hydrothermal, Budapest.



CARBONATE  PLATFORMS


rimmed shelf width 10–100km

ramp
width 10–100km


epeiric platform	width 102–104 km



isolated platform


drowned platform

width 1–100km




Deep basin

Open sea shelf

Fore slope

Reefal	Dunes cays

Open lagoon or platform

Restricted lagoon; tidal flats

Supratidal; sabkha salinas




wide belts	very narrow belts  	

wide belts



sea level
normal wave base 	

storm waves


mudstones, wackestones, shales. chalk.
   thin to thick bedded

very fossiliferous wackestones, some shale. well bedded, thin to thick

debris, breccias, mudstone packstone. bedding variable

fossiliferous framestones, grainstones. thick
to massive

beach; dune sands, grainstones. bedding irregular, medium to massive

normal marine limestone. fossiliferous mudstone to grainstone, floatstone. well bedded, medium to thick

flats, bays, channels. fossiliferous mudstone to grainstone. dolomitic. thin to
thick beds.

salt gypsum– anhydrite.
early dolomite. irregularly bedded, thin to massive eolian
calcarenite


Figure 2.4 (a) Different types of carbonate platforms. Reproduced with permission from Tucker, M.E. and Wright, V.P, Carbonate Sedimentology, Blackwell Science, Oxford © 1990 Blackwell Science. (b) A composite facies model to illustrate deposition of limestone, early dolomite and evaporite rocks on a rimmed shelf and ramp. This is a generalized, simplified picture. Not all facies will        be present in any given transect. Narrow belts range from a few metres to a few kilometres in width, whereas wide belts range from  hundreds of metres to more than 100 km. Modified with permission from Wilson, J.L. (1974) Characteristics of carbonate platforms  margins, Bulletin, 58, 810–24.© 1974 American Association of Petrologists.




an idealized, composite model that extends from supra-   tidal salt marshes through lagoons, reefs and shelves out     to the deep sea. Note that sulphate and halide rocks can   also be formed in these model environments. It is claimed that the number of distinct limestone facies is greater than facies of all other sedimentary rocks com- bined: this gives rise to innumerable subtle variations in    the hydrogeological and geomorphological properties of    the rock.
  Most of the original limestone material is aragonite or calcite precipitated by marine animals for shell and skeleton building, expelled as faeces or precipitated in the tissues of algal  plants. Some aragonite  is formed at    the sea surface by homogeneous precipitation (whitings;   see section 3.8) or on picoplankton nucleii. Rate of production by these various means can aggregate 500– 1000 g m2 yr—1  or  more  on  platforms.  Later, vadose encrustations and beach rock may be formed if the limestone is raised above sea level. Cementation and recrystallization during diagenesis add inorganic calcite spar that is relatively coarse. These principal components   of limestones are summarized in Table 2.4; see Tucker and Wright (1990) and Carozzi et al. (1996) for compre- hensive details.
  Carbonate mud (or micrite) is the most important bulk constituent. It can compose entire beds or formations, or serve as matrix or infilling. Much originates as aragonite needles from algae, some is precipitated directly, the rest

is the finest fragmentary matter produced by abrasion, faunal burrowing, excretion, microbial reduction, etc.
  Carbonate sand is formed mainly of faecal pellets, ooliths and fragments of skeletons and shells. It may accumulate in higher energy environments  (beaches, bars, deltas) and build to sand ripples or dunes. More frequently it is dispersed within carbonate mud. Intra- clasts and lithoclasts are larger erosional fragments. The former are produced when storm waves break up the local sea bed; the latter have been transported greater distances   by longshore, delta or turbidity currents and may include large particles such as pebbles, cobbles and boulders, or  may consist of cliff or reef talus.
  Reefs make only a small volumetric contribution to the world’s limestones but they can be spectacular. They range from those having a complete framework tens to many hundreds of metres in height built of successive generations of coral or algae (framestone) to carbonate   sand, silt or mud piles containing scattered, but unlinked, corals, fragments and algal or microbial mats. Modern coral grows chiefly between 30○N and 25○S in the photic zone (upper layer of the sea where photosynthesis occurs). It grows to the sea surface and may be exposed      at low tide, e.g. on coral atolls. Growth rates are com- monly  1–7 mm yr—1  (or  1–3 kg m—2).  Algal  mats  (stro- matolites) have a greater environmental range and  can flourish in the supratidal zone. Reefs may grow continu- ously along marine platform edges. On platforms and in



Table 2.4   The principal components of limestone

Textural type	Description	Origin

Micrite	0.5–5 mm diameter lime mud and silt particles. The largest component by volume in a majority of limestones
Peloids	Faecal pellets, micro-ooliths, 30–100 mm diameter. By volume, the most important larger particles

Clay- and silt-sized original marine grains
Ooze

Ooliths	Sand-sized spherical accretions	Sand-sized or larger original marine
grains, skeletons and growths
Lumps or grapestones	Clumped peloids, ooliths
Oncolites	Algal accretionary grains up to 8 cm diameter
Skeletal	Corals, vertebrates, shell fauna, etc. Algal stems and other flora
in situ or transported. Fragments of all genera
Intraclasts	Eroded fragments of partly lithified local carbonate sediment,
e.g. beach rock
Lithoclasts	Consolidated limestone and other fragments; often allogenic Frameworks	Constructed reefs, etc., mounds, bioherms, biostromes
Vadose silt	Carbonate weathering silt	Formed during vadose exposure Pisoliths	Large ooliths or concretions, e.g. nodular caliche, cave pearls
Stalactites	Dripstones and layered accretions, caliche crusts

Sparite	Medium to large calcite crystals as cementing infill; drusy, blocky, fibrous, or rim cements. >20 mm diameter
Microspar	5–20 mm grains replacing micrite

Diagenetic cements




lagoons they may occur as fringes, as scattered, isolated mounds termed patch reefs when small, mounds, bio- herms or pinnacle reefs when large (Riding 2003). Biostromes are horizontal, tabular spreads of coral or algae. A few coral species grow as isolated individuals in deep water.
  When first laid down or built up these carbonate sediments contain large amounts of organic matter. This rapidly decomposes and is removed during lithification. Modern consolidated limestones contain ~1% of organic matter and ancient limestones average only 0.2%.
  Most initial limestone deposits will contain some insoluble mineral impurities derived from near or distant eroding terrains. Type and proportion clearly will vary with differing environments. At the least there is volcanic ash and other dust settling into deep-sea oozes where it   may supply only 0.1% by volume. At the other extreme, river clay, sand and gravel deposited in deltas and estuaries can exceed the local carbonate production rate    and so create the calcareous shales, sandstones, etc. of Figure 2.1.
2.2.1 Petrological classification of limestone
Sedimentological classifications of limestone have been based upon grain size, composition and perceived facies.     A scheme by Grabau (1913) with dominant grain size is   still widely used, especially in Europe, and guides later schemes. It recognizes calcilutites (carbonate mud- stones), calcarenites (sandstones) and calcirudites (con- glomerates). Later, others added calcisiltites. Dunham (1962) refined this principle. He first divided carbonates  into those preserving recognizable depositional texture and those where it has been destroyed. The latter are simply crystalline limestone or crystalline dolomitic limestone, etc. The former are subdivided into the organically bound and the loose sediment classes. An amplification of this scheme (Figure 2.5a) is now widely used. It recognizes nine original texture types, plus crystalline limestone. Some authors also designate the dominant particle kinds, e.g. pellet wackestone, intra- clast rudstone, etc.
  The other popular modern classification is that of Folk (1962), partly shown in Figure 2.5b. The two end-members are biolithites (framed and bound  coral  and  algal rocks) and micrite or dismicrite (pure carbonate mud or   mud disturbed by burrows). In between, other types are defined by combining different proportions of mud and later spar cement with differing kinds of original grains (allochems) having differing degrees of sorting as func- tions of the wave or current energies locally available. Where bottom currents are weak, occasional allochems are

dispersed amongst the mud matrix, which supports them. These are biomicrites, oomicrites, etc. Where currents are stronger the mud is partly or entirely winnowed from   the skeletal fragments; piled pellets or intraclasts, etc. produce grain-supported layers where the voids may be filled with clear calcite spar during diagenesis. These are biosparites, pelsparites and intrasparites; packstone, grainstone  and  rudstone  are  approximately  equivalent    in the Dunham classification but do not indicate the kind    of grains that are most important in a rock. For excellent descriptions of carbonate fabrics in thin section, illustrated by numerous colour photomicrographs, see Adams et al. (1984), Adams and Mackenzie (1998) and Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists (SEPM) Photo CD-Series 1, 2, 7, 8 (Scholle and James 1995, 1996). Figure 2.6 shows a small sample of the range of fabrics.
2.2.2 Sequence stratigraphy
As carbonate debris accumulates, platforms and ramps will subside, at rates generally estimated to be between
0.05 and 2.5 m per million years on continental passive margins. If local accumulation rates are greater, the water and depositional facies become progessively shallower upwards in any given vertical section, and vice versa. At   the global scale, longer term tectonic deformation of the ocean basins and shorter term withdrawal of seawater during ice ages ensure that sea levels must usually be rising or falling across sections such as shown  in Figure 2.4b. Flooding produces onlap of deeper water facies, whereas withdrawal produces offlap with shal- lower facies. This is the basis of sequence stratigraphy,        a modern concept widely used to interpret seismic records and reconstruct palaeoenvironments: Moore (2001) gives a comprehensive review.
  As a consequence, many limestones and dolomites display strong cyclic features. Figure 2.7 portrays three sequences that are commonly found. The lithology, hydrogeological and karstic properties may vary signifi- cantly across each cyclic accumulation. Before burial in    the next cycle, the two ending in supratidal exposure may well develop erosional surfaces with solutional features,     or calcrete hardening and a thin clay palaeosol. After burial, such surfaces often become prominent bedding planes or slightly disconformable contacts offering pre- ferential flow routes for all future marine and meteoric groundwater circulation; they are also favoured sites for erosional stripping, e.g. by glacier action. Hardground develops on the seafloor when sedimentation temporarily slows or ceases, permitting some dissolution and reprecipitation of calcite to pit and harden the top few





Figure 2.5   (a) The R. J. Dunham (1962) classification of carbonate rocks, as modified by Embry and Klovan. Reproduced with   permission from Embry, A.F. and Klovan, J.E., A Late Devonian reef tract in northeastern Banks Island, Northwest Territories. Canadian Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 19, 730–81, 1971. (b) Carbonate textural spectrum. Reproduced with permission from Folk,    R.L., Spectral subdivision of limestone types. Memoirs, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, 1, 62–84, 1962.


centimetres; this too may offer preferential flow routes for later karstification and stripping.
2.2.3 Terrestrial carbonates
As noted, some carbonate can be precipitated in almost every terrestrial environment. The most widespread types  are tufa and travertine. There is confusion in terminology here, with some authors using ‘tufa’ for all surficial deposits and restricting ‘travertine’ to cave deposits.  In

this book we use tufa for grainy deposits accreting to algal filaments, plant stems and roots at springs, along river banks, lake edges, in cave entrances, etc. Tufa is usually a sort of framestone. It is typically dull and earthy   in texture, and is highly porous once the vegetal frame rots out. In contrast, travertine is crystalline, dense calcite that is often well layered, quite lustrous and lacks  framing  plant  content.  That  formed  underground  or at hot springs is largely or entirely inorganic. Other surficial  travertines  may  be  bacterially  precipitated





Figure 2.6   Thin sections of characteristic limestones and a dolomite. (Top left) Mudstone (Dunham 1962) or micrite (Folk 1962) coarsening upwards to microbioclastic wackestone (Dunham) or biomicrite (Folk). Ordovician, Quebec. Width (of photograph) 1 cm.      (Top right) Fossiliferous packstone (Dunham) or fossiliferous micrite (Folk) composed of foraminifers (large fossils), pelmatozoans          and bryozoans. Lower Cretaceous, United Arab Emirates. Width 1.5 cm. (Middle left) Oolitic grainstone (Dunham) or oosparite (Folk). Jurassic, Louisiana. Width 0.8 cm. (Middle right) Bryozoan floatstone (Embry and Klovan 1971); irregular cavities are borings   filled with a second generation of geopetal mud and calcite spar. Middle Ordovician, Quebec. Width 1.5 cm. (Lower Left) Coral   boundstone (Dunham), framestone (Embry and Klovan) or biolithite (Folk). Note that the large fossils are in stylolitic (pressure solution) contact. Width ~2 cm. (Lower Right) Dolomite composed of euhedral zoned crystals almost completely replacing limestone. Miocene, South Australia. Width 5.2 mm. (From photographs and descriptions kindly supplied by Professor N.P. James, Queen’s University, Canada.)





Figure 2.7   Conceptual models of common shoaling upwards sequences. Reproduced from Moore, C.H. 2001. Carbonate reservoirs: porosity, evolution and diagenesis in a sequence stratigraphic framework, Developments in Sedimentology 55. Amsterdam, p 444,
© 2001 Elsevier.


(Chafetz and Folk 1984) and are usually mixed with tufas. These deposits may accumulate to tens or hundreds   of metres in thickness and cover many square kilometres    in area. See the Association Francaise de Karstologie (1981), Pentecost (1995), Ford and Pedley (1996) for comprehensive reviews, and Chapters 8 and 9 for further details.
  Calcium carbonate is deposited in some freshwater lakes and in hypersaline water bodies such as the Dead    Sea. Freshwater deposits include laminated micrites with     a high silicate mud content, termed marls. They are common in temperate regions but rarely accumulate to great thicknesses. At Great Salt Lake, Lake Chad and many smaller salt lakes, carbonate sands form locally around the shores and out to approximately 3 m depth, where they are replaced by sulphates and halides. Algal  mats are well developed on the carbonates. In the Dead    Sea both gypsum and aragonite are precipitated at the water surface. The gypsum is immediately replaced by calcite which settles with the aragonite to accumulate as micrite.
2.3 LIMESTONE DIAGENESIS
AND THE FORMATION OF DOLOMITE
Limestone deposits begin as unconsolidated muddy sedi- ments with a porosity of 40–80%, that are ‘bathed in their

embryonic fluids’ (James and Choquette 1984). Diagen- esis describes their alteration to consolidated rocks with a porosity rarely more than 15% and usually less than 5%.  The principal processes are compaction, dissolution, microbial micritization, calcite cementation, crystal replacement (neomorphism) and dolomitization. The diagenetic environment may remain the shallow to deep submarine site of deposition, or it may become vadose or phreatic with meteoric water as a consequence of offlap, uplift, etc. It can be deep subsurface because of burial by later sediments, or tectonic or hydrothermal or thermal metamorphic (Figure 2.8). In many examples several of these environments succeed one another. All introduce somewhat different rock fabrics or other features, so that there is a great deal of variation in consolidated limestone (Figure 2.9). Early alteration in shallow environments is eogenesis; mesogenesis occurs if there is deep burial, tectonic deformation, etc; telogenesis may then follow as cover strata are eroded away and the deeply buried carbonate becomes exposed to a new cycle of meteoric, karstic groundwater circulation, perhaps the first it has experienced. Scholle et al. (1983) and Purser et al. (1994) give comprehensive reviews.
  Submarine diagenesis is slow and imperfect. There is compaction if shallow overburden is added, and some aragonite and calcite spar is precipitated into voids as seawater is expelled. Chalk is an extreme example of a





Figure 2.8   Major environments of diagenesis, calcium carbonate cementation and dolomitization. Reproduced from Moore,
C.H. 2001. Carbonate reservoirs: porosity, evolution and diagenesis in a sequence stratigraphic framework, Developments in Sedimentology 55. Amsterdam, p 444, © 2001 Elsevier.

limestone  from  this  environment,  having  undergone minimal diagenesis because it escaped exposure to the more  acidic  meteoric  waters  and  was  never  deeply buried. The chalks of northwest Europe retain a porosity often >40% and a density of only 1.5–2.0. Cementation may be weak. Freshwater marls are similar when drained. Diagenesis in the subaerial and meteoric groundwater environment can be rapid (typically ten times faster  than marine) and extensive. More than half of all ancient lime- stones experienced one or more such episodes. When sea level falls meteoric water invades the marine sediment and depresses the saltwater interface in the proportion, 40:1 (see section 5.8). The limestone deposit, which was stable in a seawater chemical environment, is now exposed to circulat- ing fresh waters and all degrees of mixture, fresh:salt, as the salt solution is progressively expelled. There is now much dissolution, including the removal of most aragonite. It is replaced by calcite spar cements (Table 2.4). Slow dissolu- tion and reprecipitation (crystal cell  by cell) is fabric selective, preserving aragonite skeletal fossils, etc. as calcite

‘ghosts’; this is replacement. Rapid dissolution obliterates the fossil and substitutes a new, coarser crystalline spar. In the vadose zone new lenticular voids  may  be  created  at bedding  planes  and  filled  with  vadose silt; they appear rather like stromatolite biolithites and are termed stroma- tactic. If there is strong evaporation (e.g. a semi-arid coast) pisolites, travertine nodules and crusts (caliche or calcrete) replace  the  uppermost  limestone: Alsharhan and Kendall (2003) provide a comprehensive review of them, and see Chapter 9. San Salvador Island, Bahamas, is a spectacular example of rapid eogenesis: carbonate sand dunes blown up during the last interglacial stage (only 120 000–130 000 year ago) are  now firmly cemented aeolianites that host sub- stantial karst features and caves (Mylroie and Carew 2000).
2.3.1 The formation of dolomite
Dolomite is almost as abundant as limestone. Its forma-   tion has been and remains a subject of intense study (see review by Warren 2000). The solute Mg2þ ion is strongly







Figure 2.9   Some representative limestones and dolomites in outcrop. (Top) Thick bedded platformal micritic limestone with regular  tension joint systems. (Bottom left) Stylobedded platy limestones dissected by kluftkarren that follow tension joints. (Bottom centre)     Cyclic alternation of thick and thin beds typical of shallow platform sequences. Rocks in this photograph are fully dolomitized, as    suggested by the high frequency of vugs. (Bottom right) A dolomite solution breccia created by the preferential dissolution of gypsum         in a sabkha sequence of dolomite and gypsum beds. It is now a firmly recemented, resistant rock.





Figure 2.10   Dolomitization models, illustrating the depth to which the process may operate in different circumstances. r ¼ density           of salt waters.

hydrated, its electrostatic bond with H2O molecules being 20% stronger than that of Ca2þ. This bond is an energy barrier that must be broken for the ion to adsorb into a crystal lattice. Where there is a high Mg:Ca ratio and abundant (CO3)2 in the solution this can occur. Standard seawater approaches these conditions because high-Mg calcite can be precipitated, but it does not attain them. That can occur in surficial waters subject to evaporation   and some loss of Ca2þ  ions to calcite or gypsum forma-  tion, permitting primary dolomite to be precipitated (e.g.
in saline lakes – Last 1990). However, it is accepted that most dolomite forms by replacing earlier calcite and aragonite, i.e. it is a secondary precipitate.
  The principal modern models for secondary dolomiti- zation are shown in Figure 2.10. In reflux models, sea-  water is first concentrated to hypersaline levels (and greater density) by evaporation in lagoons and then fluxes through lagoonal, reefal or supratidal lime sediments, exchanging ions with them. The dolomite is eogenetic, formed very early in diagenesis. These models explain

the frequent association of dolomite with gypsum beds in sabkha facies.
  Mixing models portray mixing of fresh and salt waters    to produce conditions where calcite is soluble but dolo-   mite is not and where Mg:Ca ratio requirements are met. Hanshaw and Back (1979) hypothesized that regional- scale dolomitization is occurring today in the mixing zone that underlies much of Florida.
  It is disputed whether burial and compaction can achieve regional dolomitization in mesogenetic settings via the expulsion of basinal fluids. It may explain the preferential dolomitization of individual, more perme- able, beds. Geothermal heat may play an important role, establishing upward fluxes of Mg-rich connate waters in young but deep carbonate banks such as the Bahamas (i.e. eogenetic settings; Wilson et al. 2001). Morrow (1998) proposed that it can also establish cellular convection systems in carbonates that are deeply buried by imperme- able clastics (i.e. in mesogenetic settings), concentrating   and recycling connate fluids over distances of tens to




hundreds of kilometres. Some dolomite is undoubtedly of hydrothermal origin because it is seen to be localized along fractures or around solutional pipes which hot waters have ascended: a Ca:Mg molar ratio as high as 10:1 will yield dolomite at 300○C. In many instances it is apparent that a rock has been subject to two or more sequential episodes of dolomitization (e.g. see Ghazban      et al. 1992b).
  It is important to understand that as a consequence of these various modes of dolomitic replacement, the scale, extent and patterns of dolomitization within limestone masses can be highly variable. Because consolidated dolomite is normally less soluble than limestone, the effects upon local and regional groundwater circulation and karst morphogenesis can be profound.
2.3.2 Dolomite composition
Dolomicrite has grains <10 mm in diameter and is believed to be early replacement of aragonite. Much more abundant is medium crystalline or sucrosic dolo- mite, 10–20 to 100 mm in diameter. This is the standard dolomite. White, sparry crystalline-to-megacrystalline (centimetres in diameter) dolomite is often found in association with lead–zinc deposits and other situations where several episodes of dolomitization are possible.
  Where dolomitization is complete but proceeded slowly ghosts of fossils and other allochems or frame- work may be well preserved. Older English-language classifications  (pre-1960)  define  ‘primary  dolomite’  as that preserving some original depositional texture. In ‘secondary  dolomite’  this  is  entirely  destroyed   (e.g. Figure 2.9). The other category recognized was ‘hydro- thermal dolomite’, broadly equivalent to the  modern ‘white sparry dolomite’ which, however, is  not always hydrothermal in origin.
  As dolomitization of limestone proceeds through the range 5–75% there is, in general, progressive reduction in porosity due to infilling. Thereafter, porosity increases again because the dolomite rhombs are smaller than the calcite crystals they have now largely or entirely replaced. There is an increase in large vug porosity. The high initial and early diagenetic porosity of reef rocks (attributable to their framework) makes them pre- ferred sites of dolomitization – which again enhances their porosity. This is why buried reefs are prime targets     in petroleum exploration.
2.3.3 Dedolomitization
Dolomitization can be thrown into reverse during diag- enesis  if calcium  ion in solution  should be  greatly

enriched. The solution may then be supersaturated with CaCO3 but undersaturated with respect to MgCO3. The dolomite dissolves and crystalline calcite (pseudo- morphic or new) precipitates in its place. The process creates beds or patches of etched, crumbly rock. It requires maintenance of a particular and rather delicate hydrochemical balance (see Ayora et al. 1998; and the discussion of incongruent dissolution in section 3.5). As       a consequence, dedolomite is rare; it is most often found     in association with large vugs in small reefs.
2.3.4 Breccias
Solution breccias are common and widespread through-    out the geological record. The brecciation may occur entirely within limestone or dolomite or where evaporite rocks  are  removed  in  evaporite–carbonate  sequences.   It occurs during eogenesis when evaporites are dissolved    in supratidal carbonate sequences or where caves in case-hardened carbonate sand dunes collapse. It is com-  mon during deep burial, caused by the expulsion of connate waters or by invading thermal waters, and may extend to depths of 5 km or more. It is also common in telogenetic settings, where modern meteoric waters are known to be brecciating carbonate rocks at depths as great as 2 km.
Three principal fabrics are recognized (Stanton 1966).

1. Crackle breccia, where beds sag apart and crack upon dissolutional removal of support but there is little displacement.
2. Pack breccia, where large fragments (clasts) support   each other in a pile. The clasts have usually dropped   and vary from partly rotated to completely disorga- nized (chaotic brecciation) in orientation. Globally, clast sizes range from small pebbles to ‘cyclopean breccias’ with individual blocks of ~102 m3, but are normally more limited within any given breccia.
3. float breccia, where the larger fragments are sepa- rated from each other and ‘float’ in a matrix of fines.

  A genetic association of these fabrics is often found, consisting of crackle breccias at the top and around the perimeter of a body, pack breccia within it where beds are thicker, and float breccias at the base or where beds are   thin. In some Mississippi Valley Type (MVT) lead–zinc deposits, these may be underlain by a basal trash zone of insoluble residua (Sangster 1988; Dz˙ulynski and Sass- Gutkiewicz 1989; and Figure 7.29a). Older breccias of all types normally display partial or complete cementation, usually with calcite or dolomite spar: in Mallorca there is   an outcrop of firmly cemented chaotic breccia that is as




much as 50 km in width. Solution breccias are discussed further in Chapters 7 and 9.
  Mechanical breccias are also found in carbonate rocks, where they accumulated as submarine foreslope, reef-foot talus or landslide deposits, or as subaerial screes. There is usually interstitial cement. Some chaotic breccias in the Yucata´n Peninsula of Mexico and neighbouring Belize may be ejecta from the celebrated Chicxulub impact crater.
2.3.5 Stylolites
Stylolites are pressure solution seams. They are a strik-     ing feature of many well-bedded limestones and dolo- mites. They can develop in all diagenetic environments     but are most common where there is burial deeper than    500 m, with the associated high overburden pressures. Most are bedding-parallel and can give rise to pseudo- bedding, but transverse seams are also quite common. The carbonate dissolves at highest pressure  points. These may be at the bottom and top, respectively, of adjoining crystals, fossils, or larger masses. The results     are highly irregular, serrated dissolution seams with relief ranging from a few millimetres in homogeneous mudstones to many centimetres or more in heteroge- neous rocks such as grainstones and framestones (Andrews and Railsback 1997). They stand out in exposures because they are darkened by residual inso- luble minerals and organic matter concentrated along them (Figure 2.6; and see Moore 2001, p. 301). As much    as 40% of the compacted mass of some carbonates may  have been destroyed at the stylolite seams. The dis- solved and expelled material may then be reprecipitated      as cement elsewhere.
  The insoluble residues reduce effective permeability at many stylolites but others may break open upon pressure release to offer preferred flow paths, increasing the effective fissure frequency. They account for much karren-scale roughness on many limestone and dolomite surfaces (Figure 2.8). In clayey limestones they contri- bute to nodular weathering habits. The residues are recessive in surface exposures but may protrude as thin ledges in solution cave passages.
2.3.6 Chert
Some silica will accumulate in many lime sediments, from transported quartz or from siliceous sponges, radi- olaria and diatoms. If very alkaline conditions arise during  diagenesis  this  is  dissolved.  It  is  reprecipitated  as accretionary nodules or lenses of chert (flint). These usually accumulate along bedding planes where they may

coalesce to form continuous sheets. Nodules as great as       1 m in diameter are known. Sheets are rarely thicker than
~10 cm and are normally perforated or fractured so that  fluid flow across them is rarely prohibited entirely. However, it may be locally obstructed, perching or impounding the water. It also forms resistant caps in subaerial karst. Chert tends to be more abundant in the older limestones and dolomites.
2.3.7 Marble and other metacarbonates
Marble is produced when limestones or dolomites are metamorphosed by pressure and heat: pressure regimes are mostly in the range 1–10 kbar and temperatures are generally between 200 and 1000○C. The lowest grades of metamorphism are associated with deep but not hot diagenesis (<350○C), where the smaller grains plus outer surfaces of larger ones become annealed. They recrystallize as spar upon cooling. Fossil form, lithologi-   cal texture, etc. are quite well preserved. In the next grade (greenschist facies, ~350–500○C), partial melt or repla- cement (metasomatism) of crystals is nearly complete and the new grains may be reoriented (foliated) to accord    to the ambient pressure field, destroying most fossils and sealing bedding planes. This produces hard, dense, sac- charoidal crystalline rock of rather even grain size, i.e. ideal sculptors’ marble. Grains are irregular in form with sinuous or zigzag surfaces. At >400○C dolomite may be converted to periclase marble when part of the CO2 is driven off, leaving CaCO3 with periclase (MgO) embedded in it as insoluble octahedra. In carbonates with abundant silica (e.g. chert) and other impurities, reactions produce wollastonite (CaSiO3, seen as big, lustrous white and insoluble crystals in many marbles), chlorites    (Mg,    Fe,Al)6(OH)6(Si,Al)4,O10),    garnets  such as grossular (Ca3Al2Si3O12), and talc (Mg6(Si8O20) (OH4)). Marble has very low porosity and often there is negligible permeability so that it is difficult for karst waters to penetrate. But where this is possible it tends to give the sharpest,  cleanest dissolutional morphology, as     in the very spectacular Ultima Esperanza karsts of Pata- gonia (see section 9.2; and Maire 1999).
  The highest metamorphic grades, amphibolite (~500– 700○C) and granulite (>700○C) facies, are usually associated with invasion of magmatic fluids from adjoin-  ing igneous intrusions, which leach the carbonates and reconstitute them as schistose or gneissic mixtures (skarn) of lower solubility that are unsuitable for karst.  There are always exceptions, however. In the Rudohorie Mountains of Slovakia, Mg-rich solutions from regional metamorphism produced lenticular bodies of magnesite (MgCO3) within dolomites; individual masses are up to




hundreds of metres in size and contain small caves (Zenis and Gaal 1986). Similar features are found in granulitic metacarbonates within a few metres of granite stocks on    the west shore of Lake Baikal, and in western Tasmania.    In the Carlin Trend of Nevada the leachates are reprecipi- tated as gold-bearing calcite veins, dikes and solution breccia fillings. It is rare for high-grade metamorphism to extend more than ~500 m or so from an igneous intrusion.

2.3.8 Carbonatites
Carbonatites are peralkaline igneous rocks composed of  60% to >90% carbonate minerals, principally calcite. They are normally intrusive, associated with pyroxenites  and amphibolites, but eruptive tuffs and lapilli are known. They are rare ( 1% of igneous rocks in outcrop) but more than 350 examples are now described, ranging from
~1.0 to 20 km2  in area (Bell 1989). They tend to be
enriched in rare earths and base metals, suggesting that   their sources are partial melts from the upper mantle.
  Karst features develop well on high-calcite carbona- tites. Sandvik and Erdosh (1977) describe a carbonatite intrusion containing up to 17% apatite (Ca5(F,Cl,OH)3 PO4), where the phosphate has been concentrated as a weathering residuum in large sinkholes in the calcitic rock.
2.3.9 Conglomerates
Conglomerates are debris mounds or fans of pebble-, cobble- and/or boulder-sized clasts that have been rounded or partly rounded during transport by flowing water, waves or glaciers. The interstices may be filled with clay or other fines, and they may be cemented by calcite or silica. Conglomerates composed of limestone or dolomite clasts are common features in carbonate regions, where  they usually originated  as submarine delta dumps  from steep  mountains fronts,  or  detrital fans into lowland basins that later became submerged. Where the clasts are largely or entirely carbonate and the cement is calcite, they may function like other pure carbonate rocks. An example is the Dolomitic Conglom- erate of the Mendip Hills, England: the clasts (up to boulder size) are from platform limestones of Lower Carboniferous age that were eroded from steep desert scarps during Permian times and swept down canyons to accumulate as fanglomerates that then became sub- merged. In tourist caves such as Wookey Hole solutional forms in the passage walls can be seen to pass smoothly from the undisturbed Carboniferous Limestone to the Permian conglomerate. In the Italian Fore-Alps the Mon- tello Fan is a spectacular limestone conglomerate nearly

2000 m thick that was formed during the Miocene ‘Mes- sinian Crisis’ when the Mediterranean Sea dried up (see below). Although its pebbles are small, it has quite a high clay content in the matrix and cementation is not as firm     as in the diagenetically more mature case of the Mendip Hills; nevertheless, it supports a densely packed doline karst draining into well-formed caves (Ferrarese et al. 1997).
2.4 THE EVAPORITE ROCKS
Evaporite rocks are or have been present beneath ~25%      of the continental surfaces (Figure 1.3). They are much    less common in outcrop than the carbonates but extensive gypsum karsts occur in parts of China, Ukraine and the USA, and there are smaller examples in many other countries. Salt karst landscapes are limited to small patches in deserts. Interstratal solution of these rocks (with or without some surface expression) is widespread   and very important (see overview by Klimchouk et al. 1996).
  The rocks are formed by homogeneous or heteroge- neous precipitation in marine, lake or ponded waters that have been concentrated by partial evaporation, or as residues left by complete evaporation. Seawater is quan- titatively the most important source: restricted lagoons, plus sub-, inter- and supratidal salt flats (known collec- tively by the Arabic term sabkha (Figure 2.4b)) are the   chief depositional environments. Figure 2.11 shows a good example of mingled limestone, dolomite, gypsum and anhydrite stratigraphical sequences from Canada. Playa lakes and interdune pondings in arid and semi- arid environments are regionally important, and there are substantial gypsum and salt deposits in such compara- tively humid regions as the Ebro Valley of Spain (e.g. Sanchez et al. 1998).
  Figure 2.12a shows the evaporative concentrations required to induce precipitation of gypsum, anhydrite and salt. A brine is any water with total dissolved solids equal to or greater than those in  standard  seawater (~33 000 parts per million (ppm) of water). Figure 2.12b     is a comprehensive summary of the variety of brines, precipitates and evaporites that may evolve,  relating them to differing solute chemical concentrations in the water at the start of the processes. Calcite can precipitate from standard seawater when it is warmed (whitings noted above) and dolomite when there is only slight evaporative concentration. Gypsum precipitates at about three times seawater strength and salt at eleven times strength; gypsum is thus the more widespread evaporite deposit because lagoonal, sub- and intertidal waters are generally renewed before there can be much deposition





Figure 2.11    Schematic section through the Presqu’ile Reef at Pine Point, Northwest Territories, Canada, to illustrate lateral and      vertical facies changes in limestone, dolomite, gypsum and anhydrite formations. The rocks are of Middle Devonian age. They display palaeokarst cavities which are believed to be younger, and which contain sulphide deposits of zinc/lead ore grade. During the Quaternary sinkholes were rejuvenated; glacial deposits from the last ice advance (Wisconsinan) are intruded through the section.    Devonian section is generalized from the work of Rhodes et al. (1984).

of salt. The other evaporative minerals such as poly- halite, sylvite and carnallite (Table 2.1) tend to be thin        or peripheral accumulations and thus are of little karst significance. In contrast to the carbonates, all of these rocks are wholly inorganic in origin and composition (Alsop et al. 1996; Sarg 2001).
  Evaporative concentration and precipitation are power-  ful processes that produce rapid results. Table 2.5 gives general estimates of accumulation rates for the principal clastic, carbonate and evaporite sedimentary facies, showing gypsum and salt building up at least ten times  faster than the others. Thicknesses may quickly come to exceed 1000 m. In the ‘Messinian Salinity Crisis’ of the late Miocene (~5.5 a) the tectonic collision between North Africa and Spain temporarily closed off the Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic; many geologists believe that it nearly dried, depositing 1000–2000 m of shallow marine gypsum and salt at ~2000 m below modern sea level within a timespan that was probably less than 500 000 yr. The Dead Sea (surface at —400 m   and floor at —730 m below sea level) is the deepest saline closed basin today; calcite and gypsum are precipitating      at its surface and salt on the floor.
2.4.1 
Gypsum and anhydrite
Gypsum (Table 2.1) is the mineral normally first pre- cipitated. Primary anhydrite is rare. When buried beneath 200–300 m or more of overburden most gypsum is con- verted to anhydrite as the rock is dehydrated, although some  is  reported  to  survive  to  depths  of  3000 m.  If  the overburden  is then stripped by erosion, rehydration  to gypsum normally takes place. Most gypsum that is exposed in karst has been through the cycle of dehydra-   tion and rehydration in differing temperature and pressure environments. As a consequence, there is a wide range of petrological and lithological forms; original depositional environments may be difficult to discern.
  Minor gypsum occurs as isolated crystals or clusters of crystals in some carbonate rocks. It appears as rare to frequent interbeds in sequences of medium- to thin- bedded series containing dolomite, clay or shale inter- beds. Where it is interbedded it is common to see dikes, diapirs and other intrusions of gypsum penetrating the other rocks.
  Major gypsum deposits occur as coarsely crystalline (equant, curved, acicular, prismatic or columnar forms) to



Figure 2.12 (a) The sequence of precipitation of salts when seawater is evaporated, showing the relationship to temperature. (b) The relationships between inflow chemistry, types of brines and evaporate precipitates found in lakes in continental closed basins. Reproduced from Eugster, H.P. and Hardie, L.A. 1978. Saline Lakes. in Lerman, A. (ed.) Lakes – chemistry, geology,and physics.        New York, 237–93 © Springer Verlag 1978.




Table 2.5 Comparison of the various depositional rates in some sedimentary settings (Reproduced from Warren, J.K. (1989) Evaporite Sedimentology, Prentice Hall. New Jersey, 285 pp.)

Depositional rate
Sediment type                                                  (m Myr—1)
Deep-sea clay	1
Deep-sea carbonate ooze	1
Shelf carbonate and mud (non-reef)	10–30
High-productivity clastic slope	40
Deep-sea turbidite	100–1000
High-productivity marine diatomite	400–1000
Shallow-water reefal limestone                      1000–3000
Sabkha (supratidal) evaporate	1 m thick section progrades 1 km
1000 yr—1
Subaqueous gypsum                                       10 000–40 000
Subaqueous halite                                           10 000–100 000
Diapir growth (Zagros Mountains, Iran)         150 000–200 000

granular or amorphous, massive beds of the pure mineral, usually  translucent  (selenite),  opaque  white  (alabaster)   or tinged in shades of brown, grey, yellow or pink. Individual beds 10–40 m thick are known. Sequences of them may exceed 200 m. These are rarer than the thinner, interbedded sequences but support most of the prominent surficial gypsum karsts.
  Dehydration of gypsum to anhydrite occurs at pres- sures of 18–75 10—5 Pa and results in a volume reduction of approximately 38% (Warren 1989). In the field, anhydrite contains little measurable porosity, and joints and bedding planes are annealed. Flow as diapirs may occur. Overlying strata (e.g. dolomite) are often brec- ciated as a result of this sulphate volume reduction and compaction.
  Hydration of anhydrite has been reported as deep as 2000 m (in Texas), but most of it probably occurs within  100 m of the surface and much within the topmost few tens of metres. Pechorkin (1986) stressed that it advances along reopening joints or new fractures, with the conse- quence that the hydration front can be highly irregular. It is common to find small patches of anhydrite surviving   in gypsum cliffs where there has been rapid exposure. Quinlan (1978) argued that hydration involves dissolu- tion with immediate reprecipitation. It generates a pres-   sure of ~20 kg cm—2. Below 150–200 m this is probably dispersed in fluid flow without expansion of volume (Gorbunova 1977). Above that limit mineral volume expansion of 30% to 67% may occur, causing flow and intrusion at depth, brittle fracture towards the surface, and recreating some bulk porosity. At the surface tightly

folded (corrugated) or small-scale block-faulted topogra-  phy may appear, or blisters termed tents or teepees (section 9.13). Little or no groundwater flow occurs within anhydrite.
2.4.2 Salt
The mode of occurrence of rock salt is similar to that of gypsum. It may be disseminated in carbonates, sul- phates or shales, occur as thin interbeds, or as massive    units up to 1000 m in thickness that contain only a few anhydrite or shale beds and often have economic depos-     its of potash salts (carnallite,  sylvite,  sylvinite (KNaCl2)) at the top. Most disseminated or thin-bedded    salt is dissolved during diagenesis so that its presence is signified only by voids, breccia or disconformities in surviving rocks such as dolomite. In massive salt all joints and other openings become annealed by litho- static pressure; the rock is made quite impervious, prone     to flow and intrude to form diapirs and smaller struc- tures. The deep solution of salt can occur only where water approaches it via mechanically strong aquifer strata immediately  above or below  it and  can  sap  it at   the contact. Although little or no groundwater flow occurs within salt itself,  where  there  are  outcrops there can be significant vadose circulation and caves (see section 9.13).
2.5 QUARTZITES AND SILICEOUS SANDSTONES
Silica sands and pebbles cemented by silica (siliceous sandstones, conglomerates) and their metamorphosed equivalents, quartzites, can develop dissolutional karst landforms at small and intermediate scales (Mainguet 1972) because, like the carbonates and evaporites, they are monominerallic in composition or nearly so. The range of forms and hydrogeological behaviour is more limited, however. In the mineral habit of quartz, the solubility of silica is very low in meteoric waters; but quartzite strongly  resists  most  other  forms  of  weathering  attack  as well. Amorphous silica (which forms many sandstone cements) is more soluble. Solubility of all forms of silica greatly increases in water above 50○C (section 3.4).
  Some measure of karst development will be found along most escarpment crests and cuestas in quartzites because groundwater hydraulic gradients are steep, per- mitting rapid water flow and effective flushing of residua. Massive Precambrian quartzite scarplands of the Roraima Formation in Brazil and Venezuela are perhaps the great-  est example, with corridors and deep shafts drained by caves that may be several kilometres in length (see




section 9.14; and e.g. Galan 1995, Correa Neto 2000). Lesser instances, plus pinnacle karsts, are found on quartzites and siliceous sandstones in many other places,
e.g. Montserrat, Spain. Limited but attractive karren (chiefly pit, pan and runnel forms – see section 9.2) are even more common. There are three principal require- ments for substantial development of solution features:
(i) high mineral purity, so that initial surficial pits or underground dissolution channels do not become filled or blocked by grains of the insoluble aluminosilicates, etc.    that are present in a majority of sandstones; (ii) thick to massive bedding with a few penetrable planes intersected   by strong but widely spaced fracturing; and (iii) absence     of strongly competing geomorphological processes such     as frost shattering or wave attack. The absence of effective competition permits the comparatively slowly developing solution landforms to become dominant.
2.6 EFFECTS OF LITHOLOGICAL       PROPERTIES UPON KARST DEVELOPMENT
The remainder of this chapter considers factors of ‘rock control’ on karst hydrogeology and morphogenesis. Karst specialists are concerned with a narrower range of rock  types than most other hydrogeologists and geomorphol- ogists, so it is somewhat ironic that they find it necessary    to investigate local rock properties in more detail in a majority of field studies. The need is real; petrological, lithological and structural features greatly influence all aspects of karst genesis. Here we outline some main points. Necessarily, others are illustrated throughout all later chapters of the book.
  Significant properties at the scale of individual crystals are summarized above. This section notes properties that   are important at the scale of hand specimens. Later sections then consider local- and regional-scale factors.
2.6.1 Rock purity
Clay minerals and silica are the most common insoluble impurities in carbonate rocks. It is a widespread finding   that limestones with more than 20–30% clay or silt (argillaceous limestones) form little karst. In a series of computer models Annable (2003) found that medium- grained silt was very inhibitive because it clogged pro- toconduits but, treated as individual particles, finer silt and clays did not; however, at these sizes there is much agglomeration of particles, producing the medium silt effect. There are no such clear-cut relationships with respect to sand content. Large and diversified carbonate  karst assemblages do not commonly develop where silica

exceeds 20–30%, but shallow dolines and well-formed small caves are known in some calcareous sandstones.
  The best karst rocks are >70% pure carbonates. Studies of local limestone and dolomite specimens have  been made in many countries. They have established that laboratory dissolution rates in carbonated water may vary   by more than a factor of five. Fastest dissolution has been recorded where the percentage of insolubles is nil and where it was as great as 14%, although most investiga-   tions show a clear positive correlation between percen- tage CaO and dissolution rate. Pure dolomites are normally slowest to dissolve. But there is always much variation about any trend that cannot be explained by simple bulk purity. For example, in an exhaustive study      in Pennsylvania, Rauch and White (1970) found that the greatest solubility in pure carbonates occurred where MgO ¼ 1 to 3% and was present within silty streaks that increased the roughness (exposed area) of the dis- solving surfaces. This is a textural effect. James and Choquette (1984) suggest that high-Mg calcite is nor- mally the most soluble because of severe distortion of the calcite lattice, followed by aragonite, low-Mg calcite, pure calcite and dolomite, in descending order of solubility.
  In gypsum, anhydrite and salt there is normally a simpler positive correlation between purity and solubility.
2.6.2 Grain size and texture
The finer its grain size the more soluble a rock tends to be because the area of exposed grain surfaces is increased. Many studies have found that micrites or biomicrites are most soluble and that solubility decreases substantially where sparite (coarse crystals) becomes greater than 40– 50% by volume (e.g. Sweeting and Sweeting 1969; Maire 1990). In a discriminant analysis of ten different purity,  grain size, texture and porosity measures applied to cavernous limestones and dolomites in Missouri, Dreiss (1982)   found  grain  size   to  be  the  most  significant,   the finer grained rocks being more soluble. However, the finest grained limestones are sometimes less soluble      if the grains are uniform in their size and packing because surfaces are then smooth, with exposed grain areas being reduced; such rocks are termed porcellaneous or aphanitic in texture. The Porcellaneous Band is a dis- tinctive, very fine-grained micrite that obstructs cave genesis and perches passages in Gaping Ghyll Cave, England (Glover 1974). It is sandwiched between coarser biomicrites.
  The greater the heterogeneity of grain size in a speci- men, the greater is the roughness of a dissolving surface.




This increases solubility, up to a limit. Biomicrite is more soluble than pure micrite because the tiny fossil frag- ments protrude as roughnesses.
  Karren, because they are small, are strongly affected by texture. As homogeneity increases so do the number of karren types that may be hosted and also the regularity of form displayed by any particular type. No channel karren develop well on very heterogeneous rocks such as reefs      or most conglomerates. Solution scallops (round forms)    and rillenkarren (linear) require fine grain size and high homogeneity. Trittkarren, a mini-cirque form, are largely confined to aphanitic rocks. The morphology of these features is discussed in section 9.2.
2.6.3 Fabric porosity
Much of the variation in erosional behaviour of carbonate rocks is due to variation in the nature, scale and distribu- tion of voids within them. This is termed porosity. It is a subject of the greatest importance. There are now many different terms and classifications; see Moore (2001) for a modern summary.
  Sedimentologists define primary porosity as that cre- ated during deposition of the rock (i.e. created first) and secondary porosity as that produced during diagenesis. For hydrogeologists, all types of bulk rock porosity are primary. Fracture (or fissure) and channel (or conduit) porosity are considered to be secondary and tertiary respectively. We adopt this convention throughout all later chapters – see section 5.2.
  The widely adopted classification given in Figure 2.13 avoids these problems of precedence by distinguishing porosity that is related to petrofabric from that which is    not. In general it is true to write that karst hydrogeology   and geomorphology are concerned largely or entirely with large-scale, interconnected, non-fabric-selective porosity (penetrable bedding planes and fractures, dis- solutional channels and caverns of Figure 2.13) in rocks where the fabric-selective porosity is low (<15%). This is because the hydraulic pressure gradients experienced also tend to be low, insufficient to drive significant quantities    of fluids through the tiny throats separating poorly con- nected pores within the rock fabric itself. The converse is true in much petroleum exploration, which is concerned with high-pressure environments where many fractures are closed but fabric porosity is preserved. Large-scale karstic porosity is further discussed in section 5.1 and later.
  Fabric-selective porosity can be broadly important in eogenetic conditions. In diagenetically mature rocks it helps determine such features as the form, scale and distribution of solution pits and some other karren, the

distribution of many stalactites, etc. In a limestone or dolomite it tends to be positively correlated with grain size and textural heterogeneity, although there is much variation. The primary porosity of micrite is generally less than 2%, that of sparite between 5 and 10%. Dolomitization increases porosity by 5–15% in most instances. The porosity of most marble is <1%.
  Anhydrite and salt anneal readily and so have negli- gible porosity. Where gypsum is formed by hydration, high intercrystal and breccia porosity may be created.
2.6.4 Mechanical strength
At small scale the strength of a rock is a function of its interparticle bonding. Such strength can be measured in    the laboratory by compression, shear or hammer tests. At larger scale in sedimentary rocks strength is more obviously a function of the density of fissures such as joints or bedding planes. This kind of strength is not amenable to machine testing.
  Compressive strength is probably the most significant     of the laboratory measures (Table 2.6). It conveys some   idea of how a given rock bed will respond if it must bear extra load where there is no buttressing support, as at the base of a cliff or at a cave passage junction. Weaker rocks yield by platy fracture parallel to the unsupported faces. This undermines higher parts of the cliff or cave   wall, etc. and may induce more widespread  block failure (Figure 7.48). A majority of carbonate rocks are  quite strong and will support vertical cliffs and cave roofs for long periods unless they are thinly bedded and highly fissured. Some chalks and other poorly cemented, particle-supported limestones (e.g. aeolianites or oolites of Pleistocene age) are too weak to support big cliffs or caves of enterable dimensions.
  The Schmidt hammer is a field tool designed to measure the hardness of concrete on a scale of 10–100.    Its field values on natural rocks correlate quite well with compressive strength. Sample dolomitic limestones in the Caribbean area have mean Schmidt hardness, R, of 40–41 whereas limestone micrites and sparites score 34–35; there is some positive correlation with topographic rug- gedness (Day, 1983). Older crystalline limestones in the USA and Canada range from 35 to 70; Tang (2002) obtained mean values of 40–60 from the thick to massive limestones supporting the great karst towers around Guilin, China.
  Gypsum, anhydrite and salt are weak. In most instances they will support cliffs and cave roofs, but with excessive rates of block and slab breakdown due to mechanical failure.





Figure 2.13 Classification of porosity in sedimentary carbonates. Reproduced from Choquette, P.W. and Pray, L.C. (1970) Geological nomenclature and classification of porosity in sedimentary carbonates. American Association of Petroleum Geologists      Bulletin, 54, 207–50.


Table 2.6 Compressive strength of some common rocks (Modified with permission from Jennings, J.N. Karst Geomorpholog, ©1985 Blackwell Publishing)
Rock type	Uniaxial compressive strength (bars)* Limestones (excluding chalk		340–3450
and breccias)
Dolomites                                                                    620–3600
Marbles                                                                       460–3400
Anhydrite 	220–800
Shales                                                                          300–2300
Sandstones                                                                  120–2400
Basalts                                                                         800–3600
Granites                                                                     1600–3000
Quartzites                                                                  1500–6300
*Suggested terms: very weak <350; weak 350–700; strong 700–1750; very strong
>1750.




2.7 INTERBEDDED CLASTIC ROCKS
Here we consider the bulk solubility of rocks at the scale    of geological units, members and formations. Many car- bonate, sulphate and salt formations are without significant clastic interbeds for thicknesses of tens, hundreds or even several thousands of metres. These strata generally yield   the best karst development. However, the geological record contains many more examples of formations with frequent beds of clay, shale, sandstone or coal between the soluble strata. These grade to shales, etc., with limestone interbeds, etc. and the geomorphological and hydrological systems grade from wholly karstic to non-karstic.
  It is difficult to offer valid generalizations concerning karst development in the intermediate conditions. As frequency of shale increases in a formation, so does the likelihood that intervening limestones will be argillaceous and non-karstic but this is not always true. Groundwater penetration to initiate karst is often easier at the contact between limestone and shale than it is at bedding planes, joints, etc. within limestone. As a consequence small, independent or poorly connected, solution conduit systems may develop in adjoining, sandwiched limestones. The same is true of gypsum. Karren develop where the soluble rocks crop out. There may be small dolines. Collapse features are important where gypsum is interbedded.
2.8 BEDDING PLANES, JOINTS, FAULTS AND FRACTURE TRACES
Bedding planes, joints and faults are of the greatest importance because they host and guide almost all parts      of the underground solution conduit networks that distin- guish the karst system from all others. These are the planar breaks in the rock that can be significantly pene- trated and modified (by dissolution or precipitation) by circulating groundwaters, past or present. When all is said and done about properties of karst rocks it is these entities where rock is absent that determine much of the variety      of form and behaviour that occurs in the system. In hydrogeology it is customary to categorize all of them as fractures, combining to form fracture aquifers although, strictly speaking, this is only partly correct because many karstified bedding planes are primary depositional features without any mechanical fracturing. Structural engineers concerned with slope stability describe all as penetrative discontinuities.
2.8.1 Bedding planes and contacts
Bedding or parting planes in sedimentary rocks are produced by some change in sedimentation or by its

temporary interruption. The change may be minor, e.g. from one size of carbonate grain to another a little larger. Major changes are represented by large differences in grain size and, more often, by the introduction of clay by a storm or flood, etc. that leaves a paper-thin or thicker parting between the successive regular carbonate layers. Interruption is usually a brief marine emergence with some erosion and the start of meteoric diagenesis or beachrock before renewed submergence, or the formation of a hard- ground. Subparallel pseudobedding is created by current scour where carbonate shell banks are reworked by the tides, often giving rise to platiness in weathering outcrops. Many smaller subaerial unconformities in young rocks      are diminished during diagenesis because they are pre- ferred sites for mineral infilling or obliteration by stylolite pressure solution. More prominent interruptions persist as minor geological discontinuities and are widely used to subdivide layered sequences into members or lesser  units within formations. Many authors classify them as contacts. The junctions between layered sediments and mounds such as reefs in carbonate deposits are another type of contact that is often preferentially penetrated by
groundwaters.
  In hydrogeology, bedding planes are only significant if they are sufficiently open to be penetrable by water under natural pressure gradients. Only a minority of sedimen- tological planes will be in most cases. In karst geomor- phology, these planes are also the most important, but impenetrable planes that will rupture under mechanical stress (e.g. during cave-roof collapse) are also significant. Table 2.7 presents a standard classification of bed thick- ness. In karst work it defines the separation between successive bedding planes that are penetrable by water in the prevailing conditions.
  The areal extent of individual penetrable bedding planes varies considerably. Where bedding is thin to very thin, they may cover only a few square metres. Where it is medium to thick the extent is normally 103–106 m2 or much more. Truly major planes may be followed throughout a formation, sometimes for hundreds   of kilometres. As a consequence major bedding planes and contacts can be considered to  be  continuous entities when solution caves are propagating through them, whereas penetrable joints and most faults are discrete (they terminate in comparatively short dis- tances). This enhances the importance of bedding planes     in cave genesis (Ford 1971a). Lowe (2000) termed such features inception horizons.
  The penetrable plane itself can be considered to com- prise two rock surfaces in undulatory contact, with some greater interlocked prominences and depressions due to sand ripples, hardground pitting, etc. The voids are



Table 2.7   Terminology for bed thickness and joint spacing

Bed thickness (cm)	Description	Joint spacing (cm)	Description

100–1000
Very thick bedded or massive
>300
Very wide
30–100
Thick
100–300
Wide
10–30
Medium
30–100
Medium
3–10
Thin
5–30
Close
1–3
Very thin
<5
Very close
<1.0
Laminated




shallow, sinuous, irregular in outline, and partly inter- connected via throats that have openings of lesser aperture. Planes most readily exploited by groundwater include those with substantial depositional disconformi-   ties, plus planes with shale laminae or thicker partings (often with disseminated pyrite) and planes with nodules    or sheets of chert. Perhaps the most important are those    that have served as surfaces of differential slippage during tectonic events. Even if the displacement is just a few centimetres there is some slickenside striation and brecciation that enhances openings. Most steeply tilted
and all folded strata will display some measure of differential slip (Sˇebela 2003).
  It is widely recognized that the finest karst landforms require medium to massive bedding. The solutional attack is dispersed where beds are thin: they also lack the mechanical strength to sustain steep slopes and enterable caves in many instances.
  Mammoth Cave (Kentucky, USA) and Holloch (Switzerland) are amongst the most extensive limestone caves currently known. In both the great majority of conduits are guided by bedding planes. At Skocjanske Jama, a UNESCO World Heritage cavern in Slovenia, Knez (1996) recognized 62 prominent bedding planes in   the thick-to-massive limestones, but showed that just three  of them had guided initiation and development of the cave.
2.8.2 Joints and shear fractures; joint systems
Joints are simple pull-apart breaks in previously conso- lidated (or partly consolidated) rocks. In shear fractures  there is some lateral or vertical displacement but it is too small to be recognized in hand specimens (Barton and Stephansson 1990). Fracturing occurs during diagenesis, later tectonism, erosional loading and unloading. It is caused by tensional or shear forces.
  In regularly bedded rocks, most joints are oriented normal to bedding planes, but they may be inclined. In    plan view a majority will be straight. Sinuous and curvi- linear joints predominate in reefs, however, and are quite

common elsewhere. Parallel joints constitute a joint set.  Two or more sets intersecting at regular angles compose a joint system. Rectangular and 60○/120○  systems are the  most common, caused by simple tension and shear forces respectively (e.g. Figure 2.9). Arcuate sets are frequently seen in reefs and mounds. Major joints extend through several or many beds and are often termed master joints. They terminate at other master joints. Cross joints are confined to one or a few beds and terminate at master joints. Master joints in thick to massive rocks may be as  long as several hundred metres, exceptionally extending    for many kilometres: on Anticosti Island, Quebec, a master set in thick Ordovician limestones persists for 200 km, parallel to a plate-tectonic suture in the under- lying Precambrian strata.
  Table 2.7 gives the scale of joint spacing. This is broadly proportional to bed thickness but the correlation      is not precise. An individual bed may contain just one set   or system, or several systems imposed at different times. Successive beds in a sequence often display different patterns and densities.
  Joint fracture openings may be latent or tiny and impenetrable to water, or larger but filled by secondary calcite or quartz that renders them effectively imperme-  able. Most master joints exposed at the surface will be penetrable, however, plus many cross joints. Initially, the opposed joint surfaces display hackling and cusps around  the point of breakage and fan-like (plumose) striations away from it but, in karst, this fine structure is quickly destroyed by dissolution. Under lithostatic  pressure, joints are more readily closed to impenetrable dimensions than are bedding planes, reducing their significance in deeper karst situations.
  It is important to understand that some new joints are created as a karst terrain is eroding, because of pressure release as rock is removed. This is not true of bedding planes or of most faulting. Large tensional joints form parallel to steep faces, especially at the rims of plateaus      or along reef fronts. Small compressional joints form at     the bases of cliffs and cave passage walls.




  As with bedding, the best development of karst fea- tures is found where joint spacing is wide to very wide. Many caves are rectangular mazes guided rigidly by joint patterns, including Optimist’s Cave (Ukraine), a gypsum cave that is second in aggregate known length in the world (Figure 7.26).
2.8.3 Faults and fracture traces
Faults are fractures with some displacement of rock up, down and/or laterally. Where this is less than about 1 cm they may be considered to grade into shear fractures or joints. At the greatest, vertical displacement extends several kilometres while lateral displacement  may amount to 102–103 km.
  Normal faults are produced by tension and therefore a wide opening is possible (as much as a few centimetres), although it may fill with breccia, secondary calcite, etc. Reverse faults and lateral or transcurrent faults are compressional features, and so may be impenetrably tight. However, formation of breccia or slickenside grooves can open them, while displacement may bring together recessed facets to create wide spaces. Thrust or de´collement faults are low-angle reversed faults that are often particularly important because they are areally extensive (nearly vertical faults are not) and so emulate   very penetrable bedding planes in their capacity to host interconnected solution conduits. In regions of moderate tectonic activity it is common to see a thrust fault originate in one slightly slipped bedding plane, pass through a few beds as a curvilinear surface, and terminate   in a second disturbed bedding plane higher up.
  Large faults are rarely represented by a single fracture surface. Usually lesser faults feather off of them at acute angles as a consequence of the wrenching of the rock. Shear fractures are often oriented parallel or close to the feathering breaks.
  Fracture traces (or linears, lineaments) are narrow linear trends detectable on high-altitude and satellite images. Most karst landscapes  display  them  (e.g. Figure 2.14). On the ground they are zones of closely spaced high-angle faults of minor displacement, plus their feathering fractures, etc.
  The hydrogeological and speleogenetic role of faults    and fracture traces varies with their type, size, and the diagenetic record since they were formed. At one extreme they may direct the predominant flow in a groundwater basin, like a trunk river channel on the surface, or have sinkholes aligned along them. Large normal and reversed faults often have low permeability, however, due to clayey crush fillings (mylonite) or precipitated calcite in them, and thus serve as barriers.

Instead, there is higher permeability in the zone of feathering fractures. Research in many  regions  has found  that  many  major  karst  depressions  are  guided    by these and may be centred where two traces intersect. Summarizing much hydrogeological data from tunnel works in carbonate mountains,  Dublyansky  and Kiknadze (1983) showed that most water  intake occurred in the feathering zones, particularly in down- thrown blocks. In dolomite terrains drilling on fracture  traces often yields the greatest volumes of groundwater.      In many caves the fault planes themselves control local passage segments only, although the overall trend of cave development may follow the fault-trace zone. In intermediate cases cave systems extend between fault zones and beyond them, sometimes utilizing  them locally  and  at  other  places  being  barred  or  deflected   by them. Active thrust faults deforming passage cross- sections are reported in limestone caves in Belgium and  Italy (Figure 2.15; Vandycke and Quinif 1998), and diapir normal faults in salt caves near the Dead Sea
(Frumkin  1996).  Sˇustersˇic  (2000)  shows  that   cave systems and surface karst features around Postojna, Slovenia, are being torn apart (but not destroyed) by
modern movement on transcurrent faults.
  In the northwest Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico, a semi- circular band of cenotes (drowned, shaft-type sinkholes)      is believed to coincide with a ring fault of the Chicxulub multiring impact crater; it might be termed ‘astro-karst!’ (Perry et al. 1996).
2.8.4 Fracture apertures
Except where they are truly gaping, as in fresh quarry   walls, the physical nature of all these separations is complex and difficult to measure. In quantitative mod-  elling it has been standard practice to treat the hypothe-   tical fracture as a fissure with strictly parallel walls spaced a fixed distance apart. In reality this will never   apply except, possibly, along joints in the shallowest karst. For hydrogeological purposes it is better to think       of the water passing from more widely open areas with highly irregular shapes to others down the hydraulic gradient via constrictions (throats). Effective throat apertures appear to be log-normally distributed (e.g. Chernyshev 1983). By  measuring  the  particulate organic matter reaching stalactites and stalagmites via       the finest cracks in cave roofs worldwide, van Beynen        et al. (2001) show that throat apertures in their tiny feedwater channels can  never be less than ~0.1 mm. The minima for effective dissolutional karst genesis probably exceeds 10 mm. Most modelling  assumes values  of  100 mm  or  greater.  Hanna  and  Rajaram





Figure 2.14   Recognition of lineaments in karst terrain. (Left) Aerial photograph of labyrinth-cone karst in Genung Sewu, Indonesia.  (Right) Lineaments detected in the photograph. Reproduced from Haryono, E. and Day, M. (2004) Landform differentiation within            the Gunung Kidul kegelkarst, Java, Indonesia. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 66(2), 62–9.


Figure 2.15    A phreatic (below water table) dissolutional conduit in Grotta del Frassino, Lombardy, Italy, that has been offset by       modern slip (normal faulting) in the bedding plane in which it was initiated. (Photograph courtesy of Dr Yves Quinif.)





Figure 2.16    Computer modelling of the dissolutional enlargement of a fissure with an aperture that varies in a random manner. (Top      left) Standard deviation of the aperture about a mean width of 400 mm is only 10%. Deviation increases to 50% (top right), 100%      (bottom left) and 150% (bottom right). The upper pair of patterns are fair representations of typical dissolution in joints and faults, the   lower of dissolution in bedding planes; see section 7.2 for more details. Reproduced from Hanna, R.B. and Rajaram, H. (1998) Influence of aperture variability on dissolutional growth of fissures in karst formations. Water Resources Research, 34(1), 2843–53.


(1998) have obtained particularly significant computer results by randomly discretizing the apertures occurring      in model fissures; a standard deviation of ~50% about       the   mean   aperture   yielded   realistic   approximations   of dissolutionally enlarged joint cavities, while devia- tions of 100% or greater better represented conduit development in bedding and low-angle thrust planes (Figure 2.16).
2.8.5 Geomorphological rock mass strength classification
Taking into consideration factors of rock composition, texture and compressive strength, and the frequency of penetrable bedding planes, joints and faults, the Geomorphological  Rock  Mass  Strength  Classification  and Rating as proposed by Selby (1980) is a useful guide to the strength of karstifiable rocks at the scale of    the principal karst landforms, i.e. cave systems, dolines, karren fields, residual hills and towers. The classifica- tion is intended to rate the strength of hillslope masses. However, it is developed from mining engineering applications  (Beniawski,  1976;  Brady  and  Brown,

1985); thus it is also  pertinent  to  the  stability  of cave roofs, the likelihood of catastrophic sinkhole collapse, etc.
  The Selby classification is presented in a slightly modified form in Table 2.8. It has not been applied widely in karst terrains as yet. Most that display well- developed landforms seem likely to range across the middle categories, Strong–Weak. Moon (1985), applying the classification to hillslopes of quartzite or shale in South Africa, considered that it should contain a further parameter for the roughness of fissures of all kinds (bedding planes, joints, faults). This is a particularly complex parameter in karst because the roughness (inter- locking) on the fissure planes becomes progressively reduced by dissolution. In many regions, limestone and dolomite dip slopes are preferred sites for large landslides because of this factor (section 12.4).
2.9 FOLD TOPOGRAPHY
The world’s karst terrains encompass every type of larger geological structure. These include plains and plateaus with horizontal or subhorizontal strata, steep and gentle



Table 2.8   Geomorphological rock mass strength classification and ratings (r ¼ rating of parameter) (Adapted from Selby, M.J, ‘A   rock mass strength classification for geomorphic purposes: with tests from Antarctica and New Zealand’, Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 24, 31–51.© 1980 © E. Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers



Parameter
1
Very strong
2
Strong
3
Moderate
4
Weak
5
Very weak
Intact rock strength
100–60
60–50
50–40
40–35
35–10
(N-type Schmidt
r: 20
r: 18
r: 14
r: 10
r: 5
Hammer ‘R’)





Weathering
Unweathered
Slightly
Moderately
Highly
Completely


weathered
weathered
weathered
weathered

r: 10
r: 9
r:7
r: 5
r: 3
Spacing of fissures
>3 m
3–1 m
1–0.3 m
300–50 mm
<50 mm

r: 30
r: 28
r: 21
r: 15
r: 8
Fissure orientations
Very favourable.
Favourable.
Fair. Horizontal
Unfavourable.
Very unfavourable.

Steep dips into
Moderate
dips or nearly
Moderate
Steep dips out

slope, cross joints
dips into slope
vertical
dips out of
of  slope

interlock


slope


r: 20
r: 18
r: 14
r: 9
r: 2
Width of fissures
<0.1 mm
0.1–1 mm
1–5 mm
5–20 mm
>20 mm

r: 7
r: 6
r: 5
r: 4
r: 2
Continuity of fissures
None continuous
Few continuous
Continuous,
Continuous,
Continuous,



no infill
thin infill
thick infill

r: 7
r: 6
r: 5
r: 4
r: 1
Outflow of groundwater
None
Trace
Slight
<25 L min—1 10 m—2
Moderate
25–125 L  min—1
10 m—2
Great
>125 L min—1 10 m—2

r: 6
r: 5
r: 4
r: 3
r: 1
Total rating
100–91
90–71
70–51
50–26
<26



homoclines, simple and multiple fold  topographies, nappe structures, diapiric domes, etc. Two examples are shown in Figure 2.17. These may create differing styles      of karst at the surface and of hydrogeological organiza-    tion underground.
  Rock folding requires plastic deformation and so tends    to occur at great depth where lithostatic pressures are high. In carbonate rocks it is thus generally associated with diagenetically mature strata of Cretaceous or greater age. It is rare to encounter significant folding in Tertiary  and Quaternary limestones, although there are some spectacular examples in Papua-New Guinea. Gypsum, anhydrite and salt bodies of all ages deform, fold and flow readily, even at quite shallow depths.
  The amplitude of folds ranges from a few centimetres     to several kilometres. High folds may extend for hun- dreds of kilometres along the strike. Tensional forces tend to create strike-aligned master joint sets at the crests of anticlines and in the troughs of synclines. Differential  slipping  of  the  bedding  planes  is  often  more important on the flanks. Where cave systems extend  across  one  or  several  anticlines  or  synclines  it  is common to find trunk passages centred in the troughs.

However, the converse does occur and there are instances worldwide of principal passages extending around the noses of plunging anticlines.
  Where karstic beds or formations are mingled with siliciclastic strata, tilting and folding often create condi- tions of artesian confinement. Meteoric recharge water entering the karst rock becomes trapped beneath impermeable seals and may circulate slowly to remote springs. The longest karst groundwater flow systems that  are known are created in this manner. There are well- confirmed examples in the London and Paris basins, in the Eucla and Wasa basins of Australia and in the Basin   and Range country of the western USA. Recharge from     the Rocky Mountains and their eastern foothills is believed to flow for more than 1000 km through carbo- nates beneath confining salts, sands, clays and shales in     the Canadian Prairies, with underground residence times perhaps more than 30 000 yr.
2.10 PALAEOKARST UNCONFORMITIES
The lower illustration in Figure 2.17 shows a profound geological unconformity that has modern karst features





Figure 2.17 Two examples from France of karst development in complex geological structures. (Upper) The folded Alps at Samoens. Numbers identify individual formations, from lower Cretaceous (6) to mid-Cretaceous (1) in age; number 3, Urgonian, is           the principal karst limestone. Letters identify individual homoclinal and synclinal structures. Re´seau Mirolda (MR) and Re´seau Jean Bernard (JB) are two of the world’s deepest explored caves (see Figure 7.1). TP, LP9, PF and A3 are other prominent springs or shaft systems in the other structures. (Lower) Re´seau Pierre St Martin is another deep system that is entered in the Alpine zone on the Franco-Spanish border in the Pyrenees. It passes through a thick, gently dipping limestone formation of late Cretaceous age, to ramify    along and penetrate below a grossly unconformable contact with underlying Devonian and Carboniferous strata. Salle Verna is one of        the largest known cave chambers. Reproduced with permission from Maire, R, La Haute Montagne Calcaire. Karstologia, Memoire             3, 731 p, 1990.


developing both above and below it. Many sequences of carbonate rocks are found to contain, or to be terminated   by, unconformities that are karst solutional surfaces or cavities that are now inert, i.e. palaeokarst (section 1.1). Some of these are of hypogene origin, where waters ascending from lower formations were able to dissolve cavities in intra- or interstratal positions: usually, these collapsed to create breccias that are now partly or firmly cemented by calcite (see Spo¨rli et al. (1992) for examples in Antarctica). Much more frequent and extensive, how- ever, are the unconformities created when surface karst landscapes of the types described in Chapters 9 and 10 became buried by later consolidated rocks, and the karst hydrological circulation systems beneath them were also inundated and became more or less inert. The later (burial) rocks can be any type of sediment (clastic,

carbonate, evaporitic, organic, e.g. coal) or even extru- sive lavas and volcanic tuffs.
  The buried karst landforms range in magnitude from the cyclic type displaying only shallow dissolution fea- tures developed during brief, sequence stratigraphical, episodes of marine emergence and exposure to subaerial processes (eogenetic karst – Figure 2.7), to rugged karst landscapes with local relief of tens to hundreds of metres that have taken millions of years to form (Figure 2.18).    The eogenetic, disconformable or weakly unconformable, surfaces are more commonly preserved in the geological record, as would be expected; many individual geological formations contain stacked sequences of them or, where a little more rugged, they themselves may be adopted as the boundaries between individual formations (Wright et al. 1991). The oldest known examples are in Archaean rocks






Figure 2.18    Palaeokarst interpretation of the Rospo Mare oil field, a one billion barrel field off the Adriatic coast of Italy. The       erosional interval between the Lower Cretaceous and Miocene strata is approximately 70 Myr. The surface karst of subsoil karren,       dolines and solutional corridors has a local relief of 10–40m and is underlain by a further 100m of vadose and shallow phreatic caves. Adapted with permission from Soudet H. J., Sorriaux P., and Rolando J. P. Relationship between Fractures and Karstification - the           Oil- Bearing Paleokarst of Rospo Mare (Italy). Bulletin des Centres de Recherches Exploration-Production Elf Aquitaine 18(1), 257–297, 1994.

(>2500 a) of the Canadian Shield, including solution caves filled with sands that are now hard sandstones: the Archaean atmosphere is believed to have had a high CO2 content, which will have favoured vigorous karst activity. Eogenetic exposures are common in Lower Proterozoic strata (>1000 a) in Australia, Canada and the USA, China and Russia (Bosak et al. 1989), and some more rugged palaeokarst surfaces are reported in Upper Proterozoic exposures in those nations. Reports of palaeokarst uncon- formities of all types become frequent everywhere in Palaeozoic, Mesozoic and Eocene–Oligocene limestones and dolomites because these are more widespread, better preserved and exposed than the older formations (Bosak 1989). There are now several thousand well-described examples in the literature. Surfaces younger than Oligo- cene in age will rarely be so firmly buried that they have become chemically inert, i.e. they are more likely to function as cryptokarst beneath loose or weakly consoli- dated rocks rather than as inert palaeokarst.
  North America provides two good examples of palaeo- karst surfaces that are subcontinental in their extent. Following a long period of sedimentary rock accumula-

tion (the ‘Sauk’ – Sloss 1963), marine regression at
~480 a exposed large tracts of platformal and intertidal carbonates for some millions of years. Mature karst terrains with local relief of 10–60 m and subsurface dis- solution to —200 m or more were able to develop before early Appalachian deformation (the Taconic Orogeny) returned them beneath the sea and net deposition recom- menced. This ‘Post-Sauk’ palaeokarst surface can be traced in fragments from eastern Canada and the south- eastern USA to west of the Mississippi River. The highly productive Knox aquifer in the southeast, important oil fields in Ohio and Oklahoma, and lead–zinc deposits  in Tennessee are associated with it. Another marine regres- sion of long duration around 325 year led to development   of the ‘Post-Kaskaskia’ palaeokarst. In North America this is taken to divide strata of the Carboniferous Period into Mississippian (earlier) and Pennsylvanian (later). The karst itself is best exposed in western USA, especially in the great Jewel and Wind hydrothermal maze caves of South Dakota; some of their upper passages at least are exhuma- tions or rejuvenations of Post-Kaskaskia meteoric water caves (Palmer and Palmer 1989).


3

Dissolution: Chemical and Kinetic Behaviour of the Karst Rocks


3.1 INTRODUCTION
When a rock dissolves in water its different minerals (or some of them) disintegrate into individual ions or mole- cules which diffuse into the solution. Of necessity, study    of dissolution focuses upon the specific minerals rather than the aggregate rock. Hence, this chapter is concerned with mineral solubility. Because the principal karst rocks  are nearly pure, monominerallic aggregates there is often little difference between discussion of, for example, calcite solubility and limestone solubility.
  Dissolution is said to be congruent when all compo-   nents of a mineral dissolve together and completely. Table 3.1 gives the dissolution reactions for a range of incongruent minerals. Dissolution is incongruent where   only a part of the components dissolve. The aluminosi-  licate minerals are the great example of the incongruent class, releasing Naþ, Kþ, Ca2þ, Mg2þ, SiO4—, etc., ions       in reaction with water but retaining most of their atoms in reordered solids such as kaolinite, vermiculite or smec- tite. Incongruent dissolution of dolomite (with accompa- nying precipitation of calcite) may occur in some exceptional conditions mentioned later.
The sample of congruent minerals in Table 3.1 con-

is principally important for its role in interstratal karsti- fication. Sylvite and mirabilite are rarely encountered and never in great bulk. They occur as minor secondary cave minerals (section 8.4). Gypsum is quite common in out- crop. Karst features develop upon it rapidly because of its comparatively high solubility.
  Limestone and dolomite are common in outcrop. Their maximum solubility varies with environmental condi- tions but never approaches that of gypsum. Quartzite and siliceous sandstones are equally common in outcrop.    In terms of solubility and of common solute abundance in water there is a large overlap with the range exhibited by  the carbonate rocks. Yet siliceous rocks are not normally considered to be karstic. This raises the question of what     is the lower limit of solubility for the development of karst? The answer is that a transitional situation exists in reality, although  it is rarely considered by karst specia-  lists. Karst landforms as defined in Chapter 1 develop at    all scales on siliceous sandstones and at the small scale on many rocks of yet lower specific (mineral) solubility. However, at the global scale these landforms must be considered rare and of minor importance. There are less  than 30 mg L—1  SiO2 of silica  in most  meteoric  waters

tains all the common elements of crustal rocks except Fe,

sampled on sandstones and more than 40 mg L—

1  of

and furnishes a majority of the dissolved inorganic species. It is seen that the range of solubility is enormous. Gibbsite (Al(OH)3) is an example that is insoluble to all intents and purposes; even in the most favourable cir- cumstances encountered on the surface of this planet physical processes will disaggregate it and remove it as colloids or larger grains before there is significant solu-   tion damage. Rock salt (halite) is so soluble that it is rapidly destroyed in outcrop except in the driest places; it

dissolved calcite in most samples from carbonate terrains.
Karst becomes abundant above the latter concentration.
  Table 3.2 presents the specifications underlying some common chemical and environmental classifications of waters. On the continents solutions notably stronger than seawater are rare; most examples are in evaporating lakes   or in long-resident basinal waters intercepted in deep drilling. In a majority of gypsum karsts it is unusual for concentrations to exceed 2000 mg L—1 CaSO4. In carbo- nate terrains concentrations higher than 450 mg L—1 total



Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd



Table 3.1   Dissociation reactions and solubilities of some representative minerals that dissolve congruently in water, at 25 ○C             and 1 bar (105 Pa) pressure (Modified with permission from Freeze, R.A. and Cherry, J.A. Groundwater © 1979 Prentice Hall)


Common range of
Mineral
Dissolution reaction
Solubility (mg L—1)
abundance in waters (mg L—1)
Gibbsite
AlðOHÞ3 þ H2O ! 2Al3þ þ 6OH—
0.001
Trace
Quartz
SiO2 þ H2O ! H4SiO4
12
1–12
Amorphous
SiO2 þ H2O ! H4SiO4
120
1–65

silica
Calcite	CaCO3 þ H2O þ CO2 $ Ca2þ þ 2HCO—

60*, 400{	10–350

Dolomite

CaMgð

þ  H2O þ 2CO2 $ Ca2þ þ Mg2þ þ 4HCO—

50*, 300{	10–300

2	3
Gypsum	CaSO4 · 2H2O ! Ca2þ þ SO2— þ 2H2O	2400	0–1500
Sylvite	KCl       þ H2O ! Kþ þ Cl— þ Hþ þ OH—		264 000		0–10 000 Mirabilite	NaSO4                     · 10H2O þ H2O ! Naþ þ SO2— þ Hþ þ OH—	280 000		0–10 000                   NaCl þ	Naþ þ	þ H   þ OH	360 000		0–10 000
*PCO    ¼ 10—3 bar.
yPCO2   ¼ 10    bar.


dissolved solids (TDS) will almost invariably prove to be enriched by sulphates or chlorides, or nitrates if the water    is polluted. The great majority of karst waters contain only   a few tens or hundreds of mg L—1 of dissolved solids. As a result, their chemistry is that of very dilute solutions.

large quantity in natural aqueous systems; thus, to avoid many zeros after the decimal point concentrations are usually reported in millimoles per litre (mmol L—1 or mM) or even micromoles per litre (mmol L—1). To convert from mg L—1:




3.1.1 Definition of concentration units
In the engineering and geomorphological literature mass

mol · L—1  ¼

mg · L—1
1000 · A

concentrations of dissolved solids measured in water samples are commonly reported in milligrams per litre. By weight, these are equivalent to parts of solute per million parts of solution and to grams per cubic metre.
  In the SI system concentrations of ions in aqueous solutions are expressed in molar units (molarity). A solution of 1 mole of calcium (atomic weight ¼ 40.08) contains 40.08 g of calcium per litre of solution. This is a

where A denotes atomic or molecular weight. Conveni-
ently, because the molecular weight of 1 mmol of CaCO3     is equal to 100.1 mg, 1 mmol L—1  of Ca2þ  is the equiva- lent of 100.1 mg L—1  CaCO3  dissolved.
  The reactions are evaluated in equivalent units to enable the checking of ion positive and negative charge balances: units are eq L—1, meq L—1  and meq L—1.

mg · L—1



Table 3.2   Common chemical classifications of waters

meq · L—1  ¼

1000 · E


Total dissolved solids* (mg L—1)

where E is equivalent weight obtained by dividing atomic   or molecular weight by ionic charge; in the case of ions  with one charge (e.g. Naþ, Kþ, Cl—) E ¼ A. For ions with

Soft water	< 60
Hard water	> 120
Brackish water	1000–10 000
Saline water	10 000–100 000
(Seawater)	(35 000)
Brines	> 100 000
Potable water for humans	< 1000 or < 2000y
Potable water for livestock	< 5000

two charges (e.g. Ca2þ, SO2—) equivalents ¼ moles multi-
plied by 2. Table 3.3 gives the factors  to  convert mmol L—1  and meq L—1  (the preferred units of chemists)  to mg L—1, the units of bulk weathering studies.
  Readers should be careful when reading scales of calcium carbonate concentration in the literature, which may be reported  as  mg L—1   Ca2þ   or  as  mg L—1   CaCO3.  Total

 		hardness  (dissolved  bicarbonates,  carbonates,  sulphates,

*Total dissolved solids in potable waters are presumed to be only the bicarbonates, sulphates, chlorides and their associated species as discussed in this chapter.
{Varies between jurisdictions: these are the two most frequent limits.

chlorides, etc. of calcium and magnesium) may be reported as mmol L—1, meq L—1, mg L—1 CaCO3 or in national units; one ‘English degree’ of hardness ¼ 14.3 mg L—1   CaCO3,




Table 3.3   Molecular and equivalent weights of the common  ions and molecules encountered in karst waters
3.1.2 
Use of negative logarithms

 		Because karst waters are usually very dilute solutions

Formula	Molecular weight	Equivalent weight
2þ

numbers involved in calculations may be inconveniently small. To reduce the likelihood of arithmetical errors

Ca
Cl— CO2— F—
Fe2þ

40.08	20.04

arising from misplaced decimal points, it is conventional    to do much of the calculation with negative logarithms.    The symbol for a negative logarithm is lower case p. In     the  example  given  above,  100 mg L—1   Ca2þ ¼ 0.0025

Fe3þ	55.85	18.62
HCO—	61.02	61.02
Kþ	39.10	39.10
Mg2þ	24.32	12.16
Naþ	22.99	22.99

mol L—1.  Log10    of  this  concentration  is  10—2.6;  thus pCa2þ ¼ 2.6.
3.1.3 Source books

NHþ
NO—

18.04	18.04

In this book we use the thermodynamic equilibrium

3	62.01	62.01
4	94.98	31.66

approach and saturation indices to investigate problems

SO2—

96.06	48.03

of mineral dissolution. It is a comprehensive approach,
giving information on the evolution of water from an initial state towards its state when sampled at a karst spring, etc. Accuracy of results is dependent on precision    of pH measurements which, in the past, has been difficult

one  ‘French   degree’ ¼ 10.0 mg L—1   CaCO3    and   one ‘German degree’ ¼ 17.8 mg L—1  CaCO3  (Krawczyk 1996). Example: a solution contains 250 mg L—1   CaCO3.  The solution contains

100 mg L—1  Ca2þ  ¼ 2:5 mmol L—1 or 10—2:60 mol L—1
  150 mg L—1 CO2—  ¼ 2:5 mmol L—1 or 10—2:60 mol L—1

Ionic strength, I, is defined as the sum of the molar concentrations of ions in a water multiplied by the square   of their charges:

to achieve in the field. Hence many karst workers have preferred bulk quantitative approaches neglecting equili- bria. These yield less insight but are also less prone to error.
  The ‘classic’ text is Garrels and Christ (1965)  Solu- tions, Minerals and Equilibria. Most later works use the format and conventions adopted by these authors. A most comprehensive recent treatment is by Stumm and Morgan (1996) Aquatic Chemistry, 3rd edn. Other useful recent works include texts by Dreybrodt (1988), Appelo and Postma (1994), Langmuir (1996), Berner and Berner (1996), Bland and Rolls (1998) and Domenico and

I	1 X 2

mi · z2

Schwartz (1998).


where mi is the molar concentration of ion i and zi is its charge. In most karst waters there will be only seven constituents in significant concentration:
3.2 
AQUEOUS SOLUTIONS AND CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIA
3.2.1 Speciation, dissociation, hydration and the Law of Mass Action

I ¼ 1 ·

.½Naþ]þ ½Kþ]þ 4½Ca2þ

]þ 4½Mg2þ]

In addition to dissolution or precipitation at the solid– liquid interface, in karst studies it is necessary to consider

þ½HCO—]þ ½Cl—]þ 4½SO2—]þ ½NO—].

3	4	3
In limestone and dolomite areas,  Naþ,  Cl—,  SO2—  and NO— are often present in very low concentrations and thus can be  neglected  as  well,  but  it  is  important to establish this by measurement: it should not be assumed.
  As a rule of thumb, the ionic strength of brackish waters &0.1; fresh waters > 0.01.

speciation in the water, processes by which solute ions
and molecules combine or break apart or change phase between gas and liquid. Recently there has been increas-   ing attention paid to redox (reduction–oxidation) pro- cesses as well, in which species respectively gain or lose electrons: these are considered later.
  Water itself is an effective conductor because it is polar. Cation–anion electric bonds are weakened in solids in contact with it. Their normal thermal agitation suffices to




detach some ions, which diffuse away into the solution.    For example, for halite

H2O

where Keq is a coefficient termed the thermodynamic equilibrium constant (or solubility product or stability constant or dissociation constant by different authors).

NaCl  ,

Naþ  þ Cl—	ð3:1Þ

As an example:


H2O
where , means ‘in the presence of water’. This  most
      
Hþ
H2O ¼

]½OH—]
w


3:7Þ

simple process of solution is termed dissociation. It adequately describes the dissolution of rock salt and gypsum.
  A more complex solution process involves the partial     or complete neutralizing of either the cation or the anion charge. This unbalances the solution, requiring further dissociation (or equivalent back reaction by precipitation)   to restore it.
Pure water itself dissociates to a small extent:

H2O
H2O  ,  Hþ þ OH—	ð3:2Þ
Comparatively little dissociation occurs with CaCO3. But    if a free proton, Hþ, approaches the solid we may write     the sequence of reactions:

½H2O]	¼	ð
By convention the value assigned to H2O is unity, shrinking equation (3.7) to

Kw ¼ ½Hþ]· ½OH—]	ð3:8Þ
Kw is the thermodynamic equilibrium or dissociation constant  of  water;  it  has  a  value  of  10—14   at  25○C  and 1 bar (105 Pa), and 10—14:9  at 0○C.
  These are spontaneous reactions in which the energy retained in the product phases is lower than in the reactant phases. The difference is measured as  the Gibbs  free  energy  of  reaction,  DG○,  which  is  related  to the thermodynamic equilibrium constant, K, by:



CaCO3  , Ca2þ þ CO2—
Ca2þ þ CO2—  þ Hþ  , Ca2þ þ HCO—

ð3:3Þ ð3:4Þ

DG○ ¼ —2:303 · RT · log10 K	ð3:9Þ

3	3	where R is a gas constant with the value 8.314 J mol—1 K—1

The CO2— ion has become hydrated. Unless an OH— is within a few nanometers of the site of these reactions close to the solid–liquid interface, the solution is unba- lanced there and a further CO2— ion can dissociate to restore it. This is the process of acid dissolution. It dominates dissolution of the carbonate minerals.
  Systems of such reactions proceed in a forward direc-  tion with rates proportional to the concentration of reactants. Accumulation of reaction products increases the rate of back reaction until forward and backward rates are equal. The system then has reached a dynamic

and T is the system temperature in degrees Kelvin.
  Products with the lowest Gibbs free energies are the most stable. At earth surface temperatures and pressures more energetic metastable phases are frequently found, however, and may be long lasting. The concept is sketched in Figure 3.1. Reactants must surmount energy activation barriers to create products. In some instances, there is a lower barrier, Ea’, for the metastable product than for the stable. In karst studies the most significant metastable example is aragonite: the activation barrier for inversion to calcite has been placed between 184 and
1   in  various  experiments.  Aragonite  may

equilibrium for the given set of physical conditions imposed upon it, i.e. temperature and pressure. Variation    of any of these conditions induces systematic change in     the concentrations of each reacting species until equili- brium is again attained. This is the ‘Law of Mass Action’ for reversible systems, which may be written:

aA þ bB , cC þ dD	ð3:5Þ

where aA ¼ a moles (or mmol) of reactant species A, and cC ¼ c moles (or mmol) of product C, etc. At dynamic equilibrium this relation becomes

444 kJ mol—
survive for millions of years at low temperatures and pressures before inverting; at 360○C it is all converted in about 16 h (see White 1997a). At the other extreme, a molecule  of   carbonic   acid  (H2CO0,   formed   from H2O þ CO2, as discussed below) exists for only a fraction  of a second before dissociating into Hþ and HCO—. Full discussion of the Gibbs free energy concept, including tables of constants for compounds of importance in karst processes, can be found in Stumm and Morgan (1996,
p. 27 et seq.), and other texts cited above.
3.2.2 Activity

c	d

K	½C       ] ½D ] 	
½A]a½B]b

ð3:6Þ

Water with ions diffusing through it is a weak electrolyte. Some ions of opposite charge will combine to form ion





Figure 3.1   Conceptual model of the energy changes occurring in chemical reactions.


pairs with reduced charge or zero charge. Hence, the number of potentially reactive ions of a given species

Where I < 0:1, the extended standard form is
1

(e.g. Ca2þ) that are present in an aqueous solution is

log gi  ¼

—Azi  · ðIÞ2
1

ð3:11Þ

always somewhat less than the molar sum of ions of that
species in the solution. The proportion of potentially reactive (or free) ions is termed the activity of the species. As ionic strength (I) increases from ~0 to 0.1, activity decreases. This is a reflection of the increasing opportunity for ion combination to occur. For many species it increases again between I ¼ 0:1 and 1.0.
  Determination of activity is fundamental to the correct computation of all equilibria for solute species. Activity

1 þ B · ri · ðIÞ2
with z the valence of the ion, A and B constants depend-   ing upon temperature and pressure (A ¼ 0:4883þ 8:074× 10—4 × T; B ¼ 0:3241 þ 1:6 × 10—4 × T, with T  in ○C)
and Ri  is the hydrated radius of the ith ion; the relevant  radii are given in Table 3.4.
  Where I is > 0.1 but < 0.5, Davies’ variant (1962) is recommended by Stumm and Morgan (1996):

itself is symbolized by ‘a’ in most texts; standard brackets
( ) signify that it is the activity of the contained species    that is being considered; square brackets [ ] signify
         
 
log gi ¼ —Az2
1


1
ðIÞ2
1
I  2

!
— 0:21


ð3:12Þ

molarity and { } molality of a species.     The activity coefficient gi is defined as

g	ðai         Þ 
½ci]
where c ¼ concentration

gi ! 1   as ci  ! 0


ð3:10Þ

þð Þ



Approximate values of the activity coefficients for the dissolved species of interest in most karst work are given    in Figure 3.2. Normally they are not read off graphically   but are computed with variants of the Debye–Hu¨ckel equations contained within larger programs computing the equilibrium state of reported dissolved species. A standard extended form of the equation is satisfactory for most purposes in normal karst waters. Consult Stumm and Morgan (1996) for better precision.





Figure 3.2 Activity coefficients and ionic strength of the common ionic constituents in karst waters. Reproduced with permission from Freeze, R.A. and J.A. Cherry, Groundwater, 604  pp © 1979 Prentice Hall, Inc.



Table 3.4   Ionic radii of ions most frequent in karst waters

ri  (×10—8 m)	Ion
2.5	NHþ
3.0	Kþ, Cl—, NO—
3.5	OH—, HS—
4.0	SO2—, PO3—
4	4
4.0–4.5	Naþ, HCO—

4.5                                                             CO2—
5.0                                                           Sr2þ, Ba2þ, S2—
6.0                                                          Ca2þ, Fe2þ, Mn2þ
8.0                                                              Mg2þ
9.0                                                          Hþ, Al3þ, Fe3þ

For more concentrated solutions (e.g. brines) the Pitzer equation is often applied instead (Nordstrom 2004).
3.2.3 Saturation indices
A solution containing a given mineral will be in one of   three conditions.

1. Forward reaction predominates. There is net dissolu-  tion of the mineral; the solution is said to be under- saturated or aggressive with respect to the mineral.
2. There is dynamic equilibrium; the solution is satu- rated with the mineral.
3. Back reaction predominates and there may be net precipitation of the mineral. The solution is super- saturated.

  Few  sampled  waters  are  precisely  at  equilibrium. Saturation indices measure the extent of their deviation,
i.e. their aggressivity or supersaturated condition. The measured product of ion activity in a sample is compared with the Keq  value. The standard form of the saturation index (SI) is that of Langmuir (1971):



Figure 3.3    Evolutionary path of a water sample, X, approach-    ing equilibrium with respect to a given mineral. Ceq ¼ concentra- tion at saturation ¼ an SI value of 0.0. Change of boundary conditions will shift the SI scale, as illustrated at right.


becomes asymptotic where boundary conditions of tem- perature, etc. remain constant. Ideal equilibrium is diffi-   cult to impossible to attain; a comparatively long timespan or long flow path through the rock will be required to effect net addition of the last few ions. In karst, a supersaturated water almost invariably indicates   that a significant change of boundary conditions has occurred. In Figure 3.3 the change is indicated by DP, T.
3.3 THE DISSOLUTION OF ANHYDRITE, GYPSUM AND SALT
Anhydrite (CaSO4) may dissociate directly in the pre- sence of water. In field conditions it normally hydrates first, becoming gypsum which dissolves by dissociation:

CaSO4  · 2H2O , Ca2þ þ SO2— þ 2H2O	ð3:14Þ
The solid, gypsum, and water are both assigned values of unity. The equilibrium constant thus is

SI ¼ log IAP=Keq	ð3:13Þ

Kg ¼ ½

Ca2þ

]½SO2—


ð3:15Þ

where KIAP   is the ion activity product. Here, a solution       is at equilibrium at 0.0, aggressive waters have negative values, etc. as illustrated in Figure 3.3. An alternative index that is occasionally used is the saturation ratio (SR); this is simply the non-logarithmic version, where

½CaSO4]S
where Kg signifies that the constant is that of gypsum. Its value is 10—4.61 at 25○C, declining to 10—4:65 at 0○C. Similarly, the expression for halite is

SR is 1.0 at equilibrium. Readers are urged to use the SI index in order that results can be more immediately

Kh ¼ ½

Naþ

]½Cl—]

compared.
  Figure 3.3 illustrates a further point that is most important. For the mineral species of interest in karst research, the approach to dynamic equilibrium (SI ¼ 0.0)

½NaCl]
Kh ¼ ½Naþ]· ½Cl—]

Kh  ¼ 10—1:52  at 25○C, declining to 10—1:58  at 0○C.

ð3:16Þ





Figure 3.4   The solubility of calcite and gypsum in water and     the standard atmosphere between 2○ and 25○C.

The saturation index for gypsum is



with water, forming silicic acid by the process of hydro- lysis:

SiO2ðquartzÞþ 2H2O ! H4SiO4ðaqÞ;
Kq  ¼ 1:1 · 10—4	ð3:19Þ

Written in the alternative form, Si(OH4)aq, silicic acid is  seen to comprise four OH groups attached to a central silicon atom. It is not very reactive. The solubility of quartz in standard temperatures is only 6–10 mg L—1. In hotter waters it increases rapidly (e.g. ~60 mg L—1 at 100○C).
If very alkaline conditions should chance to occur (pH
> 9.0), silicic acid can pass through up to four dissocia-  tions (four ‘orders’) in sequence until all Hþ  ions  are detached, e.g.

SIg ¼ log ð

Ca2þ

ÞðSO2—

ð3:17Þ


H SiO


H  SiO—	þ


—9:7

Kg	4

4  !    3

4   þ H

;	K1 ¼ 10

ð3:20Þ

H3SiO—  ! H2SiO2— þ Hþ;	K2  ¼ 10—13:3	ð3:21Þ
4	4
or

  SIg ¼ logðCa2þÞþ logðSO2—Þþ pKg                          ð3:18Þ
It takes the same form for salt; however, because salt solubility is so great, even brines are strongly aggressive     in most instances. The salt index is of little practical utility in karst studies.
  The environmental controls of the rate and amount of gypsum or halite in solution may be summarized very simply. As with most other dissociation reactions there are positive correlations with pressure and temperature. However, the minor effects of pressure changes on solubility can be ignored even where groundwaters cir- culate to depths of several kilometres. The same is broadly true of temperature. The surficial environmental range from 0○  to 30○C for meteoric waters has an effect  that is inconsequential in the case of salt. For gypsum (Figure 3.4), it produces an increase of approximately 20% in the solubility product. It has not been shown that  this is an important boost in terms of any effect on karst morphology or rate of development: see Cigna (1986) for discussion of thermal mixing effects. Solution rates and concentrations here are controlled primarily by the amount of water contacting these minerals and, to a lesser extent, by the mode of supply – as laminar or turbulent flows or as impacting raindrops or spray.
3.4 THE DISSOLUTION OF SILICA
Pure silica in its compact crystalline mode as (alpha) quartz (density ¼ 2.65) is very resistant but does react

etc., substantially increasing the amount of quartz that may be dissolved. However, such alkaline conditions can rarely be achieved in quartzite and siliceous sandstone terrains, where soils and waters are normally slightly acid.
  If pH is lowered, for example by the addition of CO2 to waters as discussed in the next section, the solubility of silica may be exceeded and amorphous (or hydrous) silica, SiO2.nH2O, precipitated. It is common in many dry-zone soils. The water is slowly expelled to form opal,    a crystalline form of SiO2 with a more open structure than quartz (opal density ¼ 2.1). Amorphous silica is quite soluble (K ¼ 10—2:7), with > 100 mg L—1  often measured in waters of normal karst pH, rising to >300 mg L—1  in  very alkaline or hot waters.

3.5 BICARBONATE EQUILIBRIA AND THE DISSOLUTION OF CARBONATE ROCKS
IN NORMAL METEORIC WATERS
3.5.1 Bicarbonate waters
The solubility of calcite and dolomite by dissociation in pure, deionized water is very low, only 14 mg L—1 (as CaCO3) at 25○C. This is scarcely more than the solubility   of quartz.
  Investigations in many countries have long established that most of the enhanced solubility of carbonate minerals that occurs is due to the hydration of atmospheric CO2 (Roques 1962, 1964). This produces carbonic acid which,




in turn, dissociates to provide Hþ. Other acids may furnish  additional  Hþ,  and  other  complexing  effects   may  further  increase  solubility.  These  are  summarized  in later sections. Here we consider the effect of CO2 from  the atmosphere and soil air. It is predominant in most carbonate karsts, which are created by meteoric waters that can circulate only to comparatively shallow depths underground and, as a consequence, have not been geothermally heated to a significant extent.
  Carbon dioxide is the most soluble of the standard atmospheric gases, e.g. 64 times more soluble than N2. Its solubility is proportional to its partial pressure (Henry’s Law) and inversely proportional to temperature. Partial pressure is that part of the total pressure exerted by a mixture of gases that is attributable to the gas of interest.
  For the dissolution of CO2 in water, Henry’s Law may be written:
CO2 ðaqÞ¼ Cab  · PCO2   · 1:963	ð3:22Þ

in forests (by assimilation) and over fresh snow. How- ever, effects of these reductions appear to be very minor.   Of the greatest importance is the increase of PCO2  that     may occur in soil atmospheres as a consequence of organic compounds released in the rooting zones. In principle, CO2 can entirely replace O2 there, i.e. increas-  ing PCO2  to 21%. Soil CO2 is discussed in detail in a later
section.
  The role of  CO2   is illustrated in  Figure 3.5. Its dissolution and consequent dissociation proceed:

CO2 ðgÞ, CO2 ðaqÞ	ð3:23Þ
CO2 ðaqÞþ H2O , H2CO0 ðcarbonic acidÞ	ð3:24Þ

Carbonic acid dissociates rapidly; nevertheless, it is conventional to combine these reactions to obtain one equilibrium expression:

H2CO0

where  CO2   is  in  g L—1,  PCO

is the partial pressure of

Kco2   ¼

PCO2

ð3:25Þ

CO2, 1.963 is the weight of 1 L of CO2, in grams, at one
atmosphere  and  20○C,  and  Cab   is  the  temperature- dependent absorption coefficient, given in Table 3.5.
In the standard atmosphere, PCO2   at sea level has a


The carbonic acid dissociates:

H2CO0	þ	—

modern global mean value of ~0.038% or 0.00038 atmos-

3  , H

þ HCO3	ð3:26Þ

phere (380 ppm) or a little higher. This is equivalent to
~0.6 mg CO2  per litre of air. With increasing altitude

This first-order dissociation constant is

PCO2  declines slightly; e.g. Zhang (1997) measured only

HCO—   Hþ

120–150 ppm at 5000 m on the Tibetan Plateau, increas-
ing to 200–300 at 4000 m. It may also be reduced a little

K1 ¼ ½

3 ]½	]
½H2CO0]

ð3:27Þ


Table 3.5   The solubility of CO2 (Reproduced with permission from Bo¨gli, A, Karst Hydrology and Physical Speleology © 1980 Springer Verlag)

(a) Absorption coefficients of CO2

Temperature of solution (○C)	0
10	20
30
Absorption coefficient Cab	1.713
1.194	0.878
0.665
(b) Equilibrium solubility of CO2  (mg L—1)



Temperature (○C)

PCO2 (atm)	0
10	20
30

0.0003

1.01

0.7

0.52

0.39
0.001
3.36
2.34
1.72
1.31
0.003
10.10
7.01
5.21
3.88
0.01
33.6
23.5
17.2
13.1
0.05
168
117
86
65.3
0.10
336
235
172
131
0.20
673
469
342
261





Figure 3.5    Cartoon depicting the dissolved species, reactions and comparative reaction rates that are involved in the dissolution of     calcite and dolomite under open and closed conditions. Eddy diffusion dominates in the bulk liquid. There are very thin molecular    diffusion boundary layers and adsorption sublayers in contact with the rock – see section 3.10 for details of their significance.

Bicarbonate ion may then dissociate to carbonate:

HCO—  , Hþ þ CO2—



ð3:28Þ

where CaCO3 (s) is solid calcite.

3	3	Kcalcite or aragonite  ¼ ½Ca2þ]½CO2—

The second-order dissociation constant is


Then,

     ½Hþ
K2 ¼

]½CO2—]

3:29Þ

CaCO3 ðsÞþ Hþ  , Ca2þ þ HCO—

ð3:32Þ

½HCO—]	ð
All fresh waters exposed to the ordinary atmosphere will contain these different species of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC),  whether or  not  there are  carbonate  rocks  in the watershed.
3.5.2 Dissolution of calcite and dolomite
The pH of water in limestone and dolomite terrains usually  falls between  6.5 and  8.9. In  this  range,  HCO— is the predominant species, CO2— (aq) being negligible below pH 8.3. It is more appropriate, therefore, to approach equation (3.27) as a back reaction. This requires introducing the minerals:

3
From laboratory experiments Plummer et al. (1978) consider calcite dissolution to be the sum of three forward rate processes, which are reaction (3.31) plus direct reaction with carbonic acid

CaCO3 ðsÞþ H2CO3 ðaqÞ$ Ca2þ þ 2HCO3	ð3:33Þ
and dissolution in water ( a double dissociation)

  CaCO3 ðsÞþ H2O $ Ca2þ þ HCO— þ OH—	ð3:34Þ
This full sequence of reactions from equation (3.23) onwards is often summarized



CaCO3ðsÞ) Ca2þ þ CO2—

ð3:30Þ

CaCO

þ CO

þ H  O , Ca2þ þ 2HCO—

3	3	2	2

3	ð3:35Þ




For dolomite, the dissociation reaction is

CaMgðCO3Þ2  , Ca2þ þ Mg2þ þ 2CO2—



ð3:36Þ

A more comprehensive charge balance equation (one that will serve for almost any natural water encountered in karst terrains) is

the dissociation constant is


2mCa2þ


þ 2m



Mg2þ


þ mNaþ


þ mKþ


þ mHþ

Ca2þ

Mg2þ]½CO2—]2

¼ 2mCO2

þ 2mSO2

þ mHCO—  þ mCl—  þ mNO—  þ mOH—

Kd ¼ ½	]½	3

3:37Þ

3—	4—	3	3

½CaMgðCO3Þ2]	ð
and the summary is

CaMgðCO3Þ2 þ 2CO2 þ 2H2O



Solutions are obtained by iterative  approximations. Figure 3.6 shows the approximate solutions for open and closed systems (as these are defined below), with just the six species noted.

, Ca2þ þ Mg2þ  þ 4HCO—

ð3:38Þ


Equilibrium constants for these reactions at a range of temperatures are given in Table 3.6.
  If the dissolution of calcite or aragonite alone is
considered (and if the ion pairs, CaHCOþ  and CaCO0,
3.5.3 
The saturation indices
The saturation index for calcite is

3	3	ðCa2þÞðCO2—Þ

that appear in Figure 3.5 are ignored for the present), the water contains six dissolved species: Ca2þ, Hþ, H2CO0,

SIC ¼ log

3
KC	ð

3:42Þ

CO2—	—

    3  , HCO3  and OH—. These are defined by equations
(3.2), (3.22), (3.27), (3.29) and (3.31). The molar con-
centrations of these species at equilibrium in given conditions are calculated by adding a further equation and then solving the set simultaneously. The additional equation is for charge balance:

and has the same form for aragonite. CO2— is present in very small amounts in pH below ~8.4 and so is not normally measured; instead, the standard form is
ðCa2þÞðHCO—ÞK2

  miziðcationsÞ¼ miziðanionsÞ	ð3:39Þ
For calcium carbonate solutions this equation is
  
SIC ¼ log

or

ðHþ

3
ÞðKCÞ

ð3:43Þ


2mCa2þ  þ mHþ   ¼ 2mCO2—  þ mHCO—  þ mOH—	ð3:40Þ

SIC ¼ logðCa2þÞþ logðHCO—Þþ pH — pK2 þ pKC
ð3:44Þ

3	3
Table 3.6   Equilibrium constants for the carbonate dissolution system, gypsum and halite, at 1 atm pressure. (From Garrels and         Christ 1965; Langmuir 1971; Plummer and Busenberg 1982)

Temperature (○C)
pKCO2
pK1
pK2
pKcalcite
pKaragonite
pKdolomite
pKgypsum
pKhalite
0
1.12
6.58
10.63
8.38
8.22
16.56
4.65
1.52
5
1.19
6.52
10.56
8.39
8.24
16.63
—
—
10
1.27
6.46
10.49
8.41
8.26*
16.71
—
—
15
1.34
6.42
10.43
8.42
8.28
16.49
—
—
20
1.41
6.38
10.38
8.45
8.31
16.89
—
—
25
1.47
6.35
10.33
8.49
8.34
17.0
4.61
1.58
30
1.52
6.33
10.29
8.52*
8.37*
17.9


50
1.72
6.29
10.17
8.66
8.54*
—


70
1.858
6.32*
10.15
8.85*
8.73*
—


90
1.92*
6.38*
10.14
9.36
9.02
—


100
1.97
6.42
10.14
—
—
—


pK1 ¼ 356:3094 þ 0:06091964T — 21834:37=T þ 126:8339 log T þ 1684915=T2. pK2 ¼ 107:8871 þ 0:03252849T — 5151:79=T — 38:92561 log T þ 563713:9=T2. pKC ¼ 171:9065 þ 0:077993T — 2839:319=T — 71:595 log T.
log K CaHCOþ ¼ 1.11 at 25○C, log K MgHCOþ ¼ —0.95 at 25○C, log K CaCO0 ¼ 3.22 at 25○C.
3	3	3
*Interpolated





Figure 3.6   Saturation values of dissolved calcite in water at various values of CO2  partial pressure, and for open and closed
conditions as defined below. Reproduced with permission from Palmer, A.N, Geomorphic interpretation of karst features. In LaFleur,
R. G. (ed.), Groundwater as a geomorphic agent. Boston, Massachusetts, 173–209 © 1984 Allen and Unwin.


For dolomite the saturation index is	or
3



3 Þ— pH þ pKCO2   þ pK1	ð3:47Þ

SId ¼ logðCa2þÞþ logðMg2þÞþ 2logðHCO—Þ
      þ 2pH — 2pK2 þ pKd	ð3:45Þ
A very significant parameter (for it reveals much of the provenance or history of a karst water) is the PCO2 with which an analysed sample would be in equilibrium. This     is given by

log PCO2   ¼ logðHCO—
Figure 3.7 presents a good example of the SIc and PCO2 indices put to work to explain limestone surface and groundwater geochemical behaviour changing over the course of the growing season in a cool temperate region.

3.5.4 Soil carbon dioxide

ðHCO—ÞðHþÞ

Globally, soil CO

is undoubtedly the most important

PCO2   ¼

K1  ·

KCO2

ð3:46Þ

2
source for enhanced solubility in carbonate rocks. The






Figure 3.7 Illustrating the use of the SIc and PCO parameters by analysis of some simple calcium bicarbonate water samples collected between June and August in a limestone basin on Anticosti Island, Quebec. Allogenic rivers drain lime-rich glacial soils and flow for several kilometres before reaching the limestone and sinking underground. Autogenic streams drain similar local soils but sink within a few hundred metres. These two types of  water plus direct subsoil percolation combine to discharge at a major regional spring. As the summer season advances a pro- gressive increase in the effect of soil CO2 comes to dominate the evolution of these waters. Reproduced with permission from Roberge,  J.,  Geomorphologie  du  karst  de  la  Haute-Saumons,  Ile d’Anticosti, Quebec.  MSc  thesis,  McMaster  University, p. 217 1979.
porosity of normal soils is greater than 40% but part is occupied by bound water. The maximum volume avail-   able for air storage and circulation ranges from ~17% in  clay soils to ~31% in very sandy soils (Drake 1984). Gases produced in soils will tend to accumulate there because rapid diffusion or drainage are retarded by the high friction of the tortuous intergranular pathways.
  Into the pore spaces green plants respire approximately 40% of the CO2 that they extract from the atmosphere above ground. Their roots are CO2 pumps. Yet greater quantities of CO2  are respired by soil fauna, microfauna   and microflora, principally bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi.  Numbers  of  bacteria  can  exceed  1–3  million  per gram of soil. Their greatest densities occur in and above the rooting zone. From it the gas diffuses out to the surface (and O2 diffuses in) and also to the soil base and below.
  
Carbon dioxide productivity of roots and soil bacteria increases with temperature and water availability. Opti- mum temperatures for different species range from 20○C    to as high as 65○C (Miotke 1974). In recent work in the great subtropical karstlands of southern China, for exam-  ple, Yuan (2001) measured mean monthly CO2 abun- dances at —50 cm (the heart of local rooting zones) ranging from ~500 ppm during the dry, cooler winter months to 26 000–40 000 ppm (PCO2 ¼ 2:6–4:0%) at  the height of monsoon rains in June, July and August. Cold- adapted bacteria can continue to respire down to —5○C; Cowell and Ford (1978) recorded a sharp drop in soil PCO2 after the first hard frost of winter in central Canada.
  The field capacity of a soil is notionally defined as the amount of water retained after free drainage. Soil CO2 production is greatest at 50–80% capacity but may continue as soil dries to as little as 5%. Carbon dioxide production and retention tends to be greatest in fine- grained soils with swelling clays that can retain water. For example, in a loess with a mature brown earth profile   in western Germany, Miotke (1974) found that maximum PCO2 was stable at 0.3% atm during dry spells in the growing season. After rains it rose quickly to as much 4%  in the B horizon, presumably because water sealed pore outlets in the A horizon.
  These observations indicate that patterns of soil CO2 abundance will be most variable. They vary with soil type, texture and horizon, depth, drainage and exposure, types of vegetation cover, soil flora and fauna, with seasonal and shorter period warming and wetting. There      is a considerable literature on the subject because it is also of great interest to botanists, zoologists, agronomists, etc. In tropical areas reported common ranges of soil PCO2    are from 0.2 to 11.0% (Smith and Atkinson 1976)  with extremes > 17.5% that may be suspected of error. In temperate areas the usual range is from 0.1 to 6.0% but   10% is occasionally reported. In arctic tundra 0.2–1.0% is
reported over the brief thaw season. In alpine tundras common ranges during the melt season are similar, 0.04– 1.0%, rising to brief peaks greater than 3% just below the treeline.
  As illustrated above, the soil CO2 effect can be studied also by back-calculating the equilibrium PCO2 of ground- waters that have drained through soil. By this means Drake and Wigley (1975) investigated limestone and dolomite spring waters in Canada and the USA that were just saturated, i.e. very close to equilibrium with respect to calcite. The sites ranged from the subarctic to Texas, a 20○C range of mean annual temperature. They obtained the linear relation:
log PCO2   ¼ —2 þ 0:04 · T	ð3:48Þ




where T is the mean annual temperature (○C) at a given   site. This signifies a general soil enrichment effect of ×5 compared with the standard atmosphere, onto which the positive temperature effect is added.
  Use of mean annual temperature will give inaccurate estimates  where  there  are  strong  seasonal  variations      in temperature–recharge–growing-season relationships, however (Bakalowicz, 1976). Brook et al. (1983) inves- tigated this question, using soil CO2 field data from arctic   to tropical locales in place of calculated PCO2    of carbo-   nate waters. Equation (3.47) was broadly confirmed. The predictive power of mean annual precipitation was found    to be very poor but there was a fair correlation with the logarithm of aggregate actual  evapotranspiration, which     is related to the length of the growing season and thus to   the period during which soil CO2 is being produced:

0:00172 AET
  
Whether the surface is bare or covered by soil, the finer particulate organic matter produced by decay filters down into fissures in the vadose percolation zone below. A part   of it even penetrates into the finest cracks, those that drain  to stalactites and stalagmites in underlying caves. In a worldwide analysis of stalagmites from all climates, hot      to cold, wet to dry, van Beynen et al. (2001) found that all samples contained significant amounts of organic frag- ments  too  large  to  pass  a  0.07 mm  filter.  In  the  vadose (aerobic) percolation zone this material produces CO2 by bacterially mediated oxidation. In boreholes beneath bare karst in the Bahamas, for example, Whitaker and Smart (1994) calculated CO2 concentrations of 1.6 T 0.8% which they attributed to in situ oxidation.
  Soil CO2 itself may drain down into any underlying fissures or caves because it is a heavy gas. At gravitational trap sites such as pits with no outlets for air through the

log PCO2  ¼ —3:47 þ 2:09ð1 — e—

Þ	ð3:49Þ

bottom, CO2 from drainage and decay can accumulate to
lethal levels. There have been many local studies.

where AET is the calculated mean annual actual evapo- transpiration of a site. It was concluded that ~50% of variation of soil PCO2    can be explained by temperature,  20% by precipitation, and the balance by seasonal water availability and by growth and inhibition factors.
  Although it might appear that CO2 could accumulate in    a soil until all O2 was replaced (i.e. up to PCO2 ¼ 21% by volume), this does not occur in practice. Root respiration begins to be impaired at PCO2 of ~6%. At slightly higher concentrations aerobic bacteria begin to be killed and anaerobic species are unable to replace them fast enough    to maintain the CO2 production; hence the process tends
  
In comprehensive accounts, Renault (1982) and Ek and Gewelt (1985) reviewed some thousands of measure- ments of CO2 in caves worldwide. Cave air is generally enriched 2–20 times with respect to the standard atmo- sphere but concentrations as high as 6% have been recorded. They tend to be highest where air circulation is weakest (e.g. in the narrowest accessible fissures) or at sites closest to overlying soils. Northern Hemisphere maxima occur in July–September, when CO2 concentra- tions may be two to four times as great as in winter. Bakalowicz et al. (1985) report precise flux rates for summer CO2 in the large Grotte de Bedeilhac, Pyrenees.

to be self-inhibiting.

Rates approximated 4–16 kg m—2 day—1 CO

for the sur-



3.5.5 Carbon dioxide in exposed epikarst, the vadose percolation zone and caves
Over large areas in many carbonate karst regions there is   no regular soil cover. Instead, the rock is bare or mantled only with discontinuous veneers of lichen, algae and/or vegetal litter. It may lack soil because it is diagenetically young and porous, as in many tropical islands of Pleis- tocene age. In regions of intensive agriculture such as the Mediterranean lands, older limestones are exposed due to deforestation and overgrazing, and in glaciated areas due    to scour by ice: all are indented to varying degree by dissolutional pits and troughs (karren).
  In the uppermost dissolutional zone, the epikarst, rotting vegetation and residual soil form a rich base for  roots of trees and shrubs and for bacterial activity. Although  difficult  to  measure  accurately,  PCO2     values  up to several per cent appear to be common in the trapped detritus, which can amount to substantial volumes.

face area of the cave. The gas was derived from gravita-
tional drainage and the degassing of saturated infiltration waters.
  Cave streams, especially floodwaters, will pick up this excess CO2 and so boost their solvent capacity. In river caves of warm, humid regions where much vegetal debris   is carried underground it may make a significant con- tribution to corrosional enlargement.

3.5.6 Open and closed system conditions
In the present context a system is open when all three phases, solid, liquid and gas, are  able to react together.     An ideal open system exists when such conditions are maintained until thermodynamic equilibrium is achieved.    A system is closed when only two phases can interact at a given site.
  The application to carbonate dissolution is suggested in Figures 3.5, 3.6 and 3.8. In the ideal open case, as Hþ and





Figure 3.8   Summary of the principal complicating effects in carbonate dissolution chemistry. The numbers indicate the approximate equilibrium concentrations of CaCO3 (mg L—1) the given effects achieve. (Prepared by Ford and J.M.James.)

H2CO0

are converted to bicarbonate by reaction with

not  apply  in  soils  with  low  air  volume  or  in  low

CaCO3, more CO2 is able to dissolve from the air and so

temperatures, because the rate of dissolution of CO2

replenish  the  CO2(aq)   and  H2CO0

until equilibrium is

into recharge waters exceeds the CO2(g)  supply rate.

reached. An open air pool on limestone is such a system.
The value of PCO2  is fixed at ~0.036% and is interactive until equilibrium, which at 25○C occurs when 55 mg L—1 CaCO3 have been dissolved (Fig. 3.9).
  In an ideal closed system, air and water alone react until the solution is saturated with dissolved CO2 plus its derived H2CO0 and HCO—. The water then flows away

Very high rates of water recharge will have the same
effect. However, where they have been adequately stu- died, it is found that karst waters at equilibrium tend toward one or another of the ideal extremes, as illustrated   in Figure 3.9. The surprisingly high mean concentrations measured in some temperate regions with average annual temperatures 5–12○C can be explained by the fact that the

3	3

from the atmosphere and first contacts carbonate minerals
where no air is present, e.g. in a water-filled capillary or

soils are young and on glacial or thermoclastic detritus
(e.g. till) that still contains many carbonate fragments

fracture.  The  Hþ   and  H2CO0

that are withdrawn by

dispersed in the rooting zone, yielding ideal open condi-

association with CaCO3 cannot be  replenished.  For 25○C and PCO2   ¼ 0:036%, the solution becomes saturated  at only 25 mg L—1 CaCO3, or 40% of that achieved in the open system.
  In reality, we may expect that many karst waters will evolve under hybrid conditions, i.e. where the system is   part open, part closed; Figure 3.5 is an example. Drake (1984) suggests that ideal open-system conditions may

tions. In the tropics, where there are deep soils on lime-
stone they are usually dissolutional residua. These are clay-rich (favouring high PCO2 ) but without any surviving carbonate fragments, so that dissolution commences only    at their base, where the system becomes partly or fully closed.
  A  fundamental  point  to  appreciate  is  that  the initiation   and   early   expansion   of   dissolutional





Figure 3.9    Global model for the dissolution of calcite under ideal open and ideal closed system conditions in and below soils, and           for global mean open air (PCO2~350 ppm). Open and closed functions are calculated from equation (3.47) and assume some bacterial inhibition at high PCO  . Data points are means of 20 different karst groundwater sample sets where waters are at or very close to   equilibrium with respect to calcite. Geographical location of the sets ranges from arctic and alpine to tropical environments. Reproduced with permission from Drake, J.J. 1984. Theory and model for global carbonate solution by groundwater. In R. G. LaFleur    (ed.). Groundwater as a geomorphic agent, pp. 210–226 © 1984 Allen and Unwin.


conduits in the rock will almost always occur under closed conditions.
3.6 THE S–O–H SYSTEM AND THE DISSOLUTION OF CARBONATE ROCKS
During the past three decades there has been increasing interest in the role of aqueous geochemical processes producing H2S that can react to dissolve limestone and

CO2–H2O  system  such  as  those  described  in  later sections.
  An initial, very simple example of the processes, one   that can be recognized in many ordinary meteoric water caves worldwide, is the oxidation of pyrite (FeS2) and other iron compounds that are very common constituents    of shale interbeds in limestone and dolomite. For pyrite in shale:

15

dolomite. In most localities, such processes play only a
trivial quantitative role, if any, in creating surface karst landforms such as karren, solution dolines, or poljes. However, they may make important contributions to the

2FeS2 þ

O2  þ 4H2O ) Fe2O3  þ 8Hþ  þ 4SO2—
ð3:50Þ

early opening of dissolutional conduits in general. More certainly, they appear to be the predominant processes in   the initiation and enlargement of one rare but remark- able class of cave, the ramiform hypogene system (Palmer  1991;  see  Chapter  7.8),  which  is  represented  by such large and magnificently decorated caverns as Carlsbad and Lechuguilla in the USA, Frasassi in Italy,    and Novaya Afonskaya in Georgia. In addition, they are associated with the precipitation of the majority of sulphide ore bodies known in carbonate rocks, the so- called ‘Mississippi Valley Type’ (MVT) deposits. This leads many specialists to consider the S–O–H system to be of independent significance in karst studies, rather than  a  subsidiary  contributor  of  complexity  to  the

The Hþ acidifies the solution, permitting increased dis- solution of calcite or dolomite (equation 3.32). Reaction (3.50) may or may not be moderated by bacteria.
  As O2  has a low solubility, these effects will be of limited importance in phreatic (anaerobic) environments, although an exception is cited below. Physical effects are readily seen in vadose (i.e. air-filled) caves. Water seep-   ing from a limestone bedding plane that contains a little pyrite-rich shale may be conspicuously aggressive, etch-   ing a pattern of solutional microrills at its emergence. Floods that push O2-rich water into such planes may recharge the acidity of main cave streams as they recede. Hydrogen sulphide is liberated in many volcanic regions  and may enter juvenile or meteoric groundwater as a gas.





Figure 3.10 Processes of oil and gas formation, with acid release, at depth in crustal rocks. These are often associated with sulphate reduction. HC ¼ hydrocarbons. Vitrinite reflectance is an industry standard measure of the maturation of an oil deposit. Reproduced       with permission from Tucker, M.E. and Wright, V.P, Carbonate Sedimentology © 1990 Blackwell Publishing.

More important, it is also created by reduction processes operating in fluids being expelled from sedimentary basins as the sediments compact or are deformed. In particular, it   is created as the abundant organic matter contained in mudstones and marls is degraded, first into kerogen by reduction at temperatures < 50○C, and then into oil and natural gas at temperatures up to 120○C. Mudstones and marls are commonly deposited with carbonate rocks (which serve as carriers for the fluids) and with sulphates and salt. Maturation is illustrated in Figure 3.10, where ‘BSR’ is bacterial sulphate reduction and ‘TSR’ is thermo- chemical  sulphate  reduction.  Geothermal  gradients are generally between 20 and 40○C km—1 in  sedimentary basins, thus the processes take place principally at depths between 1.5 and 5 km.
  Thermochemical reduction is noted later. Here we follow  the  bacterial  reduction  genetic  model  proposed  by Hill (1995) for an example of comparatively shallow settings, the Delaware Basin oilfield of New Mexico– Texas and the adjoining Guadalupe Mountains that con-   tain Carlsbad, Lechuguilla and many other remarkable caverns. The model is illustrated in Figure 3.11, where 3.11a summarizes the complex sequence of reactions that can occur. Not all of these are likely to be present in any particular H2S karst; it is difficult to balance all proposed components in certain of them and in the current state of knowledge should be considered as indicative modelling     of the possibilities rather than proven cases.
  
The processes begin (Stage 1 of Hill (1995) and Figure 3.11b) with the flow of hydrocarbon compounds (represented here by CH4 (methane, the principal com- ponent of most commercial natural gases) through reser-  voir rocks such as dolomites or sandstones, to the base of impermeable anhydrite cover strata:

Ca2þ þ 2SO2— þ 2CH4  þ 2Hþ
) 2H2SðaqÞþ CaCO3  þ 3H2O þ CO2	ð3:51Þ

The reactions take place at substantial depth but with temperatures < 80○C. In the Delaware Basin they occurred during Oligocene–Miocene times. They are driven by anaerobic, sulphur-reducing bacterial species, Desulfovibrio. Note that calcite may be precipitated, i.e.     it replaces the anhydrite here. This formed resistant masses within the Delaware Basin sulphate rocks that late Tertiary–Quaternary dissolution has exposed by removing the surrounding gypsum, creating low hills termed castiles (Figure 3.11c).
  The concentrations of H2S produced are commonly around 1 mg L—1 but may be much higher. Dissolution of H2S in water produces a weak acid that may dissociate in two steps:

H2S , HS— þ Hþ	ð3:52Þ
HS—  , Hþ  þ S2—	ð3:53Þ





Figure 3.11    (Top) The model of Hill (1995) for the sequence of S–O–H reactions that occurred in the Delaware sedimentary basin       of New Mexico–Texas. (Centre) The model during Stages 1, 2 and 3, when the basin and adjoining Guadalupe reefs were deeply        buried by younger rocks. (Lower) The model during Stages 4, 5, 6 and 7, when deformation, uplift and erosion exposed the reefs as a mountain range (Guadalupe Mountains) and removed much of the evaporite rocks in the basin. Reproduced from Hill, C.A. (1995)       Sulfur redox reactions: hydrocarbons, native sulfur, Mississippi Valley-type deposits sulfuric acid karst in the Delaware Basin, New    Mexico and Texas. Environmental Geology, 25, 16–23.


At 25○C the dissociation constants for these reactions are 10—7 and 10—13 respectively. Calcite or dolomite may be dissolved (equation 3.32).

H2S,  creating  a  redox  interface  within  the  phreatic zone:

1

  Oxygenated meteoric water flowing down gradient in
artesian trapping structures may reach the dissolved

H2S þ

O2 ) S0 þ H2O   ðat pH <6—7Þ	ð3:54Þ




or

2HS— þ O2 þ 2Hþ  ) 2S0 þ 2H2O   ðat 7 < pH < 9Þ
ð3:55Þ

S0 is pure (or native) sulphur. Economic deposits of sulphur were formed during Stage 2 deep in the Delaware Basin (Figure 3.11b), and much smaller but striking mounds of it were formed in the aerated caves that had   been created by the time of Stage 6 (Figure 3.11c). The processes are mediated by oxidizing bacteria (Thiobacil-  lus spp), which use the elemental sulphur as a food and energy store. Native sulphur of phreatic origin appears to be rare in karst, however, due to the low solubility of O2.
  In Stage 3 the H2S-saturated water has flowed out of     the basin into adjoining carbonate reef and back-reef
rocks, where it mixes with metal-rich chloride waters typical of those that are expelled from any adjoining lagoonal evaporite rocks as the latter are buried by later deposits. In the reducing zone below any redox interface there, limestone dissolution can occur with precipitates of dolomite and massive sulphides filling the voids that are created. This complex reaction may be written:

H2S þ CO2 þ MeClþ þ Mg2þ þ 2CaCO3 þ H2O
) MeS þ Ca2þ þ CaMgðCO3Þ2
þ HCO—  þ Cl— þ 3Hþ	ð3:56Þ

where Me represents heavy metals, chiefly Fe, Zn and Pb. Taking its origin in the generation of methane, this is considered to be the basic equation for deposition of MVT sulphide deposits in carbonate rocks (e.g. Anderson 1991).
  Where H2S is able to migrate to the water table or just below it, conditions permit very effective oxidation, creating sulphuric acid:

H2S þ 2O2  ) H2SO4	ð3:57Þ
which reacts with limestone

H2SO4  þ CaCO3  ) Ca2þ þ SO2— þ CO2  þ H2O
ð3:58Þ

This is a strong acid, capable of dissolving very large underground chambers at the water table very quickly. If
1

moderated by Thiobacillus spp. It is a most potent mechanism of cave genesis; e.g. Galdenzi and Menicheti (1990) show that it played a major role in the formation      of Grotta Grande del Vento (Frasassi), while Korshunov   and Semikolennyh (1994) suggest that the extensive caves of Kugitangtau in Turkmenistan were largely excavated  by  it.  Baiyun  Cave,  Hebei  Province,  China,  is a small but good example developed at the edge of a    coal basin instead of an oil basin.
  Hill (1987) calculated that the H2S required to generate Carlsbad Big Room (Figure 7.33) is less than 10% of one year’s natural gas production from the adjoining New Mexico gas fields, so the mechanism is quantitatively feasible. In the Hill model it represents Stage 4, when the water table was being lowered through the limestones as      a consequence of the uplift of the Guadalupe Mountains     in late Tertiary times (Fig 3.11c).
From equation (3.58), a proportion of the Ca2þ and
   4     ions pair together, precipitate as gypsum and settle  out in the slack-water areas of any water-table ponds. There is also direct conversion of limestone to gypsum on cavern walls, both below and above the water line, the latter being attributable to vapour condensation. Once
again, it is believed that sulphur-oxidizing species mod- erate the reaction.
  In Lower Kane Cave, Wyoming, Stern et al. (2002) measured 1.3 ppm H2S in the air; vapour condensed with a pH ~5.3, which was lowered to 3.0 by bacterial action,     and as low as pH 1.7 in some pendular droplets. In Carlsbad Caverns the pond-floor gypsum is up to 4 m in thickness, and wall alteration crusts reach depths of 0.5–
1.0 m. This is Stage 5 in Hill’s model. The final stage, 7, describes a minor effect occurring at present where water droplets accumulate on the native sulphur deposits in Carlsbad and other caverns, forming encrustations of gypsum:
S0 þ Ca2þ þ 2O2  þ 2H2O ) CaSO4 · 2H2O	ð3:59Þ

  Hydrogen sulphide reactions play an important quanti- tative role in one further setting. This is on modern coasts where caves of varying origin have been inundated by salt water as a consequence of the post-glacial rise of sea level, and a thin freshwater layer rests on the denser salt water. Open cave mouths, drowned shafts and collapses (cenotes) trap organic debris from the surface. Deep in the salt water sulphate-reducing organisms produce H2S from marine sulphate and the debris, which anaerobic and

there is high PCO2   in the air or water, 600 mg L—

or more

aerobic oxidizers around the halocline (fresh–salt inter-

of calcite may be taken into solution at equilibrium (see
Palmer, 1991, figure 22). The processes are probably

face) convert to H2SO4; many divers report that the rock walls in this narrow zone are typically spongy and full of




solutional holes as a consequence (see e.g. Wilson and Morris, 1994, figure 1).
3.7 CHEMICAL COMPLICATIONS    IN CARBONATE DISSOLUTION
This major section could well be entitled ‘boosters and depressants’. It is concerned with particular conditions and effects that can significantly increase or decrease the solubility of the carbonate minerals. Some of these effects also work on gypsum but because its solubility is so great they are of lesser importance. Most of the analysis has been concerned with calcite solubility but aragonite and dolomite are similarly affected in most cases. Figure 3.8 summarizes the principal effects.
  The section begins with effects that occur within the carbonate solution systems already described, then con- tinues with effects when foreign acids, ions or molecules   are introduced.
3.7.1 Temperature and pressure effects – deep karst
From Figure 3.8 and Henry’s Law, the solubility of calcite in water equilibrated to the standard atmosphere  (PCO    ¼ 0:03%) at 25○C is 55 mg L—1. This increases to  75 mg L    at 0○C.
  Water often cools as it passes underground. This enhances its solvent potential. For a water saturated at

effect may predominate so that the gas becomes redis- solved to create a second zone of boosted solvent capa-   city; e.g. waters tapped by boreholes near Cave of the Winds, Colorado, are highly carbonated and undersatu- rated by  ~200 mg L—1  CaCO3  when they  emerge.  The complex association of corrosional cavities with precipi- tated CaCO3 linings in many thermal water caves is explained by changing permutations of this cooling and/     or degassing relationship (see section 3.10 and Ford et al. (1993) for the example of Wind Cave, South Dakota).
  Deep dissolution, with some reprecipitation, is impor-  tant in carbonate-hosted oil and gas fields, at tempera- tures generally above 50○C and with commensurate pressures. Simple hydrolysis of calcite is very effective above 75○C, yielding CO2 (equation 3.4). Complex reac- tions between clay minerals and carbonates may dissolve dolomite, precipitate calcite and yield one mole CO2 per mole dolomite consumed. In the main ‘oil window’ between  80  and  120○C  thermochemical  reduction  of  any  sulphates  yields  H2S.  Decarboxylation  (destruction of fatty acids) yields CO2. Catalytic degradation of other kerogen produces aliphatic acids, RCOOH (e.g. acetic acid CH3COOH), which are more soluble than carbonic  acid and behave in a similar manner.
  Han (1998) cites a good example of the cumulative effects of these processes in his study of the Renqiu palaeokarst-hosted oil and gas deposit, part of the giant Bohai field, China. Temperature was 80○C, pressure

240 mg L—1  CaCO3  and cooling from 20○  to 10○C, Bo¨gli

300 atm and PCO2

20 atm. Total dissolved solids ranged

(1980) cites a boost of 17.7 mg L—1  CaCO3.

3750–10 000 mg L—1    in  14  water  samples,  SIc

being

  Increase of hydrostatic pressure has negligible effects
on dissolved species, including gases. However, if any CO2 bubbles can be introduced into water under pressure, CO2  (g)  solubility  increases  at  a  rate  of  approximately  6 mg L—1  per  100 m—1  depth  of  water  (at  25○C)  until  a depth of ~400 m. At greater depths solubility increases at

negative (—0.5 to —1.5) in 10 of them. Using rock
samples from the oilfield cores, solubility was investi- gated across a range of temperatures and pressures, under both open and closed conditions, with 6-h experimental  runs. With T fixed at 60○C there was rapid increase of solubility as PCO2  was increased from 1 to 5 atm, slowing

~0.3 mg L—1  per 100 m—1.

with further increase to PCO2

¼ 25 atm; with PCO2

fixed at

  When a cave is flooding rapidly, much air may be
trapped and dissolved at pressures up to several atmo- spheres. Bo¨gli (1980) and others have suggested that this boost may explain the development of ceiling half-tubes     in cave passages because bubbles will be dissolved against the ceiling. Much more significant, we believe, is the combination of pressure and cooling where crustal exhalative CO2 in active volcanic or tectonic areas is added (initially as gas bubbles) to deeply circulating waters  that  emerge  via  karst  hot  springs  (Yoshimura    et al. 2004).
  Added CO2 may greatly boost the solvent capacity of deep, hot water, creating deep karst. As the water ascends and pressure falls, gas is released as bubbles. The solution may become supersaturated with calcite, or the cooling

20 atm, solubility peaked at 55 mg cm—3 at ~50○C, with a
linear decline thereafter to ~20 mg cm—3 at the upper limiting temperature of 120○C. Physical effects were readily seen under magnification, taking the form of collapse  of  earlier  diagenetic  porosity  and  introduction of new etch pits.

3.7.2 Inorganic exotic acids
Here we refer to acids generated outside the bicarbonate   and sulphur systems by reaction with other minerals. This   is illustrated in Figure 3.12 where the increase in solubi-   lity that is shown for HCl will be true for all acids introduced in 1 N solution.





Figure 3.12   Illustrating common ion, foreign ion and ionic strength effects. (a) Increase of gypsum solubility with addition of NaCl.
(b) Ionic strength and common ion effects upon calcite solubility at 10○C. Reproduced with permission from Picknett, R.G., L.G.           Bray, and R.D. Stenner 1976. The chemistry of cave waters, in T. D. Ford & C.H.D. Culliingford (eds.). The Science of Speleology.           pp 212–266. © 1976 Academic Press, Elsevier.


  Dilute solutions of hydrochloric acid occur in nature.   The reaction may be represented:
CaCO3 þ HCl ) Ca2þ þ HCO— þ Cl—	ð3:60Þ

or
FeCO3  þ Hþ  ) Fe2þ  þ HCO—



ð3:63Þ

3	Fe2þ  ) Fe3þ þ e—	ð3:64Þ


Most exotic production involves oxidation, e.g. the case     of manganese, which is common in very low concentra-

2Fe3þ

þ 6H2O ) 2FeðOHÞ3 þ 6Hþ

ð3:65Þ

tions, (< 1 mg L—1) in cave waters:

The Fe(OH)3 is a hydrated precipitate.
Similar reactions may occur with other metal carbo-

 1 
Mn2þ  þ   O

þ H O ) MnO

þ 2Hþ	ð3:61Þ

nates in limestones, while sulphides will produce the H2S

2   2	2	2
In the case of siderite (FeCO3, present as thin layers or nodules in many limestones and dolomites) several reac-  tion paths may enhance acidity, for example:
1
2 FeCO3 þ 2 O2 þ 5H2 O ) 2FeðOHÞ3 þ 2HCO—
þ 2Hþ	ð3:62Þ

reactions summarized above. Streams flowing on to lime-
stones from siliciclastic rocks often contain these acids also. However, the quantities involved in most instances    are very small.
3.7.3 ‘Acid rain’
The pH of normal rainwater is between 5.6 and 6.4. In industrialized regions and for hundreds of kilometres




downwind of them it is now often below 4.5: indeed, it     has been recorded below 3.5 in sites as remote from

found that 70.6% of Ca2þ ions were free, 26.7% paired   with SO2—,  1.7% with  HCO—  and 1% with CO2—.  Ion

4	3	3

industry as Spitsbergen (Krawczyk et al. 2002). There are
two principal sources of the additional acidity:

1. H2SO4 from atmospheric oxidation of SO2 produced in  the burning of sulphur-rich fossil fuels and the smelt-  ing of sulphide ores;
2. HNO3, produced when atmospheric nitrogen is oxi- dized in internal combustion engines and then vented    as exhaust gas, or from the manufacture of inorganic fertilizers.

  Acid rain has been attacking limestone buildings in Europe for more than 150 year. The H2SO4 reaction (equation 3.58) is the most noticeable because surficial skins of stone are spalled off by the expansion involved;   the process is termed ‘sulphation’; see section 12.6). Nitrates also are now raining out in amounts as great as     10 kg ha—1 a—1 in many parts of the world. Attention has been focused on the deleterious effects of acid rain on forests, rivers and lakes in regions where there are no carbonate rocks to buffer the acid, e.g. much of central Sweden or the eastern Canadian Shield. So far as we are aware, acid rain has not yet produced any notable new karst on carbonate rocks (as opposed to buildings made  from them), but students of karst water equilibria and erosion rates must be alert to its potential effects in the  water samples that they analyse. Theoretically, acid rain      at pH 4.0 may dissolve 100 times more CaCO3 than ‘normal’ rainwater at pH ~6.0, although this has not been established in field studies.
3.7.4 Ion pairs
Ion pairs normally found in bicarbonate waters are shown   in Figure 3.5. They are weakly associated cation–anion pairs within a solution that also contains many free ions.    As ionic strength increases, pairing will increase. This reduces the activity of ions of interest and so increases mineral solubility.
  Chloride ions do not pair significantly, thus ion pairs in karst and saline waters will be combinations of the cations Ca2þ, Mg2þ, Kþ, Naþ  and Hþ, with CO2—, HCO—, OH—

pairing for Mg2þ was almost identical.
  Although it may increase carbonate and gypsum solu- bility a little (generally < 10%), ion pairing is truly more important for its effect on calculated saturation indices. If pairing is not allowed for, the index values are over- estimated – solutions appear more saturated than they are. Standard computer programs mentioned below (PHREEQC, WATEQ4F, etc.) compute all  probable pairs. It is essential that this be done where total dissolved solids exceed 100 mg L—1.
3.7.5 Common ions
The principle of the common ion effect is that if one of     the ions created by dissolution of a given mineral should    be introduced from some other source, the solubility of    that mineral is reduced. For calcite, aragonite and dolo-  mite, this normally implies alternative sources of Ca2þ or Mg2þ ions. Other carbonate and magnesium minerals are rare, thus the ‘common ion effect’ occurs chiefly where Ca2þ is furnished by gypsum or (to a much lesser extent) from calcic feldspars.
  Addition of Ca2þ  from gypsum decreases the activity     of the ion but increases the molar product by a much greater amount. As a consequence, less calcite can be dissolved before equilibrium is attained. At 10○C addition  of 100 mg L—1 Ca2þ from gypsum reduces a given calcite solubility of 100 mg L—1 CaCO3  to  66 mg L—1.  Where total ionic strength is much less than 0.1, the solubility of calcite and dolomite is considerably reduced in waters that have already had substantial contact with gypsum; this is a principal cause of dedolomitization, the incon- gruent dissolution of the mineral with compensatory precipitation of calcite.
3.7.6 Mixing corrosion in meteoric waters
The important concept of mixing corrosion in fresh waters was introduced into karst studies by Bo¨gli (1964;  see also Bo¨gli 1980, pp. 35–37), which is an effect produced by the mechanical mixing in the CO2 system of two karst waters from different sources, where both are

3	3

and SO2—. For example, H2CO0 (carbonic acid) is an ion

saturated with calcite and therefore, acting alone, are

4	3

pair. More complex pairings such as Ca(HCO3)0

are

incapable of further dissolution. In general, in such mixing

possible, but minor. In bicarbonate and sulphate waters
the significant pairs appear to be CaHCOþ, CaCO0,

cases the resulting mixture will be somewhat aggressive if one or more of the waters contains less than 250 mg L—1

3
MgHCOþ, MgCO0, CaSO0 and MgSO0.

3
CaCO3. The same effect applies in the mixing of two H2S

3	3	4	4

  As an early example, Wigley (1971) studied spring
water from a gypsum and carbonate basin in British Columbia. Total dissolved solids were 1700 mg L—1. He

waters from substantially different sources.
  The   principle   is   illustrated   with   an   example  in  Figure  3.13.  In  the  dissolved  CaCO3   range  of






Figure 3.13 The principles of mixing corrosion in saturated solutions in the CO2 or H2S systems. See text for details. Reproduced with permission from Palmer, A.N., Origin and morphology of limestone caves. Geological Society of America Bulletin, 103, 1–21 © 1991 Geological Society of America.

0–350 mg L—1 that is found in most carbonate karsts the equilibrium relationships between PCO2    or H2S and cal-   cite are non-linear. Groundwater A is saturated for open atmospheric PCO2 (or a low H2S environment) and groundwater B with a rich soil CO2 atmosphere. They mix along the line AB and if the two waters are of equal volume  (mixing  ratio ¼ 1:1,  as  shown  at  point  C  in  the figure) the resulting mixture is undersaturated. The spare Hþ ions can react with calcite or dolomite until equili- brium  is  regained  at  point  D.  The  angle  that  line  C–D subtends with horizontal is determined by the  mixing ratio; A:B ¼ 1:1 ¼ 45○; A:B ¼ 2:1 ¼ 60○, etc.
  Bo¨gli’s proposal has been confirmed by calculations by many others. He contended that the CO2 mixing corro- sion mechanism described here is crucial for the initiation   of caves in limestone and dolomite because otherwise waters are saturated before they have advanced more than    a few metres along their host fissures. Subsequent deter- minations that higher order kinetics begin to apply when      a solution becomes 80–90% saturated (section 3.10) have greatly reduced the significance of this argument. How-  ever, it or some similar effect offers a good explanation     for the initiation of wall and ceiling solution pockets that   are common in limestone phreatic caves where penetrable joints intersect major passages. In a computer model Gabrovsˇek and Dreybrodt (2000) have shown that it may relocate the locus of initial cave passage develop- ment and accelerate its rate.

ions such as Naþ, Kþ and Cl— to a bicarbonate water decreases the activity of Ca2þ, HCO3—, etc.  and  so increases calcite and dolomite solubility (Figure 3.12).
  The ionic-strength effect is primarily associated with addition of salt. Solubility of gypsum is tripled in a seawater-strength solution (Figure 3.12a).
  In the low concentrations of normal limestone fresh water (Fig. 3.12b) the effect appears modest. Approxi- mately 250 mg L—1 NaCl need to be added to boost CaCO3 solubility by 10 mg L—1. When thousands of mg L—1 NaCl are added in salt-water mixing situations, however, the effects can be considerable. Figure 3.14 shows Plummer’s (1975) analysis for seawater mixing at 25○C. With high
 2  calcite solubility can be boosted to ~1000 mg L— .
  On limestone coasts a mixing zone between fresh and
marine groundwaters exists (see section 5.8), in which dissolution, precipitation and replacement reactions can be widespread and quantitatively very important; they are  the subject of intense investigation at the present time (e.g. Martin et al. 2002). In an illustrative early study of   the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico (a young, permeable limestone plain), Back et al. (1984) showed that waters  from the interior flow for as much as 100 km underground


Figure 3.14   Effect of seawater–freshwater mixing upon calcite

solubility,  at  25○C  and  PCO

as specified. Reproduced with

3.7.7 Ionic-strength effects and seawater mixing
The  ionic-strength  effect  is  sometimes  termed  the
foreign-ion effect. Addition of large quantities of foreign

permission  from  Plummer,  L.N.,  Mixing  of  seawater  with
calcium carbonate ground water: quantitative studies in the geological sciences. Geological Society of America Mem. 142, 219–236 © 1975 Geological Society of America.




and become saturated with calcite at ~250 mg L—1. In the final 1 km of  their  journey  to  the  sea,  a  further 120 mg L—1  CaCO3  is added from  ionic-strength effects   as mixing with seawater occurs.
3.7.8 Trace-element effects
The minor element content of limestones or trace ele- ments from other sources that are present in the water have been found to have substantial effects on calcite solubility in laboratory experiments. The principal study    by Terjesen et al. (1961) is confirmed by some later work. The   presence   of   tiny   amounts   of   certain   metals    (< 1 mmol L—1) reduces calcite solubility. The inhibiting effect increases with increasing trace-element content and   is believed to be due to absorption of the metal ions onto dislocations in the calcite crystal surface that otherwise are the sites of dissolution, as explained in section 3.10.      In decreasing order of effectiveness, important metals investigated were scandium, lead, copper, gold, zinc, manganese, nickel, barium and magnesium. As examples,    6 mg L—1 Cu2þ or 1 mg L—1  Pb2þ  reduced calcite solubi- lity by a factor of two at PCO2  ¼ 1 atm. No research has been conducted at more appropriate PCO2 levels. No allowance for these trace-metal effects is made in Satura- tion Index calculations. The effects are probably insig- nificant in most waters.
  Some magnesium is present in most calcites. Effects of differing proportions of Mg2þ in the solid solution are discussed in section 3.10 and Chapter 2. Phosphate ions  may also be a strong inhibitor and Mn2þ at concentrations
> 0.5 mm. Some organic compounds such as maleic and tartaric acids are also inhibitive.
3.8 BIOKARST PROCESSES
Biokarst landforms are those ‘produced largely by the direct biological erosion and/or deposition of calcium carbonate’ (Viles 1984) or other karst minerals. On Earth’s land surfaces the most important quantitative biotic con- tribution to karstification is undoubtedly the production of CO2 in soil, summarized above; once dissolved, this CO2 is responsible for much more dissolution than the sum of   all other processes mentioned below. However, its action    is not direct because the carbonic acid dissolution process itself is inorganic, and usually physically distant from the CO2-generating sources. At the base of soils plant root expansion   may   also   break   up   bedrocks   mechanically, increasing their exposed surficial areas and  thus their dissolution rates. Humic and fulvic acids are  secreted by the roots and may effect minor dissolution. They are more significant in speleothem studies, however; see section 8.7.
3.8.1 
Phytokarst
Phytokarst landforms occur on rocks  exposed  to daylight (or artificial light in some commercial caves) that are bare except for a plant cover. They are ‘produced by  rock  solution  in  which  boring  plant  filaments  are  the  main  agent  of  destruction’  (Folk  et  al.  1973).  The principal    biota    are    colonies    of    tiny    blue-green algae (cyanobacteria), red algae   (rhodophyceae) or diatoms (bacillariophyceae). They are created by photo- synthesis; e.g.

6CO2  þ 6H2O ) C6H12O6  þ 6O2	ð3:66Þ

Secretion of water and CO2 from the filaments that attach  the cells to the rock permits general etching underneath     the colony, or boring (to depths up to several millimetres)   at the filament tips.
  These processes are most effective on limestone and dolomite but can also play a role on gypsum. Algal colonies are found on most bare rocks in temperate and warmer climates, sometimes veneering them completely.  The greatest effects are on sea coasts because the colonies are most abundant and diversified there, and also serve as food for molluscs which further grind and comminute the rock when grazing, accelerating its dissolution. For exam- ple, Tudhope and Risk (1985) estimated that the erosion   rate due to these processes was 350 g CaCO3 m—2 a—1 on a lagoon floor at the Davies Reef, Australia. The principal dissolutional features are small pits, often densely packed   or overlapping, and displaying an immense variety of forms in detail; see section 9.2.
3.8.2 Biokarst underground; bacterial activity
A wide variety of larger animals, ranging from mid-sized mammals down to submillimetric isopods and arthro- pods, can live in caves, lesser fissures and pores, includ-   ing tiny phreatophytes below the water table. Their abundance is generally limited by lack of nutrition, however. As a consequence, their contribution to dissolu- tion and other erosion processes appears to be quantita- tively trivial except very locally. In a pioneer review, Caumartin (1963) suggested that phreatophytes consum-   ing O2 and respiring CO2 might boost carbonate dissolu- tion by as much as 10%, but this has not received support from field studies.
  Modern attention is focused on the role of microbes, principally bacteria, primitive single-celled animals deriving their energy from electron transfer (redox) processes. Heterotrophic species consume matter carried down  from  the  Earth’s  surface.  Chemolithotrophic




species reduce oxides in rocks, chiefly S, N, Fe, Mn and     H oxides. Chemoautotrophic bacteria live on other species. All are bases of food chains for any higher animals in their environments. Anaerobic bacteria can live and multiply in temperatures up to 100○C and pressures > 1 kbar. Northup and Lavoie (2001) give a comprehensive review.
  Bacterial activity takes place in three differing under- ground karstic environments. First and most significant is  the anaerobic, i.e. below the water table to the limiting pressures and temperatures noted above. The reduction of sulphates by Desulphovibrio spp (discussed in section 3.6) appears to be the most important deep bacterial source of acids for carbonate dissolution, probably far exceeding the sum of all others in quantitative terms. Other chemolitho- trophic species may contribute CO2, NH4 and Hþ for acid dissolution more locally (e.g. James 1994).
  The second distinct environment is around the water table itself, including streams and flooding zones in river caves, tributary fissures, etc. Dissolved O2 and other heterotrophic sources of energy are more abundant here, encouraging higher densities of both oxidizing and redu- cing species. They may mediate reactions with FeCO3, etc, to boost CO2 and Hþ in the water. One reaction for which results can be seen in most cave streams is the oxidation of Mn2þ to produce birnessite and other brown or black manganese coatings on pebbles (especially of silicate rocks)  or  on  passage  walls;  it  is  not  known  to  occur  in the absence of bacteria (Ehrlich 1981).
  The final environment is that of the relict cave that has been abandoned by its formative streams. Flowing waters  no longer erode its walls and its clastic sediments are immobile on the floors. Acidic bacterial biofilms may then coat the walls, etching them and accelerating selec-  tive weathering to depths of several centimetres (Jones 2001; Zupan Hajna 2003), especially where they are wetted by seepage or condensation. As entrance zones become progressively illuminated by roof collapse, etc., algae compete with the bacteria, replacing them with phytokarst pittings oriented towards the light. Seepage waters from soils carry varying quantities of ammonia into caves; in fine-grained, well-drained cave sediments nitrifying bacteria convert it into saltpetre (the nitre KNO3 component of gunpowder) in two steps

2NH3 þ 3O2 ) 2NO— þ 2Hþ þ 2H2O	ð3:67Þ

has passed through all three of the above environments during the past 50 year as a consequence of progressive drainage for quarrying purposes. In an outstanding study, Andrejchouk and Klimchouk (2001) identified seven different  oxidizing  and  reducing  species  at  work  on  rock and in sediments there. While still anaerobic, gyp-   sum cave roofs were altered to limestone plus native sulphur (equations 3.50, 3.53) by bacterial mediation. In    the dewatered cave, aerobic species quickly started to work;  for example, in the air, N2  was locally increased  from the atmospheric standard concentration of ~79% to
> 83% by the exotic reaction:

5S þ 6KNO3 þ 4NaHCO3 ) 3K2SO4
þ 2Na2SO4  þ 4CO2  þ 3N2  þ 2H2O	ð3:69Þ
3.8.3 Algae, bacteria and calcite deposition
While algae and bacteria may be locally or regionally significant in initiating or accelerating dissolution, there    has been much closer study of their roles in facilitating calcite and aragonite deposition surficially (tufa and travertine) and in caves. They may serve as passive nucleii for precipitation onto surfaces or can be active catalysts inducing it. Passive mineralization occurs where bacterial cell walls, sheaths, etc. are covered with anionic sites to which cations such as Ca2þ can bind, whether the bacterium is alive or dead. Active mineralization occurs when bacteria produce enzymes or other chemicals that induce precipitation. Biologically controlled minerali- zation is common in algae and protozoa that build calcite structures   such   as   coccoloiths.   Bacteria   appear   to   be essential for formation of many types of moonmilk (see e.g. Northup and Lavoie 2001).
3.9 MEASUREMENTS IN THE FIELD AND LABORATORY: COMPUTER PROGRAMS
Most nations measure total hardness, calcium hardness, bicarbonate, sulphate and chloride concentrations as part    of   their   water   quality   monitoring   programmes   and  so publish handbooks of standard methods. Our purpose  here is to give only the briefest summary, with some tips   on practice for karst purposes, and to refer to some other useful sources.

2NO—  þ O2  ) 2NO—

ð3:68Þ

2	3
3.9.1 Temperature and specific electrical

Although most investigations have focused on bacterial activity in carbonate karst, it can also be significant in gypsum caves. Zoloushka (‘Cinderella’) Cave, Ukraine,

conductivity
Measurement of the specific conductivity (SpC) of a water sample is a quick and easy process that can give a very




1400



SpC>600 μS/cm


1200

1000



SpC=0.88*TH+409.6 R2=0.22



n=360



800

600

400



SpC<600 μS/cm

SpC=1.86*TH+31.5



200

R2=0.93

n=1949




0
0	100



200



300



400



500



600



700

Total Hardness [as mg/l CaCO3]

Figure 3.15    Specific electrical conductivity versus total hardness expressed as mg L—1  CaCO3. The 2300 individual results plotted       here are from 20 different, recently published, data collections from carbonate karstlands worldwide. Lower dashed line is the theoretical relationship between SpC and a pure Ca þ CO2 þ HCO3 solution, allowing for ion pairing, and upper dashed line is for the    molar  equivalent.  The  dolomite  relationships  are  very  similar.  Solid  line¼best  fit  where  SpC > 600 mS cm—1.  Best  fit  for        SpC < 600 mS cm—1 is lost in the data. The equations are for these two lines of best fit. Reproduced with permission from Krawczyk,
W.E. and Ford, D.C. Correlating specific conductivity with total hardness in limestone and dolomite karst waters. Earth Surface       Processes and Landforms, 31; 221–234, © 2006 John Wiley and Sons.


good first approximation of the dissolved load because, at

theoretical  relationship  (R2 > 0:995),  signifying  that

low I, electrical conductivity is proportional to total ionic

there  were  little  but  Ca2þ,  Mg2þ   and  HCO—

ions in

concentration. Modern solid-state digital conductivity meters are robust, small, light and cheap. They measure       a wide range of conductivities on linear scales, with results corrected to a standard temperature (customarily 25○C). They include temperature probes accurate to 0.5○C  or better: this is sufficient for most applications, including computation of saturation indices.
  Figure 3.15 shows the theoretical relationship between SpC, and pure calcite (or aragonite) and dolomite solu-   tions expressed  as  mg L—1  CaCO3.  Overlaid are  the measured results from > 2300 full ionic analyses reported from many different carbonate karst regions worldwide in recent  years  (Krawczyk  and  Ford   2006).   Where SpC < 600 mS cm—1, the best-fit line to the field relation- ship is

SpC ¼ 1:86 · TH þ 31:5	R2 ¼ 0:93	ð3:70Þ
where TH is the total hardness. Waters from some of the individual sample regions closely approximate the

solution. In contrast, from areas of substantial agricultural   or industrial pollution, correlation sometimes drops below  R2 ¼ 0:8. The best-fit line begins to deviate significantly from  theoretical  values  when  total  hardness  exceeds
~250 mg L—1  as CaCO3. In most instances this deviation can be interpreted to indicate that sulphate rocks or salt are also present in small amounts and supplying some ions to  the solution. Nevertheless, the one standard error of estimate band about the best fit is pleasingly narrow: for  SpC ¼ 200 mS cm—1    it   gives   TH ¼ 98 T 2 mg L—1;   for SpC ¼ 400 mS cm—1, TH ¼ 193 T 2 mg L—1.
  Very few samples with SpC > 600 mS cm—1 are pure calcite or dolomite solutions, although such high con-
ductivity can be achieved by evaporative concentration or where there is deep source CO2. In addition to sulphates   and chlorides, some of the largest positive deviations are  due to nitrate contamination.
  Figure 3.16 shows the same relationship for waters in gypsum karst areas, based on 140 complete ion analyses from five different sites in Europe and North America.





Figure 3.16    Specific electrical conductivity versus dissolved sulphates expressed as meq L—1 Ca2þþ SO2—.  The lower dashed line is      for the pure Ca þ SO4 þ H2O system, with ion pairing, and upper dashed line is for the molar equivalent. The equation is for the best         fit, indicated by the solid line. Reproduced from Krawczyk, W.E. and Ford, D.C. Correlating specific conductivity with total hardness         in limestone and dolomite karst waters. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 31; 221—234, © 2006 John Wiley and Sons.


Here total dissolved solids are expressed in meq L—1 Ca2þ þ SO2—. The best-fit relationship is the polynomial:
SpC ¼ 65:7 · Ca2þ þ 132:9	R2 ¼ 0:90	ð3:71Þ
It is seen that deviation from the theoretical relationship    for pure gypsum becomes significant above 10 meq L—1, which is equal to ~680 mg L—1 of Ca2þ þ SO2—  in solu- tion. As saturation with respect to gypsum is approached (30–35 meq L—1 or 2100–2400 mg L—1) the best-fit values are again greater than the theoretical in most instances; probably, this is due chiefly to the presence of ions from carbonates and chlorides.
  Conductivity meters can be adapted for continuous recording. Where an accurate relationship between elec- trical conductivity and the dissolved species of interest has been established, therefore, continuous estimates of the latter can be readily obtained.
3.9.2 Field measurement of pH
The accurate measurement of the pH of a water sample has been the gravest analytical problem encountered in the carbonate equilibrium approach that we advocate. How- ever, modern solid-state digital pH meters are small, robust

temperature of the water sample before any measurement    is made, which can require uncomfortable waiting in cold weather.
  Where it is not practicable to take the instrument to the sampling site (e.g. deep in a cave), pH should be deter- mined as soon as possible afterwards. Ek (1973) showed  that for some karst waters a very good linear correlation exists between field pH and laboratory pH so that the former can be omitted. In any study area this fortunate circumstance must be established. It cannot be assumed.
3.9.3 Specific determination of dissolved species
Ideally, all variables should be measured at the sampling  site in order to avoid disturbances, such as loss of CO2,    that occur during transport and storage. In practice, it is  quite feasible to assemble portable apparatus for a back- pack or a small field laboratory and to obtain adequately accurate results with it.
  Total hardness (Ca2þ  and Mg2þ) and Ca2þ  concentra- tions are determined by complexometric titration with
EDTA-Na.  With  care,  results  are  reproducible  to
T1.0 mg L—1.
Carbonate alkalinity (HCO—  plus a little CO2—) can

3	3

and inexpensive; some are even submersible. Used with a
combined (glass plus reference) electrode, and buffers as recommended by the  manufacturers, field measurements  are reproducible to T0.05 pH or better. A remaining difficulty is the need to bring buffers to the ambient

also be determined by titration using diluted hydrochloric
acid (HCl) and commercial indicators or bromocresol green and methyl red indicator. It is better done by potentiometric titration, using 0.01 or 0.02 N HCl and the field pH meter, with an end-point at pH 4.5.




  Chloride is best determined by ion-selective electro- des. Accurate determination of sulphate under field conditions is more difficult. A common method is turbi- dimetry, which measures a sulphate precipitate when a barium salt is added; a set of turbid standard solutions (e.g. 10) should be prepared (Krawczyk 1996). In many  karst regions nitrates of natural origin may be present. In   the modern world there can be abundant nitrates from livestock, fertilizers or acid rain. These substances will appear in SpC measurements and distort the ion balances (see below); therefore it is desirable to test for them. Standard methods use ion-selective electrodes.

3.9.4 Laboratory methods
All of the above methods can be used in a fully equipped laboratory. However, greater accuracy and rapid proces-  sing of large batches of samples can be obtained by use of AAS (atomic absorption spectrometry) and ICP–AES (inductively coupled plasma–atomic emission spectrome- try) for cations or IC (ion chromatography) for both cations and anions, as in commercial water quality laboratories. Samples should be acidified for cation ana- lysis, which may dissolve any suspended calcium carbo- nate. Filtration is also necessary, which can disturb the

programs that contain comprehensive data on 30 or more minerals, solute species, their thermodynamic properties   and equilibria in groundwaters. All have been modified through several generations and can be customized for use with Excel, etc. PHREEQC (Parkhurst and Appelo, 1999) is perhaps the most widely used.
3.10 DISSOLUTION AND PRECIPITATION KINETICS OF KARST ROCKS
Solution kinetics refers to the dynamics of dissolution. Processes are at their most vigorous when a solution is far from equilibrium. Forward processes to dissolve a mineral and back reactions to precipitate it are governed    by the same rules and so may be considered together. The central problem in kinetics is to determine what controls   the rate of reaction in specified conditions. Using solu- tions to the problem, karst specialists may then devise numerical models to estimate, for example, rates of extension of proto-caves or growth of stalagmites. Most relevant kinetic studies have been limited to calcite so it      is emphasized here. Aragonite, dolomite, gypsum and salt are discussed more briefly.
  Reactions are homogeneous when they take place in   one phase, e.g. CO2  (aq) þ H2O ! H2CO0.  They are

equilibria by precipitating CaCO3. Dissolved silica may

heterogeneous

3
when two phases are involved. All rock

be determined on a spectrophotometer at a wavelength of
816 nm, by the method of reduction to a blue complex.
3.9.5 Analytical accuracy
The completeness and/or accuracy of the analysis of a water sample are checked by calculating the ion balance error (IBE):
P cations — P anions

surface solution reactions are heterogeneous and so is all karstic precipitation.
  In a static liquid, ions and molecules of dissolved species move from regions of higher concentration to lower concentrations by the process of molecular diffu-  sion. If the liquid is flowing or is disturbed by waves or currents, dissolved species are dispersed by eddy diffu- sion which typically is several orders of magnitude more rapid than molecular diffusion.

IBEð%Þ¼ 100 P cations

þ P anions

ð3:72Þ
  
In most karst situations the water is in motion and
therefore eddy diffusion dominates. However, a diffusion

where all ion concentrations are given in meq L—1.
  Given the problems of field science, we find any error   up to 3–5% acceptable. Where error is greater, either a mistake has been made in the determinations or there are  one or more major ionic species present that have not been measured.
  Because of the field difficulties, saturation index values for calcite, aragonite and dolomite will normally have an error of T0.01–0.03.

3.9.6 Computer programs
In North America at least four major programs are currently in use – PHREEQC, WATEQ4F, MINTEQA2 and SOLMINEQ-GW. They are large, general purpose

boundary layer (DBL) is assumed at the liquid–solid interface where the water is static because of friction and thus molecular diffusion must operate. The boundary layer will be saturated with respect to the mineral, or nearly so. It is very thin, ranging from perhaps 1 mm to 1 mm in differing situations; mid-range values around 30 mm are often cited by experimentalists. Its thickness is determined by surface roughness, fluid viscosity and velocity of flow   in the bulk liquid above it. Plummer et al. (1979) proposed that there may be a further ‘adsorption layer’ of solute ions and molecules that is loosely bound to the solid surface. This sublayer is only a few molecules deep.
  Figure 3.5, the equilibria cartoon, includes these con- cepts. The DBL can be conceived as a weak shield between the aggressive bulk liquid and the soluble solid.




  Taking the calcium bicarbonate dissolution–equilibration– precipitation sequence as our  example, potential rate controls in the open system may  be divided into the following four general categories.

1. CO2 dissolves into the water, or degasses from it back into the atmosphere.
2. Speciation of solutes takes place in the bulk liquid or,     to a limited extent, in the DBL.
3. Potentially aggressive species (Hþ, H2CO0, CO2 (aq))
  
The speciation reactions are homogeneous. Most are effectively instantaneous but the hydration of CO2 takes approximately 30 s at 25○C. Great importance is now attached to this slow reaction by several authorities (see below) if it occurs within the boundary layer. Roques (1969) showed that all equilibration within the bulk liquid occurs within 5 min. This is faster than CO2 dissolution or degassing and so is not considered to be rate-controlling.
  Molecular diffusion of species in or out through a DBL   is described by Fick’s first law:

diffuse in through the DBL, and the resulting reaction
products diffuse out.

F ¼ —

DðCeq

— CbulkÞ

ð3:73Þ

4. Reaction occurs at the solid–liquid interface: a Ca2þ or
CO2—

X
3   —1

3    ion dissociates from the crystal surface, or Hþ

where F  is mass  flux (M L—   T

), D is a diffusion

combines with a CO2— ion to dislodge it.

The dissolution rate will be determined by whichever reaction within these categories is the slowest. Where the system is closed, the first category is eliminated.
  Researchers have approached the dissolution question primarily by laboratory experiments. Classically, calcite powders or Iceland spar crystals (which have relatively few imperfections) are dissolved in acid solutions, with occasional or steady stirring. Constant pH is maintained by bubbling in CO2  (pH static experiments) or pH is allowed  to change as dissolution proceeds (pH drift). It is infeasible to measure changes of concentration in the DBL itself because it is too thin, so kinetic processes and rates are estimated by changes of concentrations in the bulk liquid. Later experiments have added spinning discs of polished crystal, limestone, etc. Under laminar flow conditions, the faster the spin, the thinner the DBL; in theory it then maintains a constant thickness after turbulent (eddy) flow commences, thus permitting diffusion rates in the DBL to  be estimated. Within the past decade, application of atomic force microscopy (AFM) or optical interferometry has made it possible to observe dissolution actually occurring    at the solid–liquid interface (i.e. in aquo) at near-molecular scales, 0.2–0.5 nm (e.g Hillner et al. 1992). Atomic force microscopy works in real time but provides only brief glimpses, while interferometry relies on surface mapping    of changes between successive static snapshots. However,    a convincing picture of the rate controls of calcite dissolu- tion is now appearing; Morse and Arvidson (2002) give a comprehensive review.
  Rates of dissolution of CO2 and of degassing are not well known. There is rapid diffusion of the species in air  and flowing water so that conditions at the interface are uniform at a scale of centimetres. Roques (1969) found that  a  drop  of  water  forming  at  the  tip  of  a  soda  straw stalactite lost 10% of its CO2 in the first second, 30% in 90 s and 70% in 15 min. Dissolution or degassing of CO2 do not appear to be rate-controlling in most circumstances.

coefficient (L2 T—1), Ceq  is the equilibrium concentration
of the species (which is assumed to be the concentration     at the solid–liquid interface) and Cbulk its actual concen- tration in the bulk liquid; X is the thickness of the DBL.   For the species of interest in karst work, values of D are 1–2 × 10—5 cm2 s—1 at 25○C, falling to about one half of these rates at 0○C. Different ionic strengths (I) have little effect. The diffusion coefficient of CO2  in still air is
~1 cm2 s—1    at   25○C   and   0.14 cm2 s—1    at   0○C.   Eddy
diffusivity rates in water range 10—1  to 10—3 cm2 s—1.
  From these findings we see that where diffusion processes are rate-controlling they must be those of the liquid DBL and thus likely to be affected by conditions at the solid–liquid interface. This has been appreciated for a long time, leading to the adoption of conceptual models  such as that shown in Figure 3.17. This suggests that diffusion of Hþ  ions from the bulk liquid into the DBL    will be the control where Hþ is very abundant, i.e. in very acid solutions. As concentrations of solutes increase in the bulk, conditions move to a Transition regime of more complex kinetics, succeeded by an Hþ Independent regime very close to saturation.
  To understand reactions at the solid surface it is best to picture a ‘step, kink and hole’ model  such  as Figure 3.18a. Atoms and molecules in calcite, etc. are ordered in layers. Isolated atoms resting on a top layer have highest free-energy available for dissociation because it is likely that only one chemical bond attaches them to the layer. Atoms at a step have two likely bonds,    at kinks three or four, and in a hole five or more. These   will be the preferred sites of dissolution. A Hþ  ion that     has diffused to the crystal surface will move across it until encountering a CO2— molecule at such a site. The HCO— ion created then diffuses away, laying bare a Ca2þ atom which dissociates in its turn. Studies using AFM and interferometry have found that dissolution rates are fastest on the steepest surfaces, which are usually flights     of steps one molecule in height and width. Destruction thus passes from one atomic layer to the next, much like





25°C



pH

Figure 3.17 A schematic representation of rate-controlling mechanisms for calcite dissolution as a function of pH and temperature. Reproduced from Morse, J.W. and Arvidson, R.S, ‘The dissolution kinetics of major sedimentary carbonate minerals’. Earth Science Reviews, 58; 51–84 © 2002 Elsevier.


unravelling successive rows of knitting. Measured migra- tion rates have  ranged 0.5–3.5 nm s—1 in  Hþ-dependent regimes. Holes are also enlarged into etch pits that form   and coalesce rapidly; e.g. 800 nm deep in 30 min. As

drawn in Figure 3.18a, nucleii possessing multiple bonds    to a top layer are more important in calcite precipitation  than in dissolution because they will attract ions to them from the solution.





Figure 3.18    (Left) A model for dissolving or accreting calcite surfaces at the molecular scale. Steps, kinks, holes and nucleii are     different types of surface sites, with numbers suggesting their likely number of chemical bonds. Adsorbed ions are shown in black.      (Right) An example of experimental spinning disc calcite dissolution rates; o0¼disc rotation rate. The straight line represents the    theoretical function if the rate were entirely transport-controlled. The long dashed line is for runs with Iceland spar (few imperfections), the short dash line for runs with Carrera marble (many dislocations). Effects of surface control become very apparent in this figure. Adapted from Morse, J.W. and Arvidson, R.S, ‘The dissolution kinetics of major sedimentary carbonate minerals’. Earth Science Reviews, 58, 51–84. © 2002 Elsevier and Sjoberg, E.L. and Rickard, D.T. ‘The influence of experimental design on the rate of calcite dissolution’. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 47; 2281–2286. © 1983 Elsevier.




  Most individual crystals (and all larger aggregations of crystals) have imperfections, small faults (termed screw dislocations) that cut through the regularly stacked boxes    of Figure 3.18a to create offsetting in all layers. These also function as steep surfaces for fastest unravelling.
  We can now appreciate the dissolution-inhibiting effects of trace elements such as nickel, copper, etc. mentioned above. In eroding back, a kink or screw dislocation arrives at one of these atoms that will not dissociate or combine with Hþ. Erosional exploitation of
3.10.1 
Kinetics of calcite dissolution
There were comprehensive series of experiments during    the 1970s, with seawater by Berner and Morse (e.g. 1974) and with carbonated distilled water by Plummer and Wigley (1976) and Plummer et al. (1978, 1982). These covered the complete range of expected natural tempera- tures and a wide range of ionic strengths.
  Results were expressed as standard rate equations of the form:

that particular kink, etc. ceases.

dC	kcA

n	ð3:74Þ

  Using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) Schott
et al. (1989) found that the density of surface defects such  as dislocations, kinks and holes, and of inhibitors, had little effect on dissolution rates in Hþ-dependent regimes,  but that in Transition and Hþ-Independent conditions the effects became two to three times greater than earlier estimates based on changing concentrations in the bulk liquid had suggested. This is illustrated by the spinning    disc experiments shown in Figure 3.18b. In a Transition regime, as spin is increased (i.e. DBL thickness, X, is reduced) dissolution rates deviate ever further from the linear rate predicted for a pure Transport regime. Due to

dt ¼ VðCeq — CÞ
where Kc is a surface dissolution rate constant for calcite, Ceq is the concentration at saturation (i.e. at the solid surface) and C is the concentration in the bulk flow. Plummer et al. (1978) proposed that there are three significant forward rate processes – reaction with Hþ, reaction with H2CO0, and by CaCO3 dissociation alone. Their comprehensive rate equation (the ‘PWP Equation’) is:

r  ¼  k1  · aHþ  þ k2  · aH2CO0   þ k3  · aH2O

metamorphism, the Carrara marbles have high densities      of defects and of inhibitors, and are very deviant. Iceland spars are nearly ideal calcites with few defects or inhibitors and much less affected. Findings such as these led Morse and Arvidson (2002) to write ... ‘The distressing result is that there can be no general equa- tion that is applicable to all calcites that simply relates surface area and solution composition! It also implies that the influences of inhibitors will differ for different calcites.’
  In many analyses DBL and surface effects are merged    in a term, A/V, where A is the surface area of the solid and  V is the volume of the solution. At one extreme, a speck     of calcite dust settling through a pool has a very low A/V ratio: the DBL is essentially of infinite thickness, so that eddy diffusion is irrelevant and surface effects are trivial.   At the other extreme is the case where water is flowing through bedding planes or joints with very small mean apertures and high surface roughness. Here, the A/V ratio    is large and any effect that can thin the DBL to permit    eddy diffusivity to play a role is potentially very sig- nificant: this introduces the important concept of break- through, which is discussed later. A bare limestone surface with rain falling upon it is one example of intermediate conditions that are, kinetically, very com- plex because A/V ratios change momentarily with the rainfall intensity and pulses of sheet flow.
  With these caveats in mind, calcite solution may now     be appraised.
     
— k4  · aCa2þ  · aHCO—	ð3:75Þ
where a represents activity. The three forward rates were fitted as functions of temperature: log k1 ¼ 0:98—444=T, log  k2  ¼ 2:84 — 217=T  and  log  k3  ¼ —5:86 — 317=T, where T is in ○K. The final term is the  expression for back reaction. The derivation of k4 is complicated but can be approximated by standard rate  equations for calcite precipitation given below.
  Figure 3.19a compares the PWP theoretical rate model with some dissolutional experimental results and AFM surface measurements. Dissolution is given in moles cm—2 s—1. Note  that  the  range  of  pH  is  much  larger than will be found in any regional karst waters. It is seen that there is close agreement with respect to the form  of the function across this great pH range, but disagree-  ment of about one order of magnitude in actual measured rates in the general karstic range between pH ~5 and pH 8.9. The AFM results correspond well with the PWP theory in this latter range, but there is comparatively little change of actual rates there.
  An alternative perspective is given in Figure 3.19b, where data from the same or similar experiments are normalized against their initial (fastest) rates, and the evolving degree of saturation with respect to calcite (i.e.    the arithmetic Saturation Ratio, where equilibrium occurs    at 1.00). Curve 1 is for calcite in seawater, curve 2 for dolomite. Curves 3–7 are for calcite in pure H2O þ CO2 solutions – it is seen that they are all similar, displaying






Figure 3.19   (Upper) Theoretical and experimental calcite solu- tion rates compared. Strong dashed line¼the PWP model; short dashes¼model of Chou et al. (1989). Open circles, the square and filled triangles are from experiments with powders. Black squares with error bars are AFM results. Reproduced from Morse, J.W.    and Arvidson, R.S, ‘The dissolution kinetics of major sedimentary carbonate minerals’. Earth Science Reviews, 58, 51–84 © 2002 Elsevier (Lower) Dissolutional experimental approaches to calcite and dolomite saturation. Curve 1 from Berner and Morse (1974), using calcite in seawater. All other curves with distilled water and added CO2. Curve 2, dolomite (Herman and White 1985); curves    3 and 4, Plummer and Wigley (1976) using Iceland spar; curves 5 and 6 from Svensonn and Dreybrodt (1992) using Iceland spar; curve 7 from Eisenlohr et al. (1997) using limestone discs. (This figure compiled by S.R.H. Worthington.) Reproduced from Morse,
J.W. and Arvidson, R.S, ‘The dissolution kinetics of major sedimentary carbonate minerals’. Earth Science Reviews, 58, 51–84 © 2002 Elsevier.
log-linear rates of dissolution until the solutions are 70– 80% saturated, when rates drop off rapidly in power law form, i.e. the kinetics shift to a higher order (higher value   of n in equation 3.73). No experiment could be carried to

100% saturation under fixed boundary conditions because the rates became too slow to measure. The small differ- ences between curves 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 can be attributed to differing experimental procedures plus the problematic surface effects.
  The k1  term of equation (3.74) describes the diffusion     of Hþ through the DBL to the solid surface and is the rate control in the Hþ Dependent regime. This generally requires stronger acid solutions than are  encountered in    the majority of karst situations; it is most effective where acid mine drainage spills onto limestone or in very acid rains, and perhaps where organic acids drain from peat bogs. It can occur in some instances of bacteria-mediated H2SO4 cave genesis, e.g. Cueva de Villa Luz, Mexico (Hose et al. 2000).
  It appears that most limestone dissolution takes place      in transition regimes with complex kinetics (Figure 3.17); the processes of terms k1, k2  and k3  in the PWP equation  are all in play, diffusion in and out and surface effects are  all variables with quantitative importance that may vary  from point to point and, in some instances, with time at a given point. Rate plots against saturation, such  as Figure 3.19b, give the best practical insight: SIc increases from < 0.1 to > 0.8 across the range.
  In the Hþ Independent regime solutions are close to saturation. Little free Hþ remains, pH thus approaches its upper limit for the ambient conditions. Back reaction (term k4  in the PWP equation) may contribute to slowing  the net dissolution. Density of surface defects can become the predominant control, which has led different experimentalists to derive powers of n ranging from 2 to    11 for their best fit. There is general support for Drey- brodt and Buhmann’s (1991) contention that the com- paratively slow process of hydration of the little remaining CO2 (aq) within the DBL becomes an impor-   tant control of the forward reaction rate.
  In seawater SIc  is generally greater than 0.7, which is  only 0.2 pH below thermodynamic equilibrium. Calcite dissolution thus takes place at the high end of the transi-  tion regime or in the Hþ Independent regime. Only phosphate functions as a major inhibitor. In phosphate- free  seawater,  the  reaction  order  has  been  found  to  vary from 2 with calcite powders to 4.5 for calcite marine tests with complex void geometry (Morse and Arvidson 2002).
3.10.2 The solution kinetics of aragonite, Mg-calcites and dolomite, and quartz
There have been few investigations of the solution kinetics of aragonite. Busenberg and Plummer (1986) found that the behaviour is very similar to that of calcite.




  Dolomite dissolution has also received relatively little study, here because of the slow reaction rates coupled with difficulties created by the many variations in struc-   ture and composition in the double carbonate. Uncertain-  ties in the thermodynamic solubility of ideal dolomite remain close to ×10.
  Busenberg and Plummer (1982) worked with cleavage fragments, using fixed and free-drift pH experiments, and were unable to  come  closer  to  saturation  than SId ¼ —3. Others have used reactor columns, spinning discs or scanning interferometry. Sample findings are shown in Figure 3.20, where it is seen that kinetic

behaviour is much the same as that of calcite in very acidic, Hþ Dependent conditions. There are sadly few data for pH 5.0–8.9, the normal range in karst waters. The dissolution rates there are more than one order of magnitude slower than the calcite and aragonite rates.
  Busenberg and Plummer (1982) proposed that dolomite dissolution proceeds in two steps. The first is reaction of   the CaCO3  component  with  Hþ,  H2CO0  and H O  as  in equation (3.74). The second sees the same reactions occurring much more slowly with the MgCO3 component: this is rate-controlling. As solute concentrations increase  (but  still  at  SId   below  —3  or  0.1%)  there  begins  to  be


(a) 6
–7
–8



–9

–10
–11
–12
–2




0	2	4	6	8	10	12
pH



(b)

–11
–12


DISSOLUTION RATE OF QUARTZ



KNAUSS & WOLERY (1988) 70°C


–13

–14
–15
–16
–17
–18
0

BRADY & WALTHER
(1989) 60°C

BENNETT et al. (1988)
                25°C

BRADY & WALTHER  (1989)  25°C


1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10   11   12   13   14
pH


Figure 3.20 (a) Dolomite dissolution rates. The solid curve is the theoretical equation of Chou et al. (1989); open circles and squares, results of selected bulk dissolution experiments; filled circle, mean results from vertical scanning interferometry. Reproduced     from Morse, J.W. and Arvidson, R.S. (2002) The dissolution kinetics of major sedimentary carbonate minerals. Earth Science Reviews, 58, 51–84. (b) Some experimental dissolution rates obtained for quartz. Reproduced with permission from Mecchia, M. and Piccini, L., Hydrogeology and SiO2 geochemistry of the Aonda Cave System, Auyan-Tepui, Bolivar, Venezuela. Bollettino Sociedad Venezolana Espeleologia, 33; 1–18, 1999.




significant back reaction of HCO—. It is being adsorbed onto positively charged sites (i.e. protruberances of Ca2þ   and Mg2þ) at the surface. This explains the exponential slowing of the dissolution rate. Their comprehensive kinetic equation is of the same form as that for calcite:

constant, kss, of 6:7 × 10—1 mmol cm—2 s—1  in a standard rate equation of the form of equation (3.74). Trace amounts of Co, Cd, Cr and Pb were found to be effective inhibitors but Fe and Zn were not. Given the purity of natural salt bodies, these inhibitors can be ignored in

l ¼ k1  · an

n
H2CO0

þ k3  · an

þ k4  · aHCO—
ð3:76Þ

most cases. In their absence, the dissolution rate is in linear relation to salt concentration in the bulk solution,
i.e. n ¼ 1 in the rate equation.

n ¼ 0:5 at temperatures below 45○C, i.e. the square root    of activity in a double carbonate.
  We can now propose a mental picture of what happens    at the solid surfaces when dolomites and Mg-calcites dissolve.  Ideal  (stoichiometric)  dolomite  comprises
  
In the caves and karst of the Mount Sedom salt dome, Israel, Frumkin (2000a,b) has found that laminar flow films on shaft walls become saturated within a few minutes.  When  turbulent  flood  waters  sweep  through  the caves, measured channel floor recession rates are as
—1

CaCO3  and MgCO3  molecules in alternate layers. A

great as 0.2 mm s

, in good agreement with the rate

layer of CaCO3 is quickly peeled away by dissolution. Magnesium carbonate is more strongly bonded. Its exposed layer resists dissolution while any residual pinnacles of CaCO3  plus MgCO3  protruding from it

constant given above (Frumkin and Ford, 1995).
  In similar experiments with gypsum, experimenters such as Jeschke et al. (2001) found dissolution of natural gypsum (including selenite crystals, which have relatively

attract HCO3

ions in back reaction. As the density of

few imperfections) to be in nearly linear relation to bulk

lattice defects increases so do the opportunities to ‘unra- vel’ the crystal by following screw dislocations that breach its MgCO3 layers.
  Mg-calcite is a solid solution. Molecules of MgCO3 are scattered from place to place in the CaCO3 lattice; there is no regular alternation of layers. In ‘low Mg-calcite’ the greater resistance of the few MgCO3   clumps creates many steps and kinks in calcite about them. Low Mg-calcite is more soluble than pure calcite as a consequence. In ‘high Mg-calcite’ the density of clumps may become too great; the step and kink forward effects are overwhelmed by the

solute concentration up to ~60% saturation, following
which mixed kinetic effects began to become significant  (i.e. Regime 2). They obtained a surface rate constant, ksg,  of ~1.1 to 1:3 × 10—4 mmol cm—2 s—1.  In laminar flow films approximately 1 mm in thickness dissolution rates were ~3 × 10—6 mmol cm—2 s—1, illustrating the diffu- sion control. Experiments with pure synthetic gypsum found a linear rate law up to equilibrium.
  At and above 94% saturation in natural gypsum, rates     of dissolution dropped abruptly as surface effects came to dominate the process. A value of n ¼ 4:5 was obtained,

back reaction of HCO3

adsorbing onto protruberances.

nearly identical to the result frequently found in experi-
ments with calcite crystals.

Most field researchers have found that high Mg-calcite is
less soluble than pure calcite, although it is still more soluble than true dolomite in most instances.
  Using similar experimental designs, the dissolution rates of quartz (the predominant mineral in sandstone and quartzite karst) are found to be much lower than those of dolomite, 10—15 mol cm—2 s—1 or less at 25○C (Figure 3.20b; from Mecchia and Piccini 1999). At hydrothermal spring temperatures (e.g. 70○C in the figure) they begin  to approach the lowest dolomite rates.
3.10.3 The dissolution kinetics of salt, gypsum and anhydrite
These minerals are very soluble, dissolving by molecular dissociation alone. The dissolution rates thus are expected to be transport-controlled by diffusion out through the DBL, with possible surface effects appearing close to saturation.
  Alkattan et al. (1997) studied salt dissolution with spinning  disc  experiments,  obtaining  a  surface  rate
  
The dissolution of anhydrite is approximately 20 times slower than that of gypsum, essentially because the latter    is precipitating onto the anhydrite surface as molecules dissociate there. This can be considered to be a surface control effect that will apply until a given molecular layer has been converted, which can then be unravelled at the gypsum rate. The surface rate constant quoted for anhy-  drite is ksa  ¼ 6 × 10—6 mmol cm—2 s—1.
  Large but differing increases in the gypsum rate con-
stants are seen where there are significant amounts of salt (e.g. 10 g L—1) in solution. This is attributed to the ionic strength effect (Figure 3.12). It can be expected to be an important booster where salt beds are intercalated with anhydrite or gypsum.
3.10.4 Penetration distances and breakthrough times in limestone, dolomite and gypsum
As emphasized in Chapter 1, the essence of the karst system is that its water (and thus, energy) flows are routed




underground in channels created by dissolutional widen-   ing of fissures, rather than being discharged over the Earth’s surface. Fissure apertures are initially very small, offering high resistance to flow; thus two important questions in dissolution kinetics are how far from a groundwater input point a fissure may be significantly enlarged in a given time? Or, conversely, how far can underground enlargement be extended in geologically feasible timespans?
  Early penetration will occur under closed-system con- ditions with laminar flow that prohibits eddy diffusion. From some early experiments, Weyl (1958) believed that Ca2þ  diffusion out through the DBL became the rate

in the carbonate and sulphate rocks here, we present only  the most simple modelling case, using recent results of Dreybrodt and his associates because they have been in     the forefront of such work.
The simple case is that of the ‘parallel plate’ fracture,
i.e. the walls are straight and one fixed distance apart, as     in an idealized bedrock joint. In the example given in Figure 3.21, the rock is pure calcite, the fracture is 1000 m in length and 1 m in height or breadth. Its initial aperture is 200 mm, a popular value in modelling. There is   a pressure head of 50 m at the input end, giving a hydraulic gradient of 0.05, a rather high value for many  karst settings. At the input end the water is in equilibrium
2.5

control  of  limestone  dissolution  as  saturation  was

with a PCO2   of ~2.10—

(a common value in forest soils)

approached, and so introduced the concept of ‘L9 pene- tration distance’ – the distance a given solution will flow through a capillary or crack before it is 90% saturated and, in his opinion, effectively incapable of further
enlargement. Given reasonable values for initial apertures and acidity he found that it was no more than 1–2 m in most geological settings. This appears to prohibit most karstification because, while necessary penetration dis- tances are only 1–2 m for many types of karren, minimum distances are 1–100 km for the majority of regional karst drainage systems. Weyl’s argument was a factor in Bogli’s  (1964)  advocacy  of  mixing  corrosion  effects  as key boosters of solvent capability in fresh waters.
  In a series of experiments that successfully induced dissolutional microconduits to extend and compete with   one another in fissures in artificial gypsum (Plaster of Paris), Ewers (1973, 1978, 1982) showed that key cave- pattern building events occur when the dissolutional fronts  of one or more conduits break through the full length of    the high-resistance, unmodified fissure to reach an unim- peded point of discharge such as a spring or earlier cave; those conduits enlarge rapidly and attract the flow in other conduits towards them (see Chapter 7.2). White (1977a) coupled this concept of hydrodynamic breakthrough with  the new findings of Berner and Morse (1974) and Plum-  mer and Wigley (1976) on rate controls of calcite dissolu- tion, to invert Weyl’s (1958) argument: kinetic breakthrough occurs when a fissure or conduit within it becomes sufficiently enlarged to permit Regime 2 Mixed Kinetics to operate throughout its length. Further enlarge- ment to permit turbulent flow with eddy diffusion may then follow rapidly.
  Since 1977 there has been much computer modelling      of breakthrough and conduit development; Dreybrodt and Gabrovsˇek (2000b, 2002) and Palmer (1991, 2000) give comprehensive reviews, and the findings are further developed in Chapter 7.2. To illustrate the key impor- tance of kinetic considerations in karst system evolution

and has not yet acquired any Ca2þ. The system is closed
to further addition of CO2 thereafter.
  Figure 3.21a shows the dissolutional widening that occurs in model time. At time 1 (curve 1) 100 year after flow commences, effects are  negligible. At time 2  (~13 000 year) the fracture is 0.5 m wide at the upstream end but tapers rapidly to < 1.0 mm at 200 m downstream.  At the downstream end, 1000 m, the aperture has increased to ~300 mm but the fracture remains a high resistance, Regime 3 element. At time 4 (18 850 year) the downstream aperture is ~550 mm and kinetic break- through is about to occur. Within the next 150 year (to time 5) the aperture there increases ×10 and the amount      of water discharged from the fracture increases ×100. The model terminates at 19 150 year (time 9), when the fracture has become a conduit 20 cm wide at the down- stream end. Its discharge is then more than five orders of magnitude greater than at the start (Figure 3.21b) and is probably quite capable of handling the flow of great storms, i.e. the system is fully karstic. Figure 3.21c shows the evolution of saturation along the fracture (Weyl’s (1958) L9  penetration distance). As late as time    4 waters are > 90% saturated after 400 m of travel; when breakthrough is complete they are < 3% saturated at 1000 m. Evolution of the hydrostatic head behind the remaining high-resistance element in the fracture is close    to a mirror image of the advancing front of undersatura-  tion. In this particular model realization the breakthrough events all took place between 18 850 and 19 015 year after beginning, a dramatic demonstration of a kinetic trigger.
  The model assumed zero dissolved Ca2þ at the input
end. Figure 3.21d shows the effect for the same model conditions if some limestone has already been dissolved before the water enters the fracture. In cases 1, 2 and 3      the waters are, respectively, 0, 50% and 75% saturated at the input: it is seen that their evolution over time is very similar despite this large range in initial dissolved





Figure 3.21    Computer modelling of the dissolutional penetration of a single, parallel plate, fracture. The fracture is initially 200 mm         in aperture, 1 m in height or width, and 1000 m in length; hydraulic head is 0.05 and PCO  ¼ 10—2.5. (a) Curves showing dissolutional widening at nine different times between 100 year and 19 150 year after commencing the model run. Kinetic breakthrough occurs      between times 4 and 5. (b) Discharge from the downstream end of the fissure over time. Numbers give temporal positions of curves 1–       9 in (a) and (c). (c) Time curves for evolution of the saturation ratio. (d) Modelling the same initial conditions but with differing           values of the saturation ratio at the input end. Curve 1¼ 0 saturation (as in (a)–(c); curve 2 ¼ 0.5 (50%) saturation, etc. See the text for further details. Reproduced from Dreybrodt, W., and Gabrov^sek, F, ‘Basic processes and mechanisms governing the evolution of   karst’. In Gabrov^sek, F. (ed). Evolution of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation. Postojna-Lubljana, Carsologica. 115–154 ©  2002 Zalozhba.

load. Where Regime 3 kinetics (> 90%) apply even at the input point, however, quite minor increases in the dissolved load can have dramatic effects. The water is 97.5% saturated in case 6 and 99.5% in case 8. After
40 000 year discharge in case 6 is nearly 105 times greater and karstic flow has developed; it may never develop
in case 8 because surface erosion processes might remove the rock before breakthrough could be completed.
  The Regime 3 rates of evolution of Figure 3.21d are most applicable in deeply circulating  groundwaters, which emphasizes the potential significance over long periods of quite minor variations in their initial composi- tion. In surficial karst, before passing underground many streams will be > 90% saturated in most weather condi- tions; effective dissolution occurs during storms, when SIc generally falls below 0.01.
  
Breakthrough times will be significantly longer in dolomite but 10–100 times shorter in gypsum.
3.10.4 The precipitation of calcite
Calcite, in the form of travertine and tufa at the surface    and speleothems underground, is the dominant karst precipitate. Its kinetic factors prove to be many and complex, and are the focus of much ongoing research in the field and laboratory.
  The basic equation describing precipitation of any mineral from a solution may be written
R ¼ aðC — CeqÞ	ð3:77Þ
where C > Ceq and a is a rate constant governed by kinetic factors. By definition a solution at thermodynamic



2þ

equilibrium is in its lowest energy state. An energy barrier
(the nucleation potential) therefore has to be overcome before precipitation can begin. As a consequence, in the  case of calcite precipitation need not commence as soon as   a solution is carried above SIC ¼ 0:00.
  Homogeneous precipitation can occur in the bulk
liquid, with the formation of clusters of molecules. These are enlarged by regular or irregular accretion of further molecules to form a microcrystal (or crystallite). Crystallites   ‘ripen’   by   regular   accretion   to   become crystals that settle out of the liquid. The  nucleation potential is high; SIC values above þ 1.5 are  required before  there  is  any  significant  production.  These are readily achieved in some lagoonal seawaters,  etc. but more rarely in fresh waters (see Zhong and Mucci, 1993). Homogeneous precipitation is of little significance  in karst studies except, possibly, in some marl lakes.
  The nucleation potential for precipitation onto existing solid surfaces (heterogeneous precipitation) is much less.   As a consequence significant precipitation may begin at    SIC ¼ þ0:30 (or lower in optimum circumstances – Contos and James (2001) report formation of calcite rafts around dust nucleii on pools in Jenolan Caves, Australia, at SIc ~ þ0.05, but this appears to be excep- tional). Fastest deposition occurs where SIc > þ1.0. In heterogeneous nucleation ions, molecules and ion pairs diffuse into the adsorption layer where they are adsorbed directly at steps, kinks and other dislocations in the lattice. Slow adsorption builds the most regular crystals, layer by layer, by 2D or higher order nucleation (ion positions 2 and greater in Figure 3.18a). If the degree of supersaturation is increased by processes such as eva- poration, there may be a simultaneous formation of clusters  of  crystallites  and  even  small  crystals  within  the boundary layer. These then attach to the substrate by adhesive growth (position 1 in Figure 3.18a) to create     a solid that is less regularly ordered and of higher porosity. It lacks the lustre of crystalline surfaces, may crumble in the fingers, and is often described as ‘earthy’.

totally disordered. For example, large uranyl ions, UO2    ,
can be adsorbed; see Chapter 8.6. Humic and fulvic acids (long-chain molecules with atomic weights up to 30,000 daltons) can be taken up in cave calcite; they furnish much of its variety of colours. However, as in the case of dissolution, other substances inhibit precipitation by attaching to a step or kink, blocking further accretion there. They are often termed ‘poisons’ and include some micro-organisms, phosphates and trace metals. Most important is Mg2þ, which strongly inhibits calcite when present in high molar ratio. It does not adsorb onto the aragonite lattice to inhibit that polymorph, however, which is why much aragonite is precipitated from Mg- rich seawater. Some freshwater aragonite precipitation occurs where first there is deposition of gypsum to deplete Ca2þ and so increase the molar proportion of Mg2þ.
  Dreybrodt and colleagues have undertaken recent the- oretical and experimental studies of calcite deposition from fresh waters, with special reference to conditions in vadose (air-filled) caves; see Dreybrodt and Buhmann (1991) and Baker et al. (1998), for full reviews. A modified PWP equation is found to be appropriate:
R ¼ k1ðHþÞþ k2ðH2CO0Þþ k3ðH2OÞ
     — f :k4ðCa2þÞðHCO—Þ	ð3:78Þ
The rate control here is the back reaction, k4, because there is net deposition; f is a factor < 1.0 to reduce it, shifting the equilibrium (minimum) Ca2þ concentrations necessary to higher values in response to varying kinetic controls of precipitation. Three semi-independent con- trols may operate:

1. surface effects, giving f ¼ 0:8 on most natural crystal surfaces,   falling   to   as   low   as   f  ¼ 0:5   where  the solution is flowing through fine-grained porous materials such as silt;

The  fastest  precipitation  occurs  onto  earlier  calcite
2. 
conversion of  HCO—   and Hþ   into  CO2

and  H2O,

because of its best lattice match. Micro-organisms can be important nucleii. Pentecost (1994) identified 12 different types of cyanobacteria that can live on accreting
tufa surfaces. They serve as framework for the deposi- tional microfabric, and may accelerate deposition by

because the quantity of calcite precipitated must be
balanced by CO2 released – where V/A ratios are small (as they are in thin films on flowstones) this CO2 production may be rate-controlling;
3. molecular diffusion of Ca2þ, CO2—	—

extracting CO2 from the solution. Other micro-organisms can retard accumulation by respiring CO2; at the famous

the DBL.

3    and HCO3  across

travertine terraces of Huanglong, China, biofilms with
diatoms reduce accumulation rates by ~40% where they    are present (Lu et al. 2000).
  The calcite lattice is quite robust, able to adsorb a wide variety of foreign ions and molecules without becoming
  
Figure 3.22 presents the resulting growth models. In
Figure 3.22a the model is for calcite being deposited from    a static film of water. Rates of deposition (mm a—1) are determined by Ca2þ concentration in the bulk solution (mmol L—1), by temperature of the reactions (the cases of





Figure 3.22    Modelling rates of deposition of calcite on speleothems. (a) From stagnant films of water; curves are for three different       film thicknesses at three different temperatures. (b) From turbulent flow. Solid curves are for deposition from turbulent flow with four differing depths but a DBL fixed at 0.1 mm thickness; dashed curves for the same four depths but DBL reduced to 0.05 mm. See the        text for further details. Reproduced from Dreybrodt, W. and Buhmann, D. ‘A mass transfer model for dissolution and precipitation of calcite from solutions in turbulent motion’. Chemical Geology, 90; 107–122 © 1991, Elsevier.

2, 10 and 20○C are plotted) and by film thickness. From bottom to top, the three solid lines in each temperature cluster are for film thicknesses of 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 mm respectively; circles plot rates for a film thickness of

0.4 mm. It is seen that, as thickness increases to ~0.2 mm, the greater number of Ca2þ  ions made available because     of the thickening are an important control at all concen- trations and temperatures, but not thereafter.





Figure 3.23 (Left) Scanning electron microscope image showing experimental dissolution of rhombohedral calcite. 10 mm scale bar. (Photograph by Henry Chafetz, with permission.) (Right) Rhombohedral calcite being precipitated to form the tip of a straw stalactite. It is fed by a capillary from a helictite erratic. The droplet is ~5 mm in diameter. (Photograph by Patrick Cabrol, with   permission).




  Figure 3.22b gives the model for turbulent flow, which will be more common in caves: T ¼ 10○C and pCO2 is the same as Figure 3.22a. The DBL (where the slow mole-   cular diffusion rates apply) is much thinner than in the static case and rates of deposition become much larger as a consequence. The solid lines are for a DBL thickness of
0.1 mm, with flow depths of 0.1 cm (1), 1.0 cm (2), 10 cm
(3) and 100 cm (4). Dashed lines, A, B, C and D, are for  this same sequence of depths but with a DBL only
0.05 mm in thickness. Flow depths as great as 10– 100 cm are rarely achieved in streams depositing calcite     in caves, so rates at 0.1–1.0 cm depths in the figure should be taken as more typical. Figure 3.23 shows an extreme instance of a rhomb growing in a water droplet beneath a calcite capillary tube in a speleothem.
  Field testing of these models is in progress. For karst situations a truly static film of water is an artificial concept, but it may be approached in  condensation films or in stranded ponding between flood events. For turbulent flow Baker and Smart (1995) found the model overpredicting by two to five times in two caves in southwest England, but Baker et al. (1998) and Genty et al. (2001b) report R2 correlations of ~0.7 or better from  later  studies  for  sites  ranging  from  northern

Scotland  to southern France; there is minor overpredic-   tion or underprediction in different situations.
  Deposition of calcite below the watertable (i.e. in phreatic settings) is generally much slower. The lowest published rate that is confirmed by independent dating is from Wind Cave, South Dakota. The cave is a backwater    in a thermal water flow system and has been draining at a mean rate of ~0.4 m 1000 a—1 during the past half million years or so. Calcite deposition commences at a depth of approximately 70 m below the water table (7 atm). The rate equation is

  R  ¼  a0  ×  10—7ðZ  —  Z0Þ½mmol  cm—2  s—1]              ð3:79Þ
where  a0   is  determined  by  DBL  thickness  (with  an  esti- mated  maximum  value  of  1 × 10—5   cm  s—1),  Z0   is  the pressure-limiting  depth  for  precipitation  (—70 m  in this example) and Z is any lesser depth. Actual rates at —70 m were    ~0.00007 mm     a—1      or    less,    increasing  to 0.0008 mm a—1  at the water table. Equilibrium concentra- tion in the solution at —70 m is Ca2þ  ¼ 2 mmol L—1. The value of Z0 elsewhere will depend on temperature, Ca2þ and foreign ion concentrations, and hydrodynamic factors (Ford et al. 1993).


4

Distribution and Rate of Karst Denudation



4.1 GLOBAL VARIATIONS
IN THE SOLUTIONAL DENUDATION    OF CARBONATE TERRAINS
The power of rainwater to dissolve karst rocks has been appreciated for over 200 year, as is evident from  James Hutton’s  (1795)  comments  on  solution  forms  on lime- stones in the Alps. Estimates of natural solution rates have been made since at least 1854, when by some extraordinary computation Bischof asserted that the  annual dissolved CaCO3 load of the River Rhine was equivalent to ‘332,539 millions of oysters of the usual size’! Credit for being the pioneer of modern methods  for estimating solutional denudation must go to Spring and Prost (1883) in Belgium and Ewing (1885) in the USA. After 366 days of sampling, Spring and Prost  determined the annual solute load of the River Meuse at Liege to be 1 081 844 t, whereas Ewing calculated   limestone denudation in a river  basin  in Pennsylvania  to  be  equivalent  to  1 ft  in  9000 year
(34 mm ka—1).  These  figures  are  of  the  same  order  as
more recent estimates in the regions concerned.
  In the 1950s the French geomorphologist Jean Corbel made a great impact on conventional thinking concerning chemical denudation when he published results  derived from analyses of thousands of field samples.  He con- cluded (i) that cold high mountains provide  the  most favourable  environment  for  limestone  solution and (ii) that there is a factor of ten in the difference of solution rates between cold and hot  regions for a given annual rainfall, hot regions having the lowest karst solution rates (Corbel 1959). He  inferred from this that the principal control on solutional denudation is temperature, probably operating  through its inverse effect on the solubility of carbon dioxide (section 3.4).
  These conclusions really rocked the boat. They ran contrary to both morphological evidence and conven- tional wisdom – that weathering processes in general are

most rapid in hot humid conditions. Corbel’s findings were strongly disputed and so stimulated numerous other process studies on karst. The published results of  some
200 later investigations were synthesized by Priesnitz (1974), who found a significant, positive relationship (r ¼ 0:74) between the rate of limestone solution and the amount of runoff. This confirmed conclusions by Pulina  (1971),  who  had  identified  a  linear  relationship between chemical denudation and   precipitation, and Gams (1972), who showed solution  denudation rates in Slovenia to be dependent on runoff.  Bakalowicz (1992) has since reinforced this conclusion.
  Smith  and  Atkinson  (1976)  used  two  data  sets:  134 estimates of the rate of solutional denudation in different regions of the world and 231 reports on the mean hardness of spring and river waters. They  confirmed the above conclusions and added more detail and critical interpreta- tion. Runoff probably accounts for 50–77% of the variation in total solution rates, the remaining variation being mainly accounted for by solute concentration. Smith and Atkinson supported Corbel’s  hypothesis in that they found the greatest solutional denudation to occur in alpine and cold temperate regions, but they stressed that the climatic effect is much less  marked than Corbel claimed. For a given runoff, it appears to involve an increase not of ten times between the tropics and the cool temperate alpine zones, but only 36%. The greatest rate of solutional denudation of limestone in the world occurs where it is wettest. Hence precipitation rather than temperature is the principal con-
trol. On marble in coastal Patagonia at 51oS where  pre-
cipitation    is    about    6600 mm year—1,    Maire    (1999) estimated dissolutional denudation to be of the  order of 160 mm ka—1 of which 25–37% contributes  directly to lowering of surface outcrops. This  compares with his earlier estimates from New Britain  (6○S) in Papua New
Guinea from five areas with rainfall ranging from 5700 to



Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd




12000 mm a—1, where he calculated solutional denudation rates of 270–760 mm ka—1 (Maire 1981b).
  In an investigation of the factors responsible for  the observed variability in limestone denudation rates, Baka- lowicz (1992) concluded that whereas climate is impor- tant because it determines water surplus and the amount of CO2 production, it is not necessary the  overriding factor. Geological and morphological conditions are also significant because they can considerably increase water transmission through karst (by encouraging surface flow to divert underground); and regional evolution and neo- tectonics can create conditions that can profoundly mod- ify PCO2 (e.g. a  thick cover of sediments can augment
groundwater CO2  by limiting air exchange at depth,
whereas   significant   porosity   inherited   from   previous phases of karstification can reduce it because  it enables vigorous air exchange). Under some conditions climate- independent processes related to hypogenic  sources of acidity are the main factors promoting subterranean karst development, such as the S–O–H system (section 3.6).
4.1.1 Distinction between solution rates and denudation rates
The term ‘solution rate’ as widely used in geomorpholo- gical literature is ambiguous. The solubilities of various minerals in water are listed in Table 3.1, in which  the values refer to the maximum concentration that  can  be achieved   under   a   particular   set   of   conditions given unlimited time. They represent an  equilibrium state but tell us nothing about the rate at  which that equilibrium was reached. This is   determined by the dissolution kinetics or reaction  dynamics and can be visualized as the slope of a curve plotting solute concentration or state
of saturation against time (Figure 3.3). This is the mean- ing of rate of solution as understood by chemists and is   to be preferred to the looser usage by geomorphologists, who  also  take  it  to  mean  the  annual  rate  of  chemical denudation, i.e. the solutional denudation rate.  This latter must also be distinguished from the karst denuda- tion rate, which  is  the  sum  of  both   chemical and mechanical erosion processes. However, since in practice it is much easier to estimate chemical  than mechanical erosion, only solutional denudation   rates are usually considered. This ignores an often  significant part of the picture and so must be conceded as a major deficiency in karst process research.
  Karst erosion occurs underground as well as on slopes and is a surface-area-dependent process, but in karst it is difficult  to  measure  the  ‘true’  contact  surface  between water and the rock (Lauritzen 1990); thus while denuda- tion  rates  would  be  best  expressed  in  units  of volume/

volume    (m3 km—3 a—1),    they    are    more    commonly expressed in units of volume/area (m3 km—2 a—1), which by convention and for ease of comparison are quoted as an  equivalent  thickness  of  rock  removed  per unit time across a horizontal surface. Millimetres  per thousand years (mm ka—1) are most commonly  used (1 mm ka—1 is equivalent to 1 m3 km—2 a—1). However, to generalize a mass transfer rate calculated  for 1 year to an equivalent rate per 1000 year is only  justified if there has been no significant change in  environmental conditions in that
period. This is an increasingly untenable assumption given the intensity of human impact on the  ecosystem, although natural conditions for the past  6000 year or so can be considered metastable.
4.1.2 Separation of autogenic, allogenic and mixed denudation systems
In  interpreting  results   of  karst   erosion  studies,   it  is important to know from where the water and its  load has come. An autogenic (or autochthonous)  system is one composed entirely of karst rocks and derives its water
only from that precipitated onto them (Figure 4.1a). By contrast, a purely allogenic (or allochthonous) system derives its water entirely from that running off a neigh- bouring  non-karst  catchment  area.  In  practice,  many  if
not most karst systems have a mixture of autogenic and allogenic components (Figure 4.1c). Lauritzen (1990) explained how the contribution from each may be sepa- rated in a mixed-lithology basin and the autogenic com- ponent computed.
  Allogenic waters flowing into a karst area represent an import of energy capable of both chemical and mechanical work. Thus at the output boundary the  autogenic and allogenic components of denudation must be separated if sense is to be made of the landform development and if valid comparisons of denudation rates are to be made with other areas. Clearly a small karst  area with a massive throughput of allogenic water (such as Mulu in Borneo) will experience very much more erosion than it would if it operated only as an autogenic system. In the Riwaka basin,
New Zealand, autogenic solution is about 79 mm ka—1 but
karst rocks cover only 46.6% of the catchment. The large allogenic input increases net solution of this karst by over 20% (Table 4.1). Meaningful comparisons of solution denudation rates from different areas thus can be  made only when the relative proportions of carbonate rock are taken into account. Pitty’s (1968a) and  Bakalowicz’s (1992) results are particularly illuminating in this respect and show that if the proportion of limestone in a basin is reduced from 100% to 50% then the specific dissolution can increase by about 60% (Figure 4.2), assuming that the





Figure 4.1   Three karst denudation systems: (a) autogenic and
(b) allogenic  are  end-members  with  (c)  the mixed  autogenic– allogenic intermediate case being the most common. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphol- ogy and Hydrology.



non-karst rock is on the upstream side of the basin and a source of allogenic runoff.
4.1.3 Distinction between gross and net solution
Published estimates of karst denudation are not  always consistent in what they represent. The reason for this is that solute load may be derived from various  sources, some non-karstic (including pollution sources), and some reprecipitation of previously dissolved  materials  may have  occurred  upstream  of  the  sampling site. The total solute discharge is the product of river discharge Q at the outflow of the basin and the  corresponding solute con- centration C. Each has a value that comprises the relative contributions made by its different components. Thus
  Q ¼ ðP — EÞautogenic  þ ðP — EÞallogenic  T DS	ð4:1Þ

where P is precipitation, E is evapotranspiration and DS is change in storage. ðP — EÞautogenic is karst runoff  and ðP — EÞallogenic is non-karst runoff.  Salts  introduced by
precipitation onto autogenic and allogenic components
contribute to solute load at the outflow as do solutes derived from the corrosion of non-karst rocks by allogenic runoff. Therefore
solute load ¼ ðautogenic þ allogenic karst corrosion
— karst depositionÞþ allogenic non karst corrosion þ solute load from rain;   snowfall and atmospheric pollution

Gross  karst  solution  comprises  autogenic  solution  plus solution of karst by allogenic waters. Subtraction  of


Table 4.1 Sources of solute load in the Riwaka basin, New Zealand (Reproduced with permission from Williams, P.W. and Dowling, R.K., Solution of marble in the karst of the Pikikiruna Range,  northwest Nelson, New Zealand. Earth Surf. Proc. 4, B1010 15–36 © 1979 John Wiley and Sons)




tal

Percentage of	Percentage of to-

Source of Ca þ Mg load	Tonnes per year	karst solution	solute load
From solution of marble by	1709*	79.5* 	68
autogenic waters
From solution of marble by
440**
20.5**
17.5
allogenic waters



Net karst solution
2149{
100
85.5
From solution of non-karst rocks
250
—
9.9
Introduced by precipitation
116
—
4.6
Total solute load
2515
—
100
*Mainly surface lowering.
**Mainly cave conduit development.
{Equivalent to marble removal rate of 100 T 24 m3 km—2  a—1.





Figure 4.2 Relatonship of solutional denudation rates to the percentage of limestone in a catchment. Data from England (Pitty 1968a) and France (Bakalowicz 1992). Part of the scatter is attributable to the position of the non-karst rocks in the  catchment. Solutional loss will increase where these are in the headwaters of the catchment.


karst deposition (speleothems and tufa) yields net  karst solution.  To  gain  a  realistic  appraisal  of  the  rate of transformation of relief, estimates are required  of gross karst solution. Where reprecipitation is not important, as in most cold climates, net solution  approximates the gross. But in tropical and warm   temperate regimes speleothem and tufa deposition can  be profuse; so net solution can significantly underestimate gross rates. Solu- tional denudation will  be overestimated where the pro- portion of solutes  introduced by rainfall and non-karst rocks is not subtracted. In arid regions the introduction of carbonate  in dew and dust by airborne fallout may also complicate the picture (Gerson 1976).
4.1.4 Factors influencing global variations in net autogenic solution
In the presence of water, there is no dynamic threshold of calcite   or   dolomite   solution   (Ford   1980).   Solutional denudation rates have also been found to depend linearly on runoff. Hence it might be supposed that because runoff values  form  a  worldwide  continuum there can be no regional discontinuities in  solutional denudation. This would be so if variations  in solute concentrations are minimal. This is not  always the case, as illustrated for instance by the differing CaCO3 values of groundwaters from various  limestone lithologies in southern Britain (e.g. Paterson  1979). The underlying reasons for varia-

the importance of open and closed system conditions. Important variables superimposed upon system condi- tions that influence the percentage saturation of percolat- ing groundwaters were identified as occurrence of carbonate in the soil, rooting depth, porosity, CO2  con- centration and availability, and the residence time of the water. The model presented in Figure 3.9 helps to explain why dissolved carbonate concentrations are  often much higher in some regions than others, e.g.  open-system conditions in carbonate-rich glacial tills in cold northern regions explain why very high carbonate  values are recorded in groundwaters there despite  relatively low
PCO2    values  often  found  in  the  soils.  Porosity  includes the many lithological, mineralogical and structural char- acteristics of the rock that will affect  the surface area
exposed to corrosional attack, its solubility, and the flow through time of water. The term requires further refine- ment  and  probable  redefinition  before  the  influence  of different lithologies on groundwater carbonate values can be explained adequately. Theoretical chemical considera- tions bearing on the solubility of rocks  with different mineral assemblages were discussed in sections 3.3–3.7, and geological factors in sections 2.6–2.8.
  The link between chemical and environmental factors in the solutional denudation of limestones was explored by White (1984), who developed a theoretical expression for their relation:

1

tions in solute concentrations need closer scrutiny.
In section 3.7 we considered factors that boost or

Dmax  ¼

100  .KC K1KCO  .3
1


1
2ðP — EÞ	ð4:2Þ

depress the solution of carbonate minerals and  stressed

rð4Þ3	K2





Figure 4.3 Theoretical relationships of solutional denudation of limestone to water surplus and CO2 availability under open-system conditions. Based on White (1984) with empirical relationships derived from Smith and Atkinson (1976) superimposed as dashed lines. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology.


where Dmax  is the net autogenic solutional denudation rate (mm ka—1) for the system at equilibrium, P is precipitation and E evapotranspiration (both in mm a—1),  r  is  rock
density and K refers to the equilibrium constants cited in Table 3.5. All terms in the equation can be calculated. It combines  in  a  single  statement  the  rock  and  equilibria factors and the important climatic variables of precipita- tion  and  temperature.  The  equation  expresses the linear variation of solutional denudation  with runoff (P — E), and indicates solution to vary with the cube root of PCO2
the partial pressure of CO2. Carbon dioxide volume in the
atmosphere and soil varies from about 0.03% to 10% or more but, as White pointed out, because of the cube root dependence, a factor of 100 PCO2 only admits a factor of five in the denudation rate. The complex effects of temperature on solutional denudation rates are  incorpo-
rated in the equilibrium constants. White (1984) con- cluded that autogenic denudation increases by about 30%  as  mean  temperatures  decrease  from  25○   to  5○C, which broadly concurs with Smith and Atkinson’s (1976) empirical findings. Temperature is thus the least important of the climatic variables in the equation and in practice is often more than offset by the influence of other factors.

Figure 4.3 illustrates the theoretical relationships embo- died in equation (4.2), with empirical trends derived from field studies being superimposed on them. Further discus- sion of this point is available in White (2000).
  The  difference  between  the  theoretical  and  observed trends of Figure 4.3 can be explained by several factors termed ‘boosters and depressants’ in section 3.7. First, as White pointed out, the theoretical curves assume that the water and carbonate rocks are in equilibrium, whereas in reality most karst waters are undersaturated; second, and more important, the model assumes ideal  open system conditions, which often do not occur.
  For a given water surplus and under open system and autogenic conditions, the effect of increasing latitude on solutional denudation in theory is to increase it, provided waters do not freeze. Increasing altitude will have a similar effect because PCO2  decreases only marginally in
the open atmosphere, up to elevations of 4000 m at least
(Zhang 1997). However, the treeline provides an impor- tant threshold for soil CO2 values that in turn affects calcium concentrations in groundwaters (Figure 4.4). Thus for a given runoff, solutional denudation tends  to be greater below the tree-line than above it.





Figure 4.4   Hardness of waters from the Rocky Mountains plotted against PCO   in the gas phase in which they were equilibriated. Reproduced from Atkinson, T.C. and Smith, D.I. (1976) The erosion of limestones, in The Science of Speleology (eds T.D. Ford and
C.H.D. Cullingford), Academic Press, London, pp. 151–177; after Ford, D.C. (1971a) Characteristics of limestone solution in the southern Rocky Mountains and Selkirk Mountains, Alberta and British Columbia. Canadian Journal of Earth Science, 8(6), 585–609.


  In  this  chapter  we  discuss  dissolution  under  present climatic conditions, but of course must remain cognizant of the fact that environmental conditions  have changed considerably in the past, with major  implications for karstification. Thus extrapolation of  modern rates of dissolution into the past is fraught  with difficulty. For example, over the past 60 Myear there is no doubt given fossil and isotopic records that  there has been a steady decline in mean global temperatures and that atmospheric PCO2     values  have  also changed considerably (the two
probably being linked because of the greenhouse effect).
Atmospheric PCO2 was probably four times higher at 50 year than today, which is relevant for the rate of karst development during the Tertiary (and it was about 10 times higher in late Jurassic times, with implications for palaeokarst). During the Quaternary PCO2 values have been relatively low, but have fluctuated 30% through glacial cycles, and on present Earth are in fact close to a
minimum (Edmond and  Huh 2003).  The vigour  of  the hydrological   cycle   has   also   responded   positively to changes in global temperature. Thus  values of PCO2 , P and E in equation (4.2) can be  subject to considerable
variation as one investigates the past.
4.2 MEASUREMENT AND CALCULATION    OF SOLUTIONAL DENUDATION RATES
4.2.1 Objectives
Erosion rates are measured:

1. to obtain a generalized value for the overall rate  of denudation or transformation of relief;
2. 
to compare denudation rates in contrasting  environ- ments and by different processes;
3. to gain more understanding of the evolution of land- forms;
4. to understand the processes themselves;
5. to estimate the amount of carbon dioxide removed during limestone dissolution.

  Where the principal objective is to obtain a number to compare with other karsts, perhaps in other climatic zones,   then   an   estimate   of   the   autogenic   solutional denudation rate is required (for reasons discussed in the previous section). Where erosion by  karst solution is being compared with erosion by  mechanical processes, autogenic rates are also needed  unless the role of allo- genic water is being explicitly assessed.
  The study of denudation in karst is best undertaken in a systems context, the karst drainage basin being treated as an open system with a definable boundary and  identifi- able inputs, throughputs and output. Secondary objectives being  to  define  the  system  boundary   (usually  the watershed) and to measure the flux of solvent and solutes. Hundreds of studies of solutional denudation have been completed since 1960. A major shortcoming of much of the work is that autogenic  rates have often not been distinguished from mixed  autogenic–allogenic rates so that there is still no unequivocal answer to the question posed long ago by  climatic geomorphologists: in which climatic zone does karst evolve most rapidly? Wet regions are certainly more important than dry ones, but the field data are too  ‘noisy’ to confirm with confidence what theory   suggests  (cf.  Figure  4.3).  Thus  an  important



objective of solution studies over the next few years will be to compare autogenic rates in different environments with a view to clarifying this issue. At the same time it is necessary to recognize that high rates of solutional denu- dation   do   not   necessarily   imply   rapid   karstification, because that depends on where the dissolved rock comes from.
  The value of denudational data is much enhanced there- fore if information is available on where the  erosion has taken place. The karst denudation system is three-dimen- sional, and if an understanding of the  transformation of relief is to be acquired, the relative  importance  of  sites contributing  to  the  total  denudation must be identified. However, to achieve a  quantitative understanding of the spatial distribution of  corrosion throughout the system requires a more  sophisticated experimental design than that required merely to estimate total solutional denudation.
4.2.2 Experimental design and field installations
Here we assume that the objective is to measure the net autogenic solutional denudation rate in a karst basin. The most important measurements to characterize the hydro- logical system are rainfall input and streamflow  output. Topographic  complexity  determines  the  number of rain gauges that are required to obtain an acceptable estimate of  basin  rainfall.  Thiessen  polygons or the isohyetal method can be used to  calculate rainfall input (Dunne and Leopold 1978). The representativeness of the rainfall record  may  be  assessed by comparison with long-term records from a nearby meteorological station. Under the very best conditions, the mean annual rainfall estimate is likely to have an error of at least 5%. Point measurements for individual storms can be in error up to 30%.
  In many karst basins a convenient outfall point is  a spring. Since the solute load (or flux) is the  product of discharge and concentration both must be carefully mea- sured. Discharge measurements are  usually made in a straight channel reach a short  distance downstream, but one must ensure that any discharge from underflow and overflow springs is included. The hydrological literature (e.g. Ward and Robinson 2000) provides guidance on site- selection  criteria, appropriate measurement techniques and the  associated errors. Ideally a solid rock channel is desirable to avoid cross-section change and to minimize leakage.  Where  a  watertight  weir  or  flume  is   used (Figure 4.5), discharge values of small streams  can be accurate to 1%. Correlation of the outflow data with longer term records at nearby hydrological stations will permit assessment of the representativeness of the karst data set. The need for secondary discharge stations depends on the objectives of the research and the  nature of the






Figure 4.5 (a) A V-notch weir measuring the flow of the autogenic Cymru stream in Mangapohue Cave, New  Zealand. (Photograph by J. Gunn.) (b) Rectangular section weir at Puding experimental karst basin, Guizhou Province, China.

catchment. Estimation of mean annual solutional denuda- tion from an autogenic basin requires only a master discharge  measurement  site  at  the  outfall.  But  in   a mixed autogenic–allogenic basin, secondary sites are required to gauge the allogenic inputs. Where the spatial distribution of corrosion is being assessed, secondary sites are also desirable, but not always practicable if the system is entirely subterranean.
  At the principal flow-measuring site discharge records should be continuous, e.g. with stage data accumulated by data logger (Figure 4.6). Equipment for the  continuous measurement of some aspects of water  quality (such as electrical conductivity) is available,  but needs regular servicing, especially if flow becomes turbid and if calcite precipitation occurs. Continuous  recording of electrical conductivity is valuable, because it often correlates highly
with Ca2þ concentration (Fig. 3.15). But be warned: too






Figure 4.6 (a) Continuous records of discharge Q, specific conductivity U and temperature T of water entering Bullock  Creek stream-sink (Taurus Major) in New Zealand. Note that the cyclic pattern of conductivity is suppressed after correction of C for diurnal temperature fluctuations. (b) Frequency distribution of the conductivity record at the Bullock Creek stream-sink compared with the frequency distribution at its main resurgence in Cave Creek. In the subterranean route to the spring, the allogenic flow of Bullock Creek is supplemented by about 30% extra autogenic drainage with much higher specific conductivity. Reproduced from Crawford,
S.J. Hydrology and geomorphology of the Paparoa Karst, north Westland, New Zealand, 240 pp. Unpublished PhD thesis, Auckland University, New Zealand, 1994.


much  reliance  on  automatic  equipment  without  regular maintenance will inevitably mean data losses  through power failures and other malfunctions.   Conventional field sampling and laboratory analyses to check recorded values   are   essential.   Appropriate   field sampling  and laboratory techniques are explained in detail by Krawczyk (1996).
  A minimum requirement at the outflow site is to estab- lish    the    relationship    between    solute    concentration (Figure 3.15) and discharge. This is often achieved satis- factorily by constructing a rating curve,  although the

relationship  of  solute  concentration  to  discharge   fre- quently shows much scatter due, in particular, to  pulses of hard water emerging at the beginning of storms (section 6.7). Errors in the rating curve also arise from the precision
of the chemical techniques used to determine Ca2þ, etc.,
and from the representativeness of conditions when sam- ples were taken, which must include a very wide range of flows in every season. The standard error of estimate on the regression assumes that the Ca2þ and discharge values
are  accurate,  which  may  not  be  the  case;  thus  a  large number of samples is required to reduce the  problem.




Sampling at regular intervals (e.g. weekly) seldom obtains the information needed, except over a very long period,  because  most  flows  encountered  will  be  below

approximated by

m
P C Q

mean discharge. Although continuous sampling provides	i     i

the best source of water quality data, sampling based around  storm-induced  events  is  an  acceptable  fall-back alternative, because it focuses on sampling  through the range of flows encountered prior to,  during and after floods. Having constructed a statistically acceptable rat- ing curve, one must then be alert to the probability that the general relationship may change from one year to the next (Douglas 1968), that it will not be equally valid for every season (Hellden 1973), and that there will probably be significant interannual variability (Bakalowicz 1992),
i.e stationarity cannot be presumed. Thus continuous measurement over several hydrological years is essential
for the derivation of reliable medium-term estimates.

D ¼	m	ð4:5Þ
where i refers to equal time intervals in which C and Q may be considered constant, and m is the number of such periods. Since the sum of deviations of concentration and discharge  from  the  mean  is  usually  negative,  Corbel’s formula generally overestimates solutional  denudation (e.g. Drake and Ford 1973, Schmidt 1979).
  Very often karst rocks occupy only part of the  basin being considered, in which case Corbel incorporated the fraction 1/n into his equation thus:

4ETn

X ¼  100	ð4:6Þ

4.2.3 Calculation of solutional denudation
The best known formula for calculating solutional denu- dation is that by Corbel (1956, 1957, 1959):

 4ET 
X ¼ 100	ð4:3Þ
where     X     is     the     value     of     limestone     solution (m3 km—2 a—1 ÷ mm ka—1),  E  is  runoff  (dm)  and T is the average CaCO3 content of the water (mg L—1). This formula is important because it forms the basis of many of the earlier published figures of solutional  denudation and its use provides insight into the  methods used. The equation has been criticized for (i) assuming all carbonate rocks to have a density 2.5 (density can range from 1.5 to 2.9), (ii) ignoring MgCO3  (although it would be included if total hardness was  used for T) and solute accession from rainfall, (iii)  ignoring the possibility that sulphate rocks contribute  to Ca2þ, and (iv) for generalizing car- bonate hardness to the mean value, thus overlooking its possible variation with flow. Nevertheless, when data are limited it is still  an appropriate method for obtaining a first-order  estimate of solutional denudation (e.g. see Ellaway et al. 1990).
  Drake and Ford (1973) pointed out that a strict  for- mulation   of   the   solute   discharge   rate   D   could  be expressed as
Ð CQdt
D ¼  Ð dt	ð4:4Þ
where C ¼ CðtÞ is the solute concentration, Q ¼ QðtÞ is the  instantaneous  runoff  and  t  is  time.  This  may  be


However, because it is assumed that T is entirely derived from the carbonate rocks, another source of error will be introduced if some of the solute load has an  allogenic origin. Using this approach, corrosion by  autogenic and allogenic waters cannot be separated.
  Modifications to Corbel’s method by several  authors resulted in only minor improvements, but  significant increases in accuracy were achieved by  applying mass- flux rating curves (Figure 4.7) to the flow duration curve (Williams 1970, Smith and Newson 1974, Schmidt 1979) or better still to the outflow hydrograph (Drake and Ford 1973, Julian et al. 1978, Gunn 1981a). Automatic equip- ment now permits accumulation of  records of instanta- neous solute concentration and discharge, and so enables annual solute flux to be determined from summation over the year. Deductions  can  then  be  made  for  non-karst inputs  to  give  the  net solutional denudation rate. Gunn (1981a) found  that applying mass-flux rating curves to hourly discharge data and summing over a year yielded values 4% lower than those estimated from an equation using mean solute concentration (the equivalent of T in equation 4.3). This is because changes in solute concen- tration with discharge are not adequately taken into account in the more traditional methods which, inciden- tally, can also produce results differing by up to about 9% from the same data.
  Errors in estimating solutional denudation can arise from many sources. The hydrological representativeness of a given sample year can be assessed by  correlating runoff with rainfall data, the latter usually having by far the  longer  record.  However,  variations  in seasonal dis- tribution of rainfall from year to year  can still yield differences in solute flux even if total  annual rainfall





Figure 4.7  Mass-flux rating curves showing the relationships of equivalent CaCO3 loads to discharge in karst springs in  lower Provence, France, and Lebanon. The overlapping curves for the four French sites indicate the operation of a regional  carbonate solution regime. Reproduced from Julian, M., J. Martin and J. Nicod, Les karsts Mediterraneens. Mediterranee 1 & 2, 115–31, 1978.

amount is the same. Table 4.2 illustrates potential errors in a carefully conducted study by Gunn (1981a). His best
estimate  of  net  autogenic  limestone  solution  was 69 m3 km—2 a—1, with qualitative assessment of potential

lithologies),  and  then  from  these  the  autogenic  rate
Dauto is deduced from the following equation:

 D 2  þ D 1  þ D 1 f 2  — D 2 f 1 

errors indicating that the true value could lie between 61 and 88. The numerous sources of error that can occur in

Dauto  ¼

f2  — f1

ð4:7Þ

applying the Corbel technique suggest that published solutional denudation values derived by that method may be up to 100% or more in error.
  In order to reduce the inherent complexities of natural systems and thus minimize potential sources of error, it is desirable to monitor entirely autogenic catchments.  But geological circumstances do not always permit  this, in which case autogenic denudation  rates  have   to be deduced from mixed autogenic–allogenic    systems. Should this be necessary, we recommend that a procedure similar to that described by Lauritzen  (1990) should be followed. This involves a linear mixing model in which the apparent solutional  denudation  rates  are  determined from    two    (or    more)  sub-basins  having   different autogenic/allogenic area ratios (but otherwise similar

where D1 and D2 are the apparent solutional denudation rates (i.e. autogenic plus allogenic solution) for each sub- basin and f1 and f2 are the respective fractions of the sub- basins underlain by carbonate rocks. Lauritzen illustrated this  method  using  sub-basins  from  arctic  Norway  with annual precipitation of 2000–4000 mm, mean   annual temperatures of 3 to 4○C and f values of 0.1 to 0.4. The rate of autogenic solutional denudation was determined to be 32:5 T 10:2 mm ka—1.

4.2.4 Weight loss measurement using standard tablets
Another  technique  sometimes  used  to  assess  limestone solution rates is to measure the loss in  weight of rock tablets of standard dimensions and   lithology.  Gams



Table 4.2 Data used in computing rates of solutional denudation in the autogenic Cymru basin, New Zealand (Reproduced with permission from Gunn, J, Limestone solution rates and processes in the Waitomo district, New Zealand. Earth Surf. Proc. Landforms 6, 427–445 © 1981 John Wiley and Sons)



Parameter


Measured value


Potential error (%)
Probable maximum value
Probable minimum value
Basin area (m2)
95 350
þ5, —2
100 117.5
93 443
Precipitation (mm) (water year total)
2366
T7.5
2544
2189
Discharge (L × 103) (water year total)
155 455
T5
163 227
147 682
Mean Ca concentration (mg L—1)
48
T3
50
46
Mean Mg concentration (mg L—1)
1.26
T3
1.3
1.2
Mean Ca concentration in rain (mg L—1)
1.5

1.5
0.5
Mean Mg concentration in rain (mg L—1)
0.32

0.56
0.32
Limestone density (g cm—3)
2.66

2.66
2.5


(1981)      summarized      results      of      an     international project using limestone tablets which was  designed to determine:

1. the effect of different climates by means of suspend- ing the tablets in the open air;
2. the rate of solution of bare limestone by laying  the tablets on either rock or grass;
3. the corrosion rate in soil by burying the tablets at various depths;
4. the variability of corrosion within a single karst area by placing tablets in a variety of sites.

More than 1500 standardized tablets were distributed around the world. Results from nine countries were reported by Gams (1981, 1985) and a careful analysis of about 5 year data from Wisconsin was presented by Day (1984). Urushibara-Yoshino et al. (1999) reported results of 3 year measurements from Japan with data recorded as weight loss after different periods of exposure at the various sites, and Plan (2005) has reported data from Austria. The following international results are indicated.

1. Weight loss in tablets placed in the soil is  generally greater than that from tablets in the air  or on the surface and seems directly dependent on water surplus (P — E) rather than on temperature.
2. Solution rates show a distinct climatic control,  with generally higher rates being recorded in the  humid tropics.
3. The effect of varying lithology is often greater  than that of varying climate.
4. Mechanical erosion may be significant even in areas with high solution rates.
5. Solution of tablets on the surface is less at higher elevations than at lower elevations (at least in Slovenia and the French Alps).
6. 
In arid climates weight loss in the air is often higher than on the ground surface, although the opposite appears to hold for humid climates.
7. Weight loss at a site (in Slovenia) is considerably less than that expected from solution rates calculated from basin runoff and solute data.

This last point is reinforced by the findings of Crowther (1983), who concluded for a site in West Malaysia that rates derived from tablet weight loss are one to two orders of magnitude less than those calculated from water hardness and runoff data. Solution tablet data must therefore be interpreted cautiously. Results tend to confirm, rather than add to, our understanding of processes.
4.2.5 Short-term lowering of limestone surfaces determined by micro-erosion measurements
The micro-erosion meter (MEM) was developed by High and Hanna (1970) and improved by Coward (1975) and Trudgill et al. (1981). The instrument consists of a probe connected to a micrometer gauge and locks precisely into stainless  steel  studs  set  into  the  rock  surface.  Selected points in this surface can be repeatedly  measured to evaluate erosional lowering. Results have  been claimed
accurate to the nearest 10—4 mm. Its use and limitations
have been assessed by Spate et al. (1985), using a traversing version  which  permitted  measurement  of a large number of points within a triangular area of 12–200 cm2.
  Spate et al. (1985) undertook experiments in tempera- ture-controlled rooms to assess three possible sources of error in the use of the traversing MEM. They found:
(i) different instruments have differing temperature cor- rection factors; (ii) differential expansion and contraction of the rock and rock–stud interface produced an apparent




lowering of the surface with increasing temperature; and
(iii) a considerable range in erosion of rock by the probe from point to point within a site (up to an order of magnitude). Instrument wear, particularly of the probe tip, is also a problem but no reliable data are available. Results corrected for the above factors from more  than 4 year  of  measurements  at  11  sites  on  Palaeozoic lime- stone surfaces in New South Wales,  Australia (annual rainfall about 950 mm), showed a   range  of  surface
lowering   rates   of   0.000–0.020 mm a—1,   averaging
0.007 mm a—1, but with average errors of T0.011. Since in most cases the error term is of the same order as the solutional lowering rate, published results for other sites have to be treated with great caution. For example,  the figures for bare-rock surfaces in the well-known karsts of Clare, Ireland and Yorkshire, England  (Trudgill et al. 1981) are similar to those of New South Wales. However, Spate et al. (1985) concluded that the values reported for coastal sites are likely to be more reliable than those for inland sites because their rates are far greater and so the errors are not likely to be as significant. Trudgill (1976)
and Spencer (1985) measured subtidal and inland rates on atolls in the range 0.1–1.8 mm a—1 with a deep  organic subsoil value reaching as much as 12.5 mm a—1. Never- theless, at inland sites long periods of observation should reduce uncertainties. Thus measurements over 15 year at more than 50 sites in northeastern Italy yielded average surface lowering rates of 0.02 mm a—1, but with a range of 0.01–0.04 mm a—1  depending on the petrographic charac- teristics of the  carbonate rocks concerned (Cucchi and Forti 1994).  Similar  values  were  found  in  southeast Alaska  (annual precipitation 1752–2540 mm) by Allred (2004).   Bare-rock   dissolution   rates   ranged   from
0.03 mm a—1 under old-growth forests to 0.04 mm a—1 in alpine settings, but runoff from peat bogs produced dis- solution rates up to 1.66 mm a—1.
4.2.6 Long-term lowering of bare-rock surfaces determined by measurement of surface irregularities
Direct solutional lowering of bare-rock surfaces has been estimated from pedestals of limestone protected from corrosion by a non-carbonate caprock boulder that func- tions as an umbrella. These are sometimes known as
Karrentische, and they are found on glacially scoured
rock surfaces,  the non-carbonate  boulders  being  glacial erratics (Figure 4.8a). The height of the  pedestal is a measure of the corrosion of the surface  since the last glaciation. By this method Bogli (1961)  estimated  the rate   of   surface   lowering   in   the   Swiss  Alps  to  be
1.51 cm T 10% per 1000 year and Peterson (1982)  mea-

sured pedestal heights at 4300 m in the glaciated tropical mountains of West Irian (Figure 4.8b), where surface solution appears to have been twice as fast as in the Alps. In glaciated terrains currently below the treeline pedestals can be even taller. They have been measured up to 50 cm in northwest Yorkshire, England and to 51 cm in County Leitrim, Ireland (Figure 4.8c). However, recent detailed investigations using large sample populations have shown some earlier measurements to have  considerably overestimated average pedestal heights,   presumably because the more prominent and obvious pedestals were targeted. Thus in the Burren of County  Clare, Ireland, average pedestal height has been shown to be about 60% of previous estimates (V. Williams pers. comm.) and in northern England only 10–40% of  previous estimates (Goldie 2005). With the time since  deglaciation now also known to have increased, this  has considerably reduced estimated rates of surface  lowering  in  those regions  and  now  appears  to  confirm values measured independently by micro-erosion meter (Table 4.3).
  Similar information can be obtained from the heights of emergent quartz veins and siliceous nodules (Figure 4.8d) that stand proud of a limestone surface because of differ- ential solution, although quartz does weather and so the amount of emergence is a minimal figure unless the vein is wide (Lauritzen 1990). We must also caution that in some arctic and alpine settings severe storm blasting by grit and ice crystals can differentially abrade quartz and carbonate bedrock and thus skew results. Nevertheless, some inter- esting data can be obtained. From quartz veins standing proud  of  dolomitic  limestone surfaces in Spitsbergen (latitude 78○N), Akerman (1983) estimated surface low-
ering  to  have  averaged  2.5 mm ka—1    since  isostatic
uplift raised the area above sea level following the  last glaciation. His data set also shows that  4000–9000 year ago the lowering rate was 3.5 mm ka—1  compared with
1.5 mm ka—1 during the past 2000–4000 year. The  latter rate represents about 11% of the present total solutional denudation  in  the  area,  estimated  by  Hellden (1973) as
11–15 mm ka—1 (although the range of chemical denuda- tion in  Spitsbergen  is now  considered  to be  wider).  A similar  approach using  data from  igneous dykes  and
marble  pedestals  led  Maire  et  al.  (1999)  to  estimate  a surface lowering rate in Patagonia of about 60 mm ka—1 since the last glaciation around 8–10 a; which is consistent with evidence from paint marks made in 1948 in an old
quarry that were found raised 3 mm in relief by dissolution of the surrounding surface. This is perhaps  the greatest rate of superficial corrosion known on  bare rock and is associated with a mean annual  precipitation of about 7300 mm.






Figure 4.8 (a) A glacial erratic protecting a pedestal on a limestone pavement, Inishmore, Aran Island, Ireland. Glacial retreat was about 14 ka ago. (b) Limestone pedestals formed in about 10 000 years in a glaciated valley on Mount Jaya (Carstensz) in alpine tropical Irian Jaya. (Photograph by J. Peterson.) (c) Limestone pedestal with a glacial erratic caprock protecting it from solution by rainfall, County Leitrim, Ireland. The average height of the pedestal (51 cm) suggests either an unusually rapid rate of dissolution since deglaciation about 14 ka ago or that the area was ice-free in marine oxygen isotope stage (MIS) 2 and the erratic may have been emplaced in an earlier (MIS 4?) glacial advance. (d) Chert nodules standing proud of a marble surface, Mount Owen, New Zealand. The camera case provides scale. About 10 cm lowering has occurred since deglaciation about 15 ka ago.

Table 4.3   Approximate rates of dissolutional lowering of limestone surfaces deduced from limestone pedestals and compared   with micro-erosion meter measurements where available (Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology)



Locality
Average height
Time since ice
Rate of surface
Extrapolated micro-erosion

of pedestals (cm)
retreat (year)
lowering (mm ka—1)
meter rate (mm ka—1)
Maren Mountains, Switzerland
15*
14 000
11
—
Burren, western Ireland	9{	14 000	6	5{{
Leitrim, western Ireland	51z	14 000?	36	—
Pennines, northern England	5–20§	15 000	3–13	13{{
Mt Jaya, West Irian
30{
9500
32
—
Svartisen, Norway
13**
9000
15
25
Patagonia
40–60zz
8000–10 000
40–75
—
*Bo¨gli 1961; {V. Williams pers. comm. 2004; zWilliams 1966; §H. Goldie 2005;{Peterson 1982; **Lauritzen 1990; {{Trudgill et al. 1981; zzMaire
et al. 1999, who used veins as well as pedestals.




  Utilising data from pedestals, quartz veins and nodules, Andre´ (1996a) provided an interesting comparison of rates  of  subaerial  surface  lowering  in  polar,  temperate and tropical high alpine  zones.  Rates   ranged  from
< 3 mm ka—1  in the Arctic to > 8 mm ka—1  in the temp-
erate alpine zone, and > 30 mm ka—1 in alpine New Guinea. She concluded that increasing rates coincide with increasing amounts of precipitation. These rates compare with < 1 mm ka—1  on non-carbonate  quartzose
rocks (Andre´ 1996b).
4.2.7 Cosmogenic chlorine-36 measurements
Cosmogenic exposure age dating has been in increasing use in geomorphology since the 1990s (Nishiikumi 1993, Cockburn  and  Summerfield  2004,  Phillips  2004).  It  is most readily applied on horizontal rock surfaces at high latitude and high altitude, but with appropriate correction factors can be used at lower latitude and altitude. Expo-
sure of calcite to cosmic radiation results in the produc- tion of  36Cl  from  40Ca  (Stone  et  al.  1998). The  total production rate of 36Cl is greatest at the surface, but decreases exponentially by two orders of magnitude after about 15 m. Time to saturation is about 105–106 year. Denudation by natural processes reduces the  concentra- tion of 36Cl at the surface, and so there is a relationship between 36Cl concentration (at any given  depth) and surface erosion rate. Details are discussed   by Stone et al. (1994).
  Erosion rates of five limestone surfaces calculated from 36Cl measurements of samples from Australia and Papua New Guinea were determined by Stone et al. (1994).  Rates  varied   from  < 5 mm a—1    (equivalent   to
< 5 mm ka—1) on the  arid  Nullarbor  Plain  to  18– 29 mm a—1      in    humid    southeast    Australia    and    to 184 mm a—1 in the  wet  Strickland  ranges  of   Papua New Guinea, although a subsequent recalibration of the 36Cl production rate lowered the calculated rates by about
20%. Associated errors were estimated as about T12%. In detailed analysis at Wombeyan (~650 m above sea level and 760 mm annual rainfall) in New South Wales, Stone et al. (1998) took account of surface 36Cl concen- tration and subsurface 36Cl gradient and calculated an erosion rate of 23 mm a—1  prior to ~15 a, increasing  to about 100 mm a—1 at present. These cosmogenic  erosion rates are of the same order as those  determined from previous estimates by other methods, although results are not easy to compare because the integration time of the 36Cl method  is  105–106 year.  They yield a long-term average, which in fact is more useful in a geomorpholo- gical context than the usual short-term estimates by mass- flux methods.
4.3 
SOLUTION RATES IN GYPSUM, SALT AND OTHER NON-CARBONATE ROCKS
4.3.1 Solution rates in gypsum and salt
A priori, dissolutional rates in gypsum karsts will be  at least one order of magnitude more rapid than in limestone karsts because, for example, at 20○C the  equilibrium solubility is 2500 mg L—1 compared with  60 mg L—1 for calcite (and 360 g L—1 for halite). However, where PCO is increased in soils, etc., the  dissolution of calcite is en- hanced, which  considerably reduces the difference in solubility between gypsum and calcite. Dissolution rates of gypsum and carbonates exposed to precipitation were
compared directly in a field laboratory in Trieste,  Italy. The results indicated that average rates of dissolution of gypsum samples are roughly 30 to 70 times greater than the dissolution rates of carbonates, which  Klimchouk et al. (1996) noted accords broadly with  theoretical expectations.
  In purely sulphate regions it is comparatively rare  to measure spring waters that are saturated; most are aggres- sive with respect to gypsum and anhydrite. This suggests that gypsum dissolution often does not attain the equili- brium maximum before the waters are discharged from the karst. For example, in the great interstratal gypsum karst of Ukraine, Klimchouk and Andrejchouk  (1986) reported that both vadose and phreatic waters  are undersaturated where the groundwaters flow with normal vigour, although where downfaulting has produced deeper artesian flow that is very sluggish, waters can be saturated. In most instances where  saturated sulphate waters have been identified, it appears that saturation results from the foreign ion effect (see section 3.7 and Klimchouk 1996) due to the presence of disseminated halite or halite interbeds.
  Field evidence for the rate of solutional denudation of gypsum terrains in the Ukraine, Spain and Italy has been reviewed by Klimchouk et al. (1996), and the results reported for the Ukraine have since been updated by Klimchouk and Aksem (2000). They reported that gypsum tablets of standard lithology and size (40–45 mm diameter, 7–8 mm  thick)  were installed  at 53  sites,  re- presenting varying conditions of water–rock  interaction in unconfined and confined aquifers, and that 644 weight- loss measurements were taken over the  period 1984 to 1992. Tablets  were  exposed  to   surface precipitation (~640 mm), cave air in zones of condensation, percola- tion, and static or semi-static  water in caves and bore- holes. Aggressive   groundwaters  were  found  able  to
dissolve gypsum at a rate of up to 26 mm a—1; the solution
rate under active unconfined circulation averaged  about 11 mm a—1; whereas in the bulk aquifer the solution rate was about 0.1 mm a—1.




  In the dry Sorbas region of southern Spain (annual rainfall   250 mm)   measurements   were   made   both   by standardized   tablets   and   by   micro-erosion    meter (MEM), and it is interesting to note that the MEM values were about 1.5 times greater than those  measured by tablets directly exposed to rainfall. In the Sorbas region, Pulido-Bosch (1986) had previously  reported a surface
dissolution rate of 260 mm ka—1, whereas in a wet region
of the French Alps with an annual rainfall exceeding 1670 mm  Nicod  (1976)  calculated  a  rate  of  more  than 1m ka—1. Other measurements made in Italy  revealed different erosion rates on gypsum rocks of  different lithology and a strong relationship between  dissolution
loss and the amount of annual precipitation.
  The effect of dissolution by condensation water in cave air was measured in Spain as well as in the Ukraine and the data from the tablets were found to be essentially the same for both regions (0.004 and 0.003 mm a—1   respec-
tively). However, the diurnal wetting and drying  effect that some cave entrances experience in tropical  coastal settings can considerably increase the rate of condensa-
tion solution. Thus Tarhule-Lips and Ford (1998a) mea- sured 0.4–0.5 mm a—1 on gypsum tablets exposed in the entrance  zones  of  caves  on  Cayman  Brac  and  Isla  de Mona in the Caribbean. Condensation in caves as  a
microclimate process involving the continuous process of vapour transfer has been examined in New Zealand by de Freitas and Schmekal (2003).
  Salt karsts mainly exist in arid terrains where the low rainfall permits rock-salt outcrops to escape complete destruction by dissolution. Although salt tectonics  have been the subject of considerable investigation  (Jackson et al. 1995, Alsop et al. 1996), mainly  because of the interest of the petroleum industry, there is relatively little information on rates of rock-salt  dissolution. However, field evidence shows that the  development of solution features on rock salt is very  rapid because of its great solubility. For example,  where allogenic streams were diverted into salt domes  during mining operations in Europe, multilevel caves  of enterable dimensions and profusely decorated with speleothems have developed in 200–300 year. Further, Davison et al. (1996) noted devel- opment of ‘spectacular’ karst on top of Al Salif diapir in Yemen  since 1930 following the start of mining opera- tions, despite an annual rainfall of only 80 mm. Insoluble
residue often occurs as ‘dissolution drapes’ over the surface. In the 14 km2 area of the salt diapir of  Mount Sedom in Israel, a region with an annual rainfall of only 50 mm, Frumkin (1994) estimated the regional  karst denudation   rate   to  be   about  0.50–0.75 mm a—1 with most of this occurring within the rock-salt  mass rather than near the surface. The downcutting  rate in natural

vadose  cave-stream  passages  was  estimated  to  be
~20 mm a—1  when averaged over 10 year (Frumkin  and Ford 1995, Frumkin 2000a). This is in the  context of a maximum diapir uplift rate of 6–7 mm a—1  over the past 8000 year (Frumkin 1996).
4.3.2 Solution of quartzose rocks
The dissolution of silica is explained in section 3.4 and methods for spectrometric determination of ionized silica (SiO2) are explained in Krawczyk (1996). Discussions of dissolution processes affecting quartzites, quartz sand- stones and silicate minerals are available in Young  and Young (1992), Dove and Rimstidt (1994), Wray (1997) and Martini (2000). Simms (2004) compared denudation rates in silicate and carbonate rocks as a  function of runoff (Figure 4.9).
  The rate of dissolution of quartz is extremely slow under normal surface conditions, but under high tempera- ture  and  high  salinity  the  solubility  and  rate  of  quartz solution is much higher. Field observations  show that waters draining from quartzose rocks have silica contents
averaging about 6–7 mg L—1  but with a range of 1 to
30 mg L—1. In the high rainfall tropical region of Venezuela,  water  draining  from  the  well  known  karst- like relief developed in the Roraima Quartzite has silica values of 5–7 mg L—1; thus quartz  undersaturation is

Figure 4.9 Relationship between effective precipitation, an- nual sediment yield for silicate outcrops and annual  dissolved carbonate load from karst regions. Note that a limestone denuda- tion  rate of  1 mmka—1  is equivalent  to  about 2.5 tkm—2 a—1. Curves (a) and (b) are estimates by  Langbein and Schumm (1958) and Ohmori (1983), respectively. Carbonate data (c) are from Atkinson and Smith  (1976). Reproduced with permission from Simms, M.J., Tortoises and hares: dissolution, erosion and isostasy in  landscape evolution. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 29, 477–494 © 2004 John Wiley and Sons.





Figure 4.10 Steps in the progressive weathering of quartzite rock and the exhumation of bedrock pinnacles. Dissolution proceeds along crystal boundaries to produce a moderately weathered rock termed ‘neosandstone’. Further weathering releases sand grains which are later removed mainly by mechanical erosion, thereby exposing bedrock pinnacles. In seasonally arid climates the exposed surfaces become case hardened by interstitial cementation by opaline silcrete. Small hemispherical pockets (tafoni) form in  the neosandstone by granular disintegration of the softer parts of the rock. Reproduced from Martini, J.E.J, Silicate karst. In Gunn, J. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science, 649–653, © 2004 Fitzroy Dearborn, Taylor and Francis.


suggested. Low values are often associated with high organic acid content. Higher silica values tend to be measured in waters draining from silicate rocks such as granites, although sometimes higher values indicate supersaturation possibly by evaporation. Opaline silica can precipitate when groundwater becomes supersatu- rated. Opaline cave minerals are discussed by Hill  and Forti (1997).
  Microscopic observation shows that the weathering of quartzite is penetrative through the mass of the rock and consists of quartz dissolution along crystal junctions that are progressively enlarged until the rock loses its  cohe- sion and is reduced to sand (Figure 4.10; Martini 2000, 2004). This operates preferentially down joints and along bedding planes where water access is facilitated, although the joints themselves do not necessarily enlarge. Tripathi and Rajamani (2003) found that the  development of weathering rinds and karst-like topography in Proterozoic quartzites in India is  explained by the chemical weath- ering of minor  minerals such as pyrite and aluminosili- cates, with  the sulphate-bearing acidic solution that is released  being responsible for the decomposition of the primary silicates.
  Any quartz sand released can be gradually removed by dissolution, although if joints are wide enough and hydrau- lic gradients are high (e.g. along zones of  tension near cliffs) then turbulent subsurface water flow can mechani- cally remove the grains. But sometimes the weathering of silicate rocks can produce such large amounts of insoluble clay residue, especially kaolinite, that interstices and joints

become  clogged,  and  the  development  of  subterranean drainage is inhibited. Thus while surface  landforms on some sandstones may resemble karst  (Figure 4.11), for example cones and ruin-form hills  in some semi-arid subtropical settings, the essential   hallmark of karst– subterranean drainage–is often  absent. In a similar way, not all carbonate rocks develop karst if the insoluble con- tent is too great.
  The development of subsurface drainage in quartzose rocks requires them to be fairly pure and to be prepared by  dissolution  before  enlargement  of  subterranean  pas- sages  by  physical  stream  erosion  can  occur.  Thus even though mechanical processes may come to  dominate underground, preconditioning by dissolution  is critical. Because quartz solubility and dissolution  rates are low, very long periods of time are required for the effects of quartz solution to be noticeable in the landscape regard- less of climatic zone, although the presence of traces of pyrite will accelerate the process.  Yanes and Briceno (1993) suggested that karst-like   processes  may  have continued in the Roraima Quartzite for at least 70 Myear.
4.4 INTERPRETATION OF MEASUREMENTS
The large accumulated error that is likely to arise in the calculation by the mass-flux approach of a solutional denudation rate demands that caution be exercised in its interpretation and in its extrapolation over long periods of ‘time’. The representativeness of individual sample years is also a significant issue. Bakalowicz (1992) showed





Figure 4.11 (a) Karst-like topography in Upper Proterozoic quartz sandstone (Bessie Creek Formation) from Arnhem Land, northern Australia. (Photograph by G. Nansen.) For a discussion of this ruiniform relief see Jennings (1983). (b) Pedestal protected by relatively insoluble ferruginous clast in quartzitic Kombologie Sandstone on the Arnhem Land escarpment, northern Australia. In this tropical monsoon climate, surface lowering is mainly achieved by physical removal of loose grains after weakening by dissolution along grain boundaries.


interannual variability in carbonate flux over five hydro- logical years in the Baget basin in the French Pyrenees to be about T25%. He ascribed it as due partly to variations in  annual  precipitation,  and  partly  to  the  seasonal  dis- tribution of flood events; floodwaters in summer  being more mineralized than those in spring. Furthermore, point estimates  from  MEM   measurements   or   from   tablet weight  loss  are  difficult to extrapolate over ‘space’ and provide less  reliable areal estimates of solution than do basin studies. Consequently, the problem of the validity of  karst erosion data is the problem of transforming unique values into values representative of some defined time and space. Nevertheless, acceptable convergence of estimates made by different methods can sometimes  be achieved. Thus in northern Norway, Lauritzen  (1990) calculated  autogenic  denudation  by  solute   flux  as
32:5 T 10:2 mm ka—1; annual surface denudation mea-
sured  over  10 year  by  MEM  was  found  to   average 0:025 T 0:0027 mm a—1;   and   surface    lowering over 9000 year since deglaciation (from   maximum erratic pedestal and quartz vein heights)  averaged 13.3 and
23.3 mm ka—1  respectively. These results compare  quite
favourably and suggest that in northern Norway 42–72% of the denudation takes place at the surface of the karst.
4.4.1 Vertical distribution of solution
The contrasts in karst landform styles in humid tropical and temperate zones appear not to be attributable to radically   different   solutional  denudation   rates   (Smith and Atkinson 1976). Therefore it follows that  contrasts in the three-dimensional distribution of corrosion must be

the explanatory factor – unless comparative  denudation estimates are seriously in error. For this  reason it is essential to gain an insight into the  vertical and spatial distribution of corrosion. We will  consider the vertical distribution first.
  Information on the vertical distribution of corrosion can   be   obtained   by   following   the   evolution   of   the chemical characteristics of water as it runs across  the surface and percolates through the soil and  underlying bedrock. In this way Gams (1962) found the bulk of the corrosion  of  limestone  in  Slovenia  to  occur in the top 10 m of the percolation zone. This important conclusion has since been found to apply to most other places where the vertical distribution of  corrosion has been studied (Table 4.4). Data on the vertical distribution of dissolu- tion are available from  Smith and Atkinson (1976), Williams and Dowling  (1979), Gunn (1981a), Crowther (1989) and Za´mbo´ and Ford (1997). Measurements show that in vegetated soil-covered karst most autogenic solu- tion occurs near the top of the profile, i.e. in the soil and vegetation,  at   the soil–bedrock interface and in the uppermost bedrock. The consensus is that about 70% of autogenic solution takes place in the uppermost 10 m or so of the  percolation zone, although actual figures vary from  ~50 to 90% depending on lithology and other factors.  The implications are that (i) most solutional denudation leads to surface lowering and (ii)  solutional activity in cave conduits is of relatively  minor signifi- cance in the total denudation budget,  although funda- mental to the development of the karst landform system. In entirely autogenic systems, much field evidence sug- gests that corrosion in vadose cave passages of enterable



Table 4.4   Vertical distribution of solutional denudation (Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology)



Locality
Overall rate (m3 km—2 a—1)


Distribution of dissolution


Source
Fergus River, Ireland

Derbyshire, UK
55

83
60% at surface, up to 80% in the top 8 m
Mostly at surface
Williams 1963, 1968

Pitty 1968a
Northwest Yorkshire, UK
83
50% at surface
Sweeting 1966
Jura Mountains
98
33% on bare rock, 58% under soil,
Aubert 1967, 1969
37% in percolation zone, 5% in conduits
Cooleman Plain, NSW, Australia

Somerset Island, NWT, Canada
24

2
75% from surface and percolation zone,
20% from conduit and river channels, 5% from covered karst
100% above permafrost layer
Jennings 1972a, b

Smith 1972
Riwaka South Branch, New Zealand

Waitomo, New Zealand
100

69
80% in top 10–30 m, 18% in conduits mainly by allogenic streams
37% in soil profile, most of remainder
Williams and Dowling 1979
Gunn 1981a

Caves Branch, Belize

Svartisen, Norway

90

32.5
in to 5–10 m of bedrock
60% on surface and in percolation zone, 40% in conduits (in large allogenic river passages)
42–72% at surface

Miller 1982

Lauritzen 1990



dimensions is negligible except during occasional floods (when corrasion may also be important). In two systems at  Waitomo,  New  Zealand,  Gunn  (1981a)  found  water contributing to cave streams to be saturated or  super- saturated in most conditions, as did Miller  (1981) in caves draining a tropical cockpit karst in Belize.
  Rates of surface lowering on bare rock derived  from heights of pedestals and veins are compared with extra- polated MEM values in Table 4.3. The MEM results for northern England are more than double those for Clare– Galway, as also are the average pedestal heights, and the estimated surface lowering rates by  both MEM and pedestal methods are of the same order. Rates of surface lowering can also be computed from rainfall volume and solute concentrations achieved in  runoff over rock out- crops (Miotke 1968, Dunkerley 1983, Maire et al. 1999). Even when rock appears bare, this is seldom the case, and most rock surfaces are in fact covered with a patchy thin layer of bacteria, fungi, green algae, blue-green algae and lichens. Features produced by the action of flora and
fauna on karst rocks are termed biokarst (Viles 1984,
2003) or phytokarst (Folk et al. 1973, Bull and Laverty 1982) and processes associated with it are discussed  in section  3.8.  Naylor  and  Viles  (2002)  have  extended  the discussion  to  bioerosion  and  bioprotection in the inter- tidal zone, providing evidence that bioerosion, biological etching  and  chemical weathering are reduced once the surface is colonized by macro algae.
  
Blue-green  algae  such  as  Chroococcus  minutes  have been  found  to  weaken  the  crystalline  structure  of lime- stone surfaces thereby facilitating physical  removal of small rock fragments by raindrop impact. Most species are surface dwellers (epilithic), but in  ecologically stressful environments some cyanophytes bore into rocks to depths of ~1 mm while others dwell in vacated borings or other microcavities. Borers create  pits directly (Figure 4.12) whereas other species may contribute to their creation or


Figure 4.12 Scanning electron photomicrograph of cyanobac- teria boring into a limestone surface of an inland pool, Aldabra Atoll. (Photograph by H. Viles.)






Figure 4.13 Depths of pits resulting from cyanobacteriain- duced weathering in comparable limestone walls of varying age in Jerusalem. Reproduced from Danin, A., Weathering  of limestone in Jerusalem by cyanobacteria. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geo- morphologie. 27(4), pp. 413–421. © 1983 E. Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers.

enlargement by way of the organic acids or CO2 that they excrete. Trudgill (1985) provided a particularly good discussion of the role of organic acids as weathering agents. However, Viles and Spencer (1986) and Vilas (1987) could not relate algal activity to specific microkarst except on sea coasts, so that their role remains uncertain. Nevertheless, it is widely agreed that, once  established, small pits and fissures may be preferentially deepened if fungi, lichens or mosses can establish in them and excrete CO2. Excellent studies of the role of  cyanobacteria and lichens in the weathering of  limestones in have been published by Danin (1983,   1993),  Danin  and  Garty
(1983) and Darabos (2003). Cyanobacteria are shown to lead to rock weathering at a rate of 5 mm ka—1 (Figure 4.13) and cyanobacteria-induced pits have  been measured to 14 mm and are associated with  exfoliative
weathering of limestones in Japan (Darabos 2003).
  When the surface is forested, it is more obvious  that biological processes will play a part in solutional denuda- tion, but even then the role of vegetation is  easily underestimated. In a study of autogenic karst  solution process in peninsular Malayasia, Crowther  (1989) pre- sented a clear picture of Ca and Mg  fluxes in the vegetation–soil–bedrock system (Figure  4.14). He con- cluded that Ca concentrations in  vadose waters closely
reflect PCO2 and that: (i) dissolutional activity is concen- trated at the limestone surface, both on rock  exposures and at the soil–rock (and root–rock)  interface; and (ii)
humid tropical forests annually take up amounts of  Ca and Mg equivalent to the net solute output in  ground- waters. Vegetation was found to have an important role in solute generation through absorption  of Ca and Mg by roots, canopy leaching and litter  decomposition. It is probable that forests elsewhere in  the world have a

similar  role.  In  tropical  forest  in  Belize,  Miller  (1982) found 60% of limestone solution to occur on the surface and in the percolation zone and, under  temperate rain forest in New Zealand, Gunn (1981a) concluded that 37% of the solution occurs within the  soil, at the soil–rock interface, or on occasional limestone outcrops, with most of the remainder  concentrated  in  5–10 m  of  weathered bedrock   beneath. However, when  significant  organic material   is transported underground its bacterially mediated oxidation can supply another important source of CO2   that can sustain continued dissolution in the vadose  and phreatic zone (Atkinson 1977a, Whitaker and Smart 1994).
  The vertical distribution of denudation depends  upon two factors: (i) the distribution of water flow and (ii) the distribution of solute concentrations. Efforts have focused mainly on the latter, with data being used in  a budget approach to deduce the relative contributions  to total solutional denudation (Table 4.1). Illustrations of results are provided by Jennings’ (1972) research in New South Wales, Australia, Atkinson and Smith’s (1976)  in the Mendip Hills, England, and Williams and  Dowling’s (1979) in New Zealand (Figure 4.15). An  estimation of mass flux through the vadose zone has  been made by Crowther (1989) (Figure 4.14), but much more informa- tion is still required, especially on the spatial variation of dissolution within the epikarst,  for  it is there that such landforms  as  solution  dolines   are   made.   The   most detailed  study  of  this  to  date  is by Za´mbo´ (2004) and co-workers in Hungary   who, since the  1970s,  have measured hydrological  and geochemical characteristics of the zone between a doline and an underlying cave (see further comments below).
4.4.2 Spatial distribution of solution
The solutional denudation rate is derived from the product of water flow and solute concentration.  Topographic variations give rise to inequalities in runoff distribution: hills encourage  runoff  divergence,   whereas hollows encourage runoff convergence. Soil thickness also varies spatially, tending to be thicker in  depressions  than  on hilltops.  In  a  karst  context,  spatial inequalities in the availability of solvent (water) arise from the distribution of runoff following rain, and spatial variability in soil CO2 production arises from  variations in biological activity associated with soil thickness, soil moisture and aspect. In an autogenic  percolation system a wide range of flows occur on a continuum from very slow seepages through trickles to showering cascades (discussed further in sec- tion 6.3). Discharges of observed flows range over several orders  of magnitude, whereas their associated solute





Figure 4.14 Calcium (left) and magnesium (right) concentrations and fluxes within the vegetation–soil–bedrock system in humid tropical karst in Malaysia. Reproduced from Crowther, J, Groundwater chemistry and cation budgets of tropical karst  outcrops, peninsular Malaysia, 1 calcium and magnesium. Journal of Hydrology 107, 169–192. © 1989 Elsevier.


concentrations are unlikely to vary by more than one order of magnitude. Although direct relationships have  been reported between flow-through time and calcium hardness (e.g. Pitty 1968b), the small volumes of  highly miner- alized seepages do not account for  much denudation, although they make an impressive  contribution to spe- leothem deposition. Recent  observations show that in well-developed karsts the  upper part of the percolation zone (the epikarst or subcutaneous zone) has a significant water storage  capacity. Drainage from this zone is not uniform, but flows down preferred paths which act as foci for subcutaneous streamlines. Therefore it is probable that dissolution within the epikarst is greatest where flow paths converge above the more efficient percolation  routes. Because solute concentrations do not vary  widely com- pared with percolation discharge rates, corrosion denuda- tion in a zone of convergent flow  can be many times greater than in a zone where flow diverges. Karsts with

spatially uniform infiltration and percolation through the epikarst will experience uniform surface lowering, whereas karsts with patterns of flow divergence and convergence within the epikarst will develop accentuated relief. Inequalities in subcutaneous corrosion become increasingly manifested topographically as the surface lowers over time. Even the effect of aspect on biological activity can be important, because solute concentrations can be significantly higher in springs issuing from sunny slopes than in springs emerging from slopes that are relatively shaded (Pentecost 1992).
  These  points  are  born  out  by  field   measurements reported by Za´mbo´  and Ford (1997)  in the Aggtelek area of Hungary. They found that the capacity to dissolve limestone varies from ~3 to 30 g m—2 a—1 depending on variations in soil cover and soil  water, being lowest on
well drained high spots and slopes where soil is thin, and highest  in  closed  depressions  where  storm  runoff





Figure 4.15   Dissolved calcium concentrations in the Pikikiruna karst, New Zealand. Reproduced with permission from Williams,
P.W. and Dowling, R.K., Solution of marble in the karst of the Pikikiruna Range, northwest Nelson, New Zealand. Earth Surf. Proc. 4, B1010 15 36 © 1979 John Wiley and Sons.


converges and soil cover is thick (Figure 4.16). They calculated the mean rate of lowering of the land to be about
0.5 cm ka—1, but noted that it varies from 0.4 cm ka—1 or
less  on  interdoline  crests  to  0.7–1.0 cm ka—1    in  doline bottoms. Thus the differential deepening rate  for the doline  investigated was  in the  range of  0.3–0.6 cm ka—1
which, considering its depth of 20 m, implies that at present rates it could have developed since the Mio- Pliocene. Given the importance of flow divergence  and convergence for the development of the karst  topogra- phies modelled by Ahnert and Williams  (1997), the processes measured by Za´mbo´ and Ford (1997) are likely to be important for the development  of any style of doline relief.
4.4.3 Rates of denudation and downcutting
The rates of denudation of carbonate and silicate  land- scapes as a function of effective precipitation  are com- pared in Figure 4.9, although the silicate  values refer mainly to mechanical erosion. Cave  streams incise as a consequence of both chemical and mechanical processes. Their downcutting rate is equivalent to the rate of base- level lowering and is  equal to or less than the rate of tectonic uplift. In  stable alpine and cratonic areas long- term denudation and uplift will tend to balance and can be estimated by cave-passage incision rates.
  Gascoyne et al. (1983) used the ages of speleothems in various positions above active streamways to estimate

cave passage incision rates, and data on downcutting determined by such methods have been reviewed by Atkinson and Rowe (1992). However, caution must  be exercised in assuming that the rate of lowering of a water table is always due to valley incision, because sometimes it is attributable to an increase in hydraulic conductivity over time, as Ford et al. (1993) demonstrated in the case of the Wind Cave aquifer in  the Black Hills of South Dakota.
  Stalagmites  can  accumulate  only  when  they  are  not submerged or subject to erosion by flood waters,  as explained in section 8.3. Hence the height of the base of a stalagmite above a bedrock stream channel divided by the stalagmite basal age yields a maximum downcutting
rate for the stream. Rates of about 20–50 mm ka—1  over
the past 350 000 year were determined in this manner for cave channels in northwest Yorkshire, England, with  a mean maximum rate of valley entrenchment (aided  by glaciation)  in  the  area  of  50  to   < 200 mm ka—1 (Gascoyne et al. 1983). This compares with:  valley deepening rates of 40–70 mm ka—1 as a  minimum, with maximum values to 2 m ka—1,  calculated by the same method by Ford et al. (1981)  in the Canadian Rocky Mountains; a rate of 280 mm ka—1 in the Southern Alps of New Zealand (Williams    1982b); rates of 190– 510 mm ka—1 in the Qinling Mountains of China (Wang et al. 2004); and rates of  80–1040 mm ka—1  in the Alpi Apuane of Italy (Piccini et al. 2003). Sometimes incision is so slow that the use  of uranium-series dating is not





Figure 4.16 Infiltration and dissolution rates in a doline at Aggtelek, Hungary. (a) Infiltration and lateral runoff as a percentage of precipitation generalized from data for two sideslope sites and three dolines. (b) Mean annual CaCO3 dissolution rates, showing an order of magnitude difference depending on location. Solution at the base of the doline is enhanced by flow convergence. Reproduced with permission from Za´mbo´, L. and Ford, D.C. Limestone dissolution processes in Beke doline, Aggtelek National Park, Hungary. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 22, 531–43 © 1997 John Wiley and Sons.


helpful, because dates exceed the upper age limit of the method. Under these circumstances the minimum ages of cave passages have been determined by magnetostratigra- phy  of  sediment  fill  and  ancient  speleothems  (Schmidt 1982, Williams et al. 1986, Webb et al. 1992, Auler et al. 2002). Thus in the Buchan karst of southeastern Australia,

the rate of incision has averaged only 0.004 m ka—1 since the last reversal (Webb et al. 1992, Fabel et al.  1996). However, even when uplift and incision rates  are quite rapid, magnetostratigraphy can be a valuable  tool when cave passages extend over a large vertical  range. This was shown at Mulu in Sarawak by Farrant et al. (1995),





Figure 4.17  Interpretation of the Quaternary uplift rate from the magnetostratigraphy of sediments at various elevations in  the Clearwater–Blackrock cave system, Mulu, Sarawak. Reproduced from Farrant, A.R., Smart, P.L., Whitaker, F.F. and Tarling, D.H, Long-term Quaternary uplift rates inferred from limestone caves in Sarawak, Malaysia. Geology 23(4), 357–360.© 1995 Geological Society of America.


where a stable rate of incision of about 0.19 m ka—1 was demonstrated over the Quaternary (Figure 4.17). Cosmo- genic burial-age dating of pebbles has also been used to deduce bedrock incision rates, which at Mammoth Cave, Kentucky,  averaged  < 3–5 m Ma—1   in  the  late  Pliocene
(Granger et al. 2001).
  From the above results we find that downcutting rates of 50–1000 mm ka—1  (50–1000 m Ma—1) are  typical  for tectonically active mountainous areas, but that  rates of
< 5m Ma—1 can be found in stable cratonic areas. How- ever, even the highest incision rates in carbonate rocks are
only a fraction of what can be achieved in salt karst, even under arid climatic conditions. Thus Frumkin (2000a) assessed  long-term  vadose  incision  rates  in  the  Mount Sedom diapir near the Dead Sea as about 20 mm a—1.
4.4.4 Vertical distribution of carbonate deposition
Chemical processes involved in the dissolution and pre- cipitation of calcite were discussed in Chapter 3; crystal growth of carbonate precipitates in caves is examined in

Chapter 8 and case hardening and tufa deposition in rivers   and  lakes  in   Chapter   9.   This   section   focuses on general aspects of the vertical distribution of carbonate deposition by meteoric waters.
  Most dissolution of limestone occurs in the epikarst. It may even occur entirely in the soil where this is rich in carbonate fragments, such as a calcareous glacial till. Consequently, most autogenic percolation water is close to saturation with respect to calcite as it moves  down- wards through the remainder of the vadose zone. Ground- air CO2 may sustain a slight degree of  undersaturation, although when percolating water leaves the soil zone it is likely that most solution will occur  under essentially closed (or sequential) system conditions.
  Carbonate precipitation most commonly occurs  when water percolating beneath soil enters a cavity  that  has some  connection  with  the  outside  atmosphere.  Cavities may   be   large   caverns   or   small vugs, but  gaseous exchange with the external  air is essential because it ensures that the PCO2 of the  cave air is broadly of the
same order as that measured in the normal atmosphere




(section 3.5). The percolating water is equilibrated with a higher,  soil  PCO2    with  the  result  that  carbonate  is  pre- cipitated if significant (SIc > þ0.3) supersaturation  is attained. Should cave ventilation also be strong, relative humidity may be less than 100%, in which case evapora- tion will also occur. This accelerates deposition as well as
encouraging the growth of a different suite of speleothem forms.  For  further  discussion  of  the  kinetics  of  calcite precipitation see section 3.10.
  In  seasonally  dry  environments  carbonate  deposition can occur in the soil as a result of evaporation. In some humid environments carbonate precipitation may closely follow dissolution due to a combination of CO2 degassing and evaporation, resulting in formation of  calcrete case hardening (section 9.12). However, most  carbonate de- position takes place beneath the solum and commences in
the first cavity where PCO2 is less than in the soil atmo- sphere. There are countless instances of caves profusely decorated with actively growing speleothems within a
few metres of the surface. In raised atolls carbonate deposits fill interconnecting vugs in the rock matrix like butter melting down into hot toast; under such  circum- stances deposition reduces primary (bulk)   porosity although in the standard vadose cave it reduces secondary (fissure) porosity. Case hardening is a form of eogenetic diagenesis and can reduce primary porosity by a factor of ten or more (Mylroie and Vacher 1999). In Puerto Rico, Ireland (1979) found the indurated layer  to follow the topography and on average to be 2 m thick but to vary up to 10 m. Ivanovich and Ireland (1984) suggested that the formation of a case-hardened layer 1 m thick could occur within 10 000–20 000 year, assuming a constant denuda-
tion rate of between 50 and 100 mm ka—1. However, work
by Mylroie et al. (1995) on the marine oxygen  isotope stage (MIS) 5e aeolianites of the Bahamas  implies that much faster case-hardening rates can  occur in young eogenetic rocks.
  The degree of supersaturation of percolating  ground- water diminishes following continued carbonate precipi- tation. Thus with depth through the vadose  zone the amount of speleothem deposition may  decrease. How- ever, the secondary porosity of well-karstified terrains is often no more than a few per cent; thus percolating water often does not encounter aerated vadose cavities and the first opportunity to  precipitate carbonate  may be  in  the saturated zone. In a partly flooded cavern communicating directly with the outside atmosphere, heterogeneous car- bonate  precipitation can take place onto solid surfaces such as cave walls or other crystals. It is comparatively rare  because it occurs only where currents are slow moving. Deposits are commonly destroyed if the passage is liable to turbulent floods.
  
These points on the vertical distribution of deposition apply  to  autogenic  karst.  Under  other  geological  situa- tions differing hydrological and hydrochemical  condi- tions dictate where deposition is possible.  Impervious caprocks preclude percolation and hence limit deposition to streamways, provided that mechanical  action is also not too strong. Streams in allogenic  systems, however, are commonly undersaturated with  respect to calcite so that carbonate deposition is not  usually  a  feature.  This contrasts   strongly   with   vadose streams in autogenic systems, which are often very favoured sites for cascades of speleothems that form rimstone pools (or gours).
  The distribution of carbonate deposition in the vadose zone has received remarkably little quantitative study. However, it is generally acknowledged that the pattern of deposition discussed is much better displayed in tropical and warm temperate zones than in cold regions. This is presumed to be a consequence of the greater contrast achieved between soil and atmospheric CO2 in the tropics compared with subarctic and alpine environments.
4.4.5 Magnitude, duration and frequency of solution
Gunn (1982) reviewed the magnitude and frequency properties of dissolved-solids transport. He compared results from 24 basins of which 10 are underlain by carbonate  rocks  (Table  4.5)  and  reached  the  following conclusions.

1. The greatest variation in solute transport work achieved is shown by high flows operational for only  5%  of  the  time.  In  the  carbonate  basins  these flows  account  for  less  than  one-quarter  of  the work done (except in one case where it is 44%) compared with 24–57% in the non-carbonate catchments.
2. Flows less than mean discharge occur for 60–75% of the  time  and  account  for  20–55%  of  the  dissolved- load   transport.   Flows   less   than   median discharge usually account for less than one-quarter of the solute load.
3. High flows are less significant for dissolved-load transport in carbonate basins than in non-karst basins. Nevertheless,   Gunn   refuted   Wolman   and   Miller’s (1960)  suggestion  that  a  very  large  part  of solute load is transported by flows as low as  the mean or even the median discharge. In the  carbonate basins flows greater than the mean  account for 45–74% of the  dissolved-load   transport.  Groves  and  Meiman (2005) found from a 1-year study in a partly allogenic basin in Kentucky  that intense events that occurred
<5% of the time were responsible for 38% of the dissolved-load transport.



Table 4.5 Magnitude and frequency parameters for dissolved solids transport (Simplified from Gunn, J., Magnitude and frequency properties of  dissolved  solids  transport.  Zeitschrift  fu¨r  Geomorphologie,  26(4),  505–11  ©  1982  E.   Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers)

Percentage of annual solute load transported by:


Drainage basin
Flows equalled


Flows less than
Flows less than
Percentage of time required


the mean discharge
the median discharge
to remove 50% of solute load

Shannon
(CO3)
—
32
28
—
Rickford
(CO3)
5
34
23
24
Langford
(CO3)
10
48
35
30
South Rockies
(CO3)
13
26
19
20

(SO4)
12
35
26
23
Riwaka
(CO3)
44
33
20
10
Honne
(CO3)
16
—
26
26
Cymru
(CO3)
18
34
21
22
Glenfield
(CO3)
15
33
24
25
Cooleman Plain
(CO3)
21
55
29
29
Southeast Devon (1)
(TDS)
57
20
7
5
(2)
(TDS)
29
—
17
15
(3)
(TDS)
29
46
25
18
Slapton Ley
(TDS)
28
26
12
12
Ei Creek
(TDS)
>25
—
—
10
East Twin GP1
(TDS)
27
—
11
1.5
GP2
(TDS)
24
—
20
18
New England
(TDS)
50
—
—
5
Creedy
(TDS)
25
—
15
12


  The evidence is not sufficiently comprehensive to distinguish with confidence between the magnitude  and frequency behaviour of autogenic as compared   with allogenic basins. However, theoretical   considerations suggest that the greater the autogenic  component, the less significant will be the relatively high-magnitude but
low-frequency discharges in transporting solute load. This is because in autogenic basins the Ca2þ versus discharge relation usually has a lower slope than in allogenic basins, i.e. the dilution effect is less  marked; and in autogenic basins the discharges are in any case less
variable, i.e. the flow duration curve shows a  narrower range. In purely autogenic karsts the solute  magnitude and frequency relationships are essentially controlled by the regime of the outflowing stream.
4.4.6 Solutional denudation, karstification and inheritance
In discussing the relevance of solution rates to  geomor- phology, Priesnitz (1974) quite rightly  observed that an average annual denudation rate does  not characterize karstification. For example, there is a strong discrepancy between average lowering of the surface and the solutional

modelling of the terrain. Regions with high solutional denudation rates do not necessarily display well-developed karst. He suggested that factors  important  in  modelling karst  include  the  size  and  form of the solution front, its location, the intensity of  dissolution at each point across the front, and the form and location of eventual redeposi- tion. Priesnitz also proposed the use of a surface-lowering: surface-modelling ratio as an indicator of the  morpholo- gical effectiveness of solution. Estimating  the surface- modelling effect from the volume of dolines and applying this idea to an area of gypsum and  limestone karst near Bad Gandersheim in Germany, he concluded that for both rock types 98–100% of the  considerable solution in the Holocene has produced  only surface lowering. In the decades since that investigation we have not made much more headway on  this topic: the relationship between karstification and  solutional denudation clearly requires much more study.
  Another  factor  barely  recognized  and  certainly  unre- solved in the interpretation of denudation rates is that of inheritance. Imagine two areas of dense  limestone near baselevel that are identical in every respect except that one is already karstified and the other is not. They are uplifted an equal  amount  and   subjected  to  similar  climatic




regimes. What would be the effect of the different geo- morphological inheritance on the amount and distribution of solutional denudation and redeposition that results  in these two karsts? Although this question is  unresolved, different geomorphological inheritances  must be signifi- cant in steering erosion processes, ventilation and degas- sing of groundwaters, and resultant landform development. In geomorphology as a whole, timescales are so long that there is seldom a recognizable beginning for a landscape,

only an inheritance. In karst terrains more than most we can sometimes identify a beginning; perhaps a time when an impervious caprock was first breached or when a coral reef was uplifted from the sea. But the  commencement of karstification in some of the world’s greatest karsts, as in southern China for instance, is so far back that landforms developing in response to modern processes must depend in part on preconditioning that provides ready made ave- nues for solute attack.


5

Karst Hydrogeology



5.1 BASIC HYDROGEOLOGICAL CONCEPTS, TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Karst groundwaters display many of the characteristics of underground water in other rocks. Consequently many of  the concepts, principles and techniques applied to groundwater hydrology in general are applicable here. Therefore we recommend that for general detail on aspects of groundwater hydrology, texts such as those by Freeze and Cherry (1979) and Domenico and Schwartz (1998) should be consulted. However, karst groundwater systems have some features that markedly distinguish them from the rest. Thus the purpose of this chapter is to explain when universal principles of ground- water hydrology are appropriate for application in a karst context and, most importantly, when they are not.
5.1.1 Aquifers
A rock formation is regarded to be an aquifer when it can store,   transmit   and   yield   economically   significant amounts of water. Karst aquifers like those of other rocks  may  be  confined,  unconfined  and  perched (Figure 5.1). A confined aquifer is contained like a sandwich between relatively impervious rocks that over-    lie and underlie it. In contrast to the formation containing  the aquifer, an impermeable rock that is incapable of absorbing or transmitting significant amounts of water is known as an aquifuge. Other rocks such as clay and mudstone, may absorb large amounts of water, but when saturated are unable to transmit it in significant amounts. These are termed aquicludes. A relatively less permeable  bed  in  an  otherwise  highly  permeable  sequence  is referred to as an aquitard; a calcareous sandstone in a karstified limestone sequence could provide such a case.  The lower boundary of an aquifer is commonly an underlying impervious formation. But should the karst

rocks be very thick, the effective lower limit of the aquifer occurs where no significant porosity has devel-  oped. This may be because the rocks have only recently  been exposed to karstification or because lithostatic pressure at depth is so great that there is no penetrable fissuring  and  groundwater  is  consequently  precluded.    In regions of extensive or continuous permafrost, the aquifer may be restricted to a surficial ‘active’ layer from about 0.5 to 1 m in depth. However, in karstic rocks  the  permafrost  aquifuge  beneath  the  active  layer         is often breached by groundwater drains termed taliks      and there may be an underlying circulation (e.g. Ford 1984).
  Water within the rock occurs in pore spaces of various size, shape and origin. A distinction is made between the porosity n of a rock and its effective porosity ne. Porosity is defined as the ratio of the aggregate volume      of pores Vp  to the total bulk volume Vb  of the rock.
Thus
n ¼ Vp=Vb	ð5:1Þ
Effective porosity refers only to those voids that are hydrologically interconnected. For  a  fully  saturated rock, it can be expressed as the ratio of the aggregate volume of gravitation water that will drain from the rock    Va to the total bulk volume of the rock Vb
ne  ¼ Va=Vb	ð5:2Þ
In unconfined aquifers, it amounts to the volume of water that will drain freely under gravity from a unit volume of  the aquifer; thus bound water still remains held by molecular forces in small pores. Castany (1984b) describes measurement techniques.
  Effective porosity is influenced by pore size. Thus clays with a porosity of 30–60%, but with pores of only



Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd





Figure 5.1   Confined, unconfined and perched aquifers. Reproduced from Dunne, T.R. and L.B. Leopold, Water in Environmental  Planning, San Francisco © 1978 Freeman.

1 × 10—2 to 10—3 mm in width yield almost no water when able to drain freely under gravity. This is because    the force of molecular adhesion involved in the adsorp-    tion of water in clay is sufficient to overcome the force of gravity. Yet massive karstified limestone with a porosity    of perhaps only 3%, but with interconnected voids measuring 1–103 mm or more in diameter, will yield almost all the water in storage if freely drained.
  We saw in Chapter 2 that when a carbonate sediment is formed it acquires a fabric-selective porosity of about 25– 80% from interstitial spaces between its mix of materials. However, later chemical diagenetic processes involving dissolution and reprecipitation, dolomitization and subse- quent fracturing by tectonic movements result in the mod- ification of the original porosity. Sedimentologists define primary porosity as that created during deposition of the  rock (i.e. created first) and secondary porosity as that resulting later from diagenesis. However, for the hydrogeol- ogist, all types of bulk rock porosity are primary (some- times referred to as matrix porosity), and only fracture (or fissure) porosity arising from rock folding and faulting should be considered to be secondary. When dissolution along penetrable fissures by circulating groundwaters devel- ops some pathways into pipes (conduits or caves), this is referred to as tertiary porosity. These voids may continue    to enlarge while groundwater circulation persists.
  Average total porosity is a function of the reference volume of the rock considered, i.e. whether it is of regional scale (macroscopic or first-order), pumping-test scale (mesoscopic or second-order), or at hand-specimen scale (microscopic or third-order). Clearly we do not find caves

in hand specimens, and nor do we usually encounter them   in boreholes. Scale of investigation is therefore an impor- tant consideration when evaluating porosity (Figure 5.2) and so too is depth, because lithostatic pressure and chemical compaction during burial and early diagenesis results in an exponential reduction of porosity with depth. Castany (1984a) cited an example from South Africa where effective porosity diminishes from 9% at 60 m below  the  surface  to  5.5%  at  75 m,  2.6%  at  100 m,  2% at 125 m and 1.3% at 150 m. However,  porosity–depth curves can in fact be quite variable  according to the processes to which they respond (Figure 5.3).
  Carbonate rocks thus acquire a range of voids of different origin that affect their capacity to store and transmit water. Karst aquifers are therefore commonly differentiated into three end-member types, according to   the nature of the voids in which the water is stored and through which it is transmitted, namely granular (or matrix), fracture and conduit (Figure 5.4). In practice,     most karst aquifers have components of each, but by definition must possess a significant conduit component (cave-like tubes). Table 5.1 provides examples of the distribution of porosity in four carbonate aquifers of widely differing rock type (limestone and dolostone), recharge (allogenic and autogenic) age and diagenetic maturity (Palaeozoic to Cenozoic). Matrix porosity is important in every case and is also important in providing storage capacity  (Table 5.2), yet despite this and as we  shall see later, in each of these cases it is the tertiary conduit (channel) porosity that dominates when it comes     to providing pathways for groundwater flow.




Figure 5.2   Schematic representation of the effect of scale on the hydraulic conductivity of karst. Reproduced from Kiraly, L., Rapport sur l’etat actuel des connaissances dans le domaine des caracteres physiques des roches karstiques. In A. Burger and
L. Dubertret (eds.) Hydrogeology of Karstic Terrains, Series B, 3, 53–67 © 1975 International Union of Geological Sciences.


Figure 5.3 Changing porosity in limestones with depth beneath the surface. (Left) Exponential decrease of porosity with depth in shallow-marine limestones of the south Florida basin. The ornament shows the range. This illustrates the response of primary porosity          to lithostatic pressure upon burial. (After Halley 1987; cited in Tucker and Wright 1990.) (Right) Exponential increase in karstification towards the surface in crystalline limestones of the Dinaric karst. This shows the response of secondary and tertiary porosity to karst dissolution. Based on data from 146 boreholes. Adapted from, Milanovic, P.T, Karst Hydrogeology Colorado, p. 434 © 1981 Water Resources Publication; and Milanovic, P. 1993. The karst environment and some consequences of reclamation projects. In Afrasiabian, A. (Ed.),  Proceedings  of  the  International  Symposium  on  Water Resources  in  Karst  with Special  Emphasis on  Arid    and Semi Arid Zones, Shiraz, Iran, 409–424, 1993.






Figure 5.4  Granular, fracture and conduit aquifers. Reproduced from Worthington, S. R. H., A comprehensive strategy for under- standing flow in carbonate aquifers. In A. N. Palmer, M. V. Palmer and I. D. Sasowsky (eds), Karst Modelling, Karst Waters Institute Special Publication 5, Charles Town, W. Virginia, 30–   37, 1999.
5.1.2 Water table, piezometric and potentiometric surfaces
Water in an unconfined aquifer descends freely under gravity until it finds its own level, known as the water

table. This is an English language term for the surface defined by the level of free-standing water in fissures and pores that delimits the top of the saturated (or phreatic)  zone. It is an equilibrium surface at which fluid pressure     in the voids is equal to atmospheric pressure. An equiva-  lent and completely acceptable alternative term fre- quently used in continental European literature is the piezometric surface, i.e. a surface defined by water levels in piezometers (observation wells) in an uncon- fined aquifer. We note that Domenico and Schwartz (1998) prefer the term water table.
  The pressure at a given point below the water table is equal to the product of the depth and the unit weight of water, termed the pressure head, plus atmospheric pressure (Figure 5.5). When there is no flow pressures are equal in all directions and conditions are termed hydrostatic.  The  hydraulic  head  ‘h’  is  the  sum of  the elevation  head  and  the  pressure  head.  The  product  of hydraulic head and acceleration due to gravity g  yields the   hydraulic   potential   ‘0’,   an   expression   of the mechanical energy of water per unit mass. As  gravita- tional acceleration is nearly constant near the  Earth’s surface, hydraulic head and hydraulic potential are very closely correlated.
  In a confined aquifer the water in a bore tapping the water-bearing formation usually rises up the borehole under pressure to a level that is above the top of the aquifer. The theoretical surface fitted to the water levels     in such bores is termed the potentiometric surface. When water rises up a bore, it is sometimes called an artesian well and the water is said to be confined under artesian conditions.
  Unfortunately, confusion has arisen in the literature because the potentiometric surface, which is an imagin-    ary surface contoured from hydraulic head data, has sometimes been referred to as the piezometric surface. The usage recommended and adopted here follows both Freeze and Cherry (1979) and Domenico and Schwartz (1998).


Table 5.1   Matrix, fracture and channel (conduit) porosity in four carbonate aquifers. The channel  porosity in the chalk is equivalent to that of the ‘secondary fractures’ of Price et al. (1993) (Reproduced from Worthington, S.R.H. A comprehensive strategy for understanding flow in carbonate aquifers, in Karst Modelling (eds A.N. Palmer, M.V. Palmer and I.D. Sasowsky), Special Publication        5, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 30–7, 1999)

Porosity (%)
Location                                                      Matrix       Fracture            Channel         Age of rocks

Smithville, Ontario, Canada
6.6
0.02
0.003
Silurian
Mammoth Cave, Kentucky
2.4
0.03
0.06
Mississippian
The Chalk, England
30
0.01
0.02
Cretaceous
Nohoch Nah Chich, Yucatan, Mexico
17
0.1
0.5
Eocene



Table 5.2    Fractions of storage contributed by matrix, fracture and channel (conduit) porosity       in four carbonate aquifers. (Reproduced from Worthington, S. R. H., Ford, D. C. and Beddows,
P. A., Porosity and permeability enhancement in unconfined carbonate aquifers as a result of solution. In Klimchouk, A.B., Ford, D.C., Palmer, A.N. and Dreybrodt, W. (Eds.), Speleogenesis: Evolution of Karst Aquifers. National Speleological Society, Huntsville, 220–223, 2000

Proportion of storage (%)
Location                                                          Matrix                Fracture                    Channel
Smithville, Ontario, Canada	99.7	0.3 	0.05
Mammoth Cave, Kentucky	96.4	1.2 	2.4
The Chalk, England	99.9	0.03 	0.07
Nohoch Nah Chich, Yucatan, Mexico	96.6	0.6 	2.8

  In the unsaturated (or vadose) zone above the water table, voids in the rock are only partially occupied by water, except after heavy rain when some fill completely. Water percolates downwards in this zone by a multiphase process, with air and water coexisting in the pores and fissures. Air bubbles may even impede percolation by blocking capillary  channels. More significant impediments to downwards flow are some-


Figure 5.5   Definition of hydraulic head, pressure head and elevation head for an unconfined aquifer. Reproduced from



times provided by localized impermeable layers, such as shale or chert bands in a limestone sequence. Ponding occurs above these layers, producing a localized saturated zone known as a perched aquifer, suspended above the main water table (Figure 5.1). Subdivisions of the unsaturated and saturated zones of an unconfined aquifer are listed in Table 5.3, although not all categories may be present in any given karst.

5.1.3 Flow nets
A map of the water table or of a potentiometric surface provides a two-dimensional view of the aquifer. The general movement of groundwater can be deduced as being perpendicular to the contours on these surfaces, in   the direction of the steepest hydraulic gradient. However, aquifers are three-dimensional phenomena. Consequently     a   more   complete   view   of   groundwater   movement    is obtained from considering variations in hydraulic potential throughout the aquifer (Figure 5.6).
  Points of equal fluid potential within an aquifer can be depicted by equipotential surfaces. When mapped in two dimensions on the horizontal plane these project as equipotential lines, and are represented in the case of
Table 5.3   Karst hydrographic zones
1 Unsaturated (vadose) zone*      1a Soil
1b Epikarst (subcutaneous) zone
1c Free-draining percolation
(transmission) zone
2 Intermittently saturated zone*   Epiphreatic zone (zone of
                              fluctuation of water table)  3 Saturated (phreatic) zone*	3a Shallow phreatic zone
3b Deep phreatic (bathyphreatic) zone
3c Stagnant phreatic zone

Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology	 	

and Hydrology.

*Each may be traversed by caves, permanently flooded in zone 3.





Figure 5.6   Water table contours, streamlines, equipotentials and flow net in an ideal porous, homogeneous medium. Reproduced          from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology.


an unconfined aquifer by contours on the water table. These are lines of equal head. They can also be mapped      in two dimensions in the vertical plane, when they show cross-sections of equipotential surfaces (Figure 5.6).
  Water flow in an aquifer is always orthogonal to the equipotentials, and the path followed by a particle of water is known as a streamline. A mesh formed by a series of equipotentials and their corresponding stream-  lines is known as a flow net. Since water flows from zones with high potential to places where it is lower, if   fluid potential increases with depth then groundwater flow will be towards the surface (Hubbert 1940). Flow     nets in the vertical plane parallel to the hydraulic gradient of the water table usually show flow to con- verge near valley floors or along the coast. If a large conduit (such as a water-filled cave) traverses the saturated  zone,  it  may  also  be  a  zone  of  relatively   low fluid potential and thus may cause flow to converge    on it (Figure 5.7).
5.1.4 Flow through pores and pipes
Conventional groundwater hydrology usually considers aquifers to be porous, granular media; so we must question  whether  the  normal  laws  of  groundwater





Figure 5.7 Tunnel or cave as (a) a steady-state and (b) a transient drain. Reproduced from Freeze, R.A. and J.A. Cherry, Groundwater, p. 604 © 1979 Prentice Hall.




hydrology  are  applicable  to  fractured  rocks  perforated  by large solution pipes as found in limestones. The consideration raised by this is whether a better expla- nation of groundwater movement in karst will be achieved by understanding the flow of water through individual  conduits  or  by  treating  the  rock  as  an

ability of a material to transmit fluids. It depends on the physical properties of the material, especially pores sizes, shapes and distribution. By contrast, the hydraulic con- ductivity reflects the properties of both the medium and    the fluid. The two terms are related as follows

krg

idealized  continuum  of  saturated  voids  in  a  solid	K
matrix. The pioneering work of Hagen (1839) and	m
Poiseuille (1846) as compared to Darcy (1856) helps

ð5:5Þ

to illustrate the point.
Hagen and Poiseuille studied the flow of water through

where r, mass density, and m, dynamic viscosity, are func-
tions of the fluid alone, K has the dimensions of a velocity

1) and is commonly expressed in m s

1, and k has the

small tubes and discovered that the flow per unit cross- sectional area, or specific discharge u, is directly propor-

(L T—	—
dimensions (L2) and is sometimes expressed in darcy
8 cm2  (Freeze and Cherry

tional to the hydraulic head loss by friction between one   end of the tube and the other

units, 1 darcy being about 10—
1979). Figure 5.8 shows the range of values of hydraulic conductivity and permeability encountered in common

     .r2   rg  u ¼ pr2          ·

dh.
· dl	¼

pr4
8

rg  dh
· m · dl

ð5:3Þ

earth materials. Permeability is not easy to measure in karstified aquifers, because it varies with the scale of the measurement and can be so high that standard pump tests

where pr2  is the cross-sectional area of a tube of radius       r; r2/8 is the permeability of the tube, g is gravitational acceleration, m is the dynamic viscosity and r is the fluid density of the water, and dh/dl is the change of head with distance along the tube (also termed the hydraulic gradient). This equation is sometimes referred to as Poiseuille’s law. It shows specific discharge to vary directly with the pressure drop and with the fourth power of the radius, but to vary inversely with the length    of the tube and the viscosity of the fluid.
  By contrast, Darcy (1856) studied the flow of water through saturated sand, and the results of his experiments confirmed Hagen and Poiseuille’s findings by showing that the quantity of water flowing through a granular medium is proportional to the difference in pressure, as represented by a hydraulic gradient, between the inflow    and outflow points. The relationships are expressed in what is termed Darcy’s law

obtain no measurable drawdown (Halihan et al. (1999).
  Darcy’s law assumes flow to be laminar. Under these conditions individual ‘particles’ of water move in parallel threads in the direction of flow, with no mixing or transverse component in their motion. This can be visua- lized most easily in a straight cylindrical tube of constant diameter (Figure 5.9), but it also applies to granular media. At the tube wall flow velocity v is zero, because      of adhesion, and it rises to a maximum at the centre. But    as the radius of the tube and flow velocity increase, so fluctuating eddies develop and transverse mixing occurs.  The flow is then termed turbulent. Such conditions frequently arise in pipes and fissures in karst, and can be considered predominant in cave systems.
  The Reynold’s number Re is usually used to help identify the critical velocity at which laminar flow gives  way to turbulent flow. It is thus valuable in helping to define the upper limit to the validity of Darcy’s law. Reynold’s number is expressed as

dh	Q

u ¼ —K dl ¼ a	ð5:4Þ
where Q is the discharge, a is the cross-sectional area of

Re ¼

rnd
m	ð5:6Þ

granular medium through which it flows and K is the hydraulic conductivity (or coefficient of permeability). Because water moves down a gradient in response to changes in hydraulic potential, the negative sign on the right-hand term of the equation is a convention to indicate    a loss in hydraulic potential in the direction of flow over the distance l travelled. Whereas discharge Q hasthe dimensions (L3 T—1), specific discharge u has the dimensions (L T—1).
Hydraulic conductivity K is sometimes loosely (and

where v is the mean velocity of a fluid flowing through
a pipe of diameter d. In a porous or fissured medium, the macroscopic velocity u may be substituted for v and d becomes a representative length dimension characterizing interstitial pore-space diameter or fissure width.
  Under laminar flow conditions, discharge through a pipe can be evaluated by Poiseuille’s law (Equation 5.3), or with the Hagen–Poiseuille equation

d4  g  dh

incorrectly) referred to as the permeability k. The latter,   also called the intrinsic permeability, is a measure of the

p   r	 	
¼ 128m  · dl	ð5:7Þ





Figure 5.8   Range of values of hydraulic conductivity and permeability. Reproduced from Freeze, R.A. and J.A. Cherry, Groundwater, p. 604 © 1979 Prentice Hall.


Figure 5.9   Laminar flow through a cylindrical tube. Reproduced from Hillel, D. (1982) Introduction to Soil Physics, Academic Press,   New York.



Since the discharge is proportional to the fourth power of  the diameter, large capillary tubes are very much more conductive than small ones. A tube of 2 mm diameter will conduct the water passed by 10 000 capillaries of diameter
0.2 mm. This factor dominates the processes of cave pattern construction as they are developed in Chapter 7.
  Increasing velocity, sinuosity and roughness may even- tually result in flow through the tube becoming turbulent. When this occurs, the specific discharge may be calculated using the Darcy–Weisbach equation (Thrailkill 1968)

2dg
u2
f

dh	Q2
· dl ¼ a2


ð5:8Þ


and hence
.2dga2.1=2  .dh.1=2

Q	f	·   dl

ð5:9Þ


where f is a friction factor or coefficient. Spring and Hutter (1981a, b) explained the determination of the friction  factor  and   discussed   the   relationship   of the Darcy–Weisbach and Manning–Gauckler–Strickler approaches.  They  pointed  out  that  in  turbulent  pipe  flow wall friction gives rise to a quadratic dependence of shear stress t on mean water velocity v, as expressed     by the Darcy–Weisbach friction law
f rf	2

t ¼  8 · v

ð5:10Þ

where rf  is the density of fresh water. The friction factor  can thus be estimated by rearranging the equation. Relative roughness Rf  on a flow boundary (e.g. walls of      a pipe) can be described by the ratio of pipe radius r to a characteristic length e representing the size of the fea- tures contributing to roughness, such as projections, cavities and loose grains.
  An excellent study by Lauritzen et al. (1985) revealed  the relationship between f and Q in an active phreatic conduit in Norway (Figure 5.10a). Apparent friction shows a dramatic decrease with discharge, until attaining     a constant value. A similar conclusion was reached by Crawford (1994) in New Zealand (Figure 5.10b). Friction   is affected by complexity of conduit geometry, tube dimensions, roughness of walls and occurrence of break- down. In the comparatively simple conduit studied in Norway, Lauritzen et al. found f to be particularly related   to the hydraulic radius of the passage and the character-  istic scallop size on its walls. Darcy–Weisbach f values determined in karst investigations lie in the range 0.039 to 340, with up to 208 estimated in the great drowned cave systems of Florida, whereas 0.25 was found appropriate









Figure 5.10 (a) Relationship between f and Q in an active phreatic conduit in Norway. Reproduced from Lauritzen, S.-E., Abbott, J., Arnesen, R. et al. (1985) Morphology and hydraulics    of an active phreatic conduit. Cave Science, 12(4), 139–46. (b) Relationships between f and Q for conduit segments in parts of Bullock Creek cave system, New Zealand. Reproduced from Crawford, S.J., Hydrology and geomorphology of the Paparoa Karst, north Westland, New Zealand. Auckland Univ. Unpub- lished PhD thesis, New Zealand, 1994.




for a cave in ice (Spring and Hutter 1981b). Dreybrodt and Gabrovsˇek (2000a) modelled the influence of fracture roughness on the time it takes for newly developing tubes to penetrate right through the developing aquifer (termed the break-through time of conduits) and found     that even when the flow through a smooth fracture is reduced by roughness by a factor of ten, breakthrough time is increased only by a factor of four.

flow conditions exist in jointed rock, the volumetric flow rate Q through a single fracture of unit length represented  by two smooth parallel plates separated by a constant distance can be modelled by what is sometimes called the ‘cubic law’. Porosity increases linearly with the fracture aperture w, whereas permeability increases with the cube    of the aperture

rgw3   dh


5.1.5 Flow through fractured rocks
Most karst rocks are fissured because of the presence of joints, faults and bedding planes. Interconnected fissures provide routes for water flow, with the solid intervening blocks of rock constituting the matrix often (but not always) being relatively impermeable. Contemporary understand-  ing of fluid flow through fractures in rock has been reviewed by the Committee on Fracture Characterization and Fluid Flow (1996), although they did not specifically address flow through fractures in karstified rocks. Domenico and Schwartz (1998) mentioned that at the scale of the field problem one of two approaches might be followed when trying to understand the flow of water in these rocks.

1. The continuum approach, which assumes that the fractured mass is hydraulically equivalent to a porous,

Q ¼  12m  · dl	ð5:11Þ
The hydraulic conductivity of the fracture can be deter- mined from the expression
rgw2
K ¼  12m	ð5:12Þ
Brady and Brown (1985) observed that for water at 20○C,   if w increases by a factor of 10 from 0.05 mm to 0.5 mm, then K increases by a factor of 1000 (from K ¼ 1:01× 10—7 to  1:01 × 10—4 m s—1). Values of  fluid density, dynamic viscosity and kinematic viscosity for different water temperatures are given in Table 5.4.
  For a set of planar fractures an equivalent hydraulic conductivity and permeability may be calculated from
rgNw3

granular   medium   (equivalent   porous   medium (EPM) model).
2. The discontinuum (or discrete) approach, which assumes that the rock cannot be characterized as a granular medium, and so considers that flow is best dealt with in individual fractures or fracture sets.
  
K ¼

and

k ¼

12m	ð5:13Þ
Nw3
12	ð5:14Þ



  Where a continuum approach is considered inappropri- ate, information is required about the orientation of fracture fields, the fissure frequency (i.e. fracture den- sity), the extent of their interconnectivity, and the size and smoothness of the fracture openings. Where laminar

where N is the number of fissures per unit distance across the rock face and Nw is the planar porosity. Domenico and Schwartz (1998) pointed out that in an array of fissures with an aperture of 1 mm and with a density of    one joint per metre, the equivalent hydraulic conductivity


Table 5.4 Values for fresh water of fluid density and viscosity for different water temperatures   at   one   atmosphere   pressure   (1   bar ¼ 100   kPa).   Kinematic   viscosity         v ¼ m ¼ r. Reproduced from Handbook of Chemistry and Physics © 2003 CRC Press, Taylor  and Francis

Temperature (○C)
Fluid density r
(g cm—3)
Viscosity m
(mPa s)
0
0.99984
1793
10
0.99970
1307
20
0.99821
1002
30
0.99565
797.7
40
0.99222
653.2
50
0.98803
547.0




is 8:1 × 10—2 cms—1; and that just as much water will be conducted through the fissures of 1 m2 of such rock as through the pores of 1 m2 of a conventional Darcian porous medium under identical hydraulic gradients.
  Natural conditions are of course more complex than the above, partly because of the uneven openness and roughness of fractures (e.g. Figure 2.15) and partly because of the three-dimensional complexity of fracture patterns.  Kiraly (2002) has  modelled more complex

cases, where permeability and porosity are associated with (i) three orthogonal and equally developed fracture families (Figure 5.11a) and (ii) three intersecting bundles    of tubes of dissolutional origin (Figure 5.11b). Plotted on  the diagrams are field measurements from the karst of the Swiss Jura Mountains of permeability (about 10—6 m s—1) and effective porosity (only 0.4–1%). He concludes that a unique fracture aperture or channel diameter cannot be found that would explain these measurement values. Thus


1 m

d

10 cm

1 cm

n
1 mm


0.1 mm
K



0.01 mm



1 cm



10 cm



x

1 m	10 m	100 m	1 km	10 km


1 m

D

10 cm

n

1 cm


1 mm


0.1 mm



0.01 mm



1 cm



10 cm

X

1 m	10 m	100 m	1 km	10 km


Figure 5.11    (a) Hydraulic conductivity and porosity values for various fracture networks. (b) Hydraulic conductivity and porosity       values for various channel (intersection) networks. Reproduced from Kiraly, L.,. Karstification and groundwater flow. In Gabrovsek, F.   (Ed.) Evolution of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation. Postojna-Ljubljana: Institut za raziskovanje krasa, ZRC SAZU, 155–190, 2002.



Table 5.5 Matrix, fracture and channel (conduit) permeability in four carbonate aquifers (Reproduced from Worthington, S. R. H. A comprehensive strategy for understanding flow in carbonate aquifers. In A N Palmer, M V Palmer and I D Sasowsky (eds), Karst Modelling,     Karst Waters Institute Special Publication 5, Charles Town, W. Virginia, 30–37, 1999)

Hydraulic conductivity (m s—1)
Location                                                          Matrix                 Fracture                 Channel

Smithville, Ontario, Canada                            1 × 10—10                   1 × 10—5                        3 × 10—4
Mammoth Cave, Kentucky                             2 × 10—11                   2 × 10—5                        3 × 10—3
The Chalk, England                                        1 × 10—8                     4 × 10—6                        6 × 10—5
Nohoch Nah Chich, Yucatan, Mexico            7 × 10—5                     1 × 10—3                        4 × 10—1

the void geometry that determines the permeability is not  the same as the void geometry that determines the effective porosity. The effective porosity value requires large openings in the fracture planes (up to 1 mm aperture), but the permeability value shows that these voids are not well connected. It follows that large open-  ings are well connected to the tubes through which the groundwater flows but are poorly connected to each other. Further information on flow through fractures can    be found in papers by Brush and Thomson (2003) and Konzuk and Keuper (2004).
  The same set of widely differing carbonate rock types used in Table 5.1 provides a valuable illustration of how permeability and groundwater flow are affected by matrix, fracture and conduit porosity. The Tertiary and Quaternary limestones of Yucatan have large well- connected pores and channel networks and, as a conse- quence, have extremely high hydraulic conductivity values with channel permeability two orders of magni- tude higher than that encountered in the well-karstified Mammoth Cave network in Kentucky (Table 5.5). Although at least 96% of aquifer storage is provided by     the rock matrix, regardless of which lithology (from these examples) is considered (Table 5.2), the proportion of groundwater flow that passes through this matrix is minimal in all cases (Table 5.6). In every example almost

all the flow takes place through the conduit network. Such is the nature of karst.
5.1.6 Homogeneous and heterogeneous, isotropic and anisotropic aquifers
We can appreciate from the example from the Jura Mountains that karst aquifers can have a complex poros-    ity that is difficult to describe. This contrasts with well- sorted sand and gravel aquifers that have comparatively consistent values for porosity and permeability through-    out their extent. Under these latter conditions in a simple porous medium hydraulic conductivity K is independent     of position within the formation and the aquifer is then considered homogeneous. But if K varies with location within the formation then it is considered heterogeneous.     If hydraulic conductivity is the same regardless of direc-  tion of measurement, then the aquifer is defined as isotropic, but if K varies with direction then it is anisotropic.  A  characteristic  of  karst  aquifers  is  that they become increasingly heterogeneous and anisotropic with time. In an unkarstified rock, heterogeneity within the permeability field may be perhaps 1 to 50, whereas karstification may increase it to perhaps 1 to 1 million. Palmer (1999) provides an interesting discussion of anisotropy in carbonate aquifers.


Table 5.6   Reproduced from Worthington, S. R. H., Ford, D. C. and Beddows,
P. A., Porosity and permeability enhancement in unconfined carbonate aquifers as a result of solution. In Klimchouk, A.B., Ford, D.C., Palmer, A.N. and Dreybrodt, W. (Eds.), Speleogenesis: Evolution of Karst Aquifers. National Speleological Society, Huntsville, 220–223, 2000
Proportion of flow (%)
Location
Matrix
Fracture
Channel
Smithville, Ontario, Canada
0.000003
3.0
97.0
Mammoth Cave, Kentucky
0.00
0.3
99.7
The Chalk, England
0.02
6.0
94.0
Nohoch Nah Chich, Yucatan, Mexico
0.02
0.2
99.7




  The ease with which water flows through a karst aquifer usually varies according to direction. This condi-  tion can be approximated by a parallel capillary tube model, where hydraulic conductivity is greatest in the direction of the tubes but very much less at right angles to them. Thus hydraulic conductivities Kx, Ky   and Kz   may    be envisaged for different directions, although only one value for K will apply in an isotropic aquifer. Horizontal values (Kx, Ky) are of particular interest in the analysis of flow in the phreatic zone, and vertical values Kz are of importance in characterizing recharge through the vadose zone. However, the hydraulic conductivity in any particular  direction  is  unlikely  to  remain  constant  over  a large distance. Vertical hydraulic conductivity, in particular,  diminishes  considerably  with  depth  below   the surface in most well-karstified rock, because second-   ary permeability is usually greatest near the surface.

5.1.7 Storage and transmissivity
The proportion of water storage held in matrix, fracture    and conduit porosity is illustrated for four carbonate

lithologies in Table 5.2. However, not all of the water held in storage is released by gravitational flow, because  that in the smallest pores is held by capillary attraction     and molecular forces, and that below the level of the outflow spring is impounded (Figure 5.12). The volume      of water that a unit volume of saturated rock releases following a unit decline in head is a measure of the available storage capacity of the aquifer. In an unconfined aquifer it is termed specific yield Sy and in a confined aquifer specific storage Ss   (Figure 5.13). The storativity       S of a confined aquifer is defined as the product of specific storage and aquifer thickness b
S ¼ Ssb	ð5:15Þ
Alternative approaches to determining aquifer thickness    are shown in Figure 5.12.
  The ability of an aquifer to transmit water is defined by  its transmissivity T, which is dependent on the thickness b of the aquifer and its hydraulic conductivity
T ¼ Kb	ð5:16Þ




Figure 5.12  Alternative approaches to determining the thickness of an unconfined karst aquifer. For the calculation of reserves, themaximum dynamic volume is dependent on the thickness of zone 2. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology.





Figure 5.13   Specific storage defined for (a) unconfined and
(b) confined aquifers. Reproduced from Castany, G., Hydrogeo- logical features of carbonate rocks. In P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson and B. A. Memon (eds.), Guide to the Hydrology of Carbonate Rocks. Studies and Reports in Hydrology 41, Paris: UNESCO, 47–67, 1984.
Clearly, T varies with direction in an  anisotropic aquifer.
  Specific yield and transmissivity values for some karstic limestone aquifers are presented in Table 5.7. The specific yields of unconfined aquifers are considerably larger than  the storativities of confined aquifers (Freeze and Cherry 1979). Both T and Sy for karst aquifers can be estimated from spring hydrograph recession characteristics (Atkin- son 1977, Sauter 1992, Baedke and Krothe 2001).
  Transmissivity values will vary between the rock matrix, fissure system and conduits, and specific yield can be expected to vary according to vertical position in    the karst rock, because effective porosity also varies



vertically. In most cases it will be highest in the most weathered zone of limestone near the surface (the epikarst, Table 5.1) and usually diminishes exponen- tially with depth, but there are exceptions (Figure 5.3). Eventually lithostatic pressure prevents the penetration of groundwater and precludes the development of secondary porosity.
5.2 CONTROLS ON THE DEVELOPMENT     OF KARST HYDROLOGICAL SYSTEMS
5.2.1 Boundary conditions and related factors
Kiraly (2002) pointed out that groundwater flow depends   on hydraulic parameters and on boundary conditions and, consequently, that other factors such as geology, geomor- phology and climate exert their influence on groundwater movement solely through hydraulic parameter fields and boundary conditions. The relationship of the above factors  to the physical characteristics of an aquifer, such as porosity, hydraulic conductivity and storage capacity, is illustrated schematically in Figure 5.14. There is consider- able interaction amongst the principal factors as well as between them and the chemical and mechanical processes whose rates of activity they determine. Boundary condi- tions are determined especially by geological, topographic, climatic and biological influences, which control sites and quantities of recharge and discharge, including altitude of recharge, altitude of discharge, rainfall and infiltration rate. Thus one may identify flow boundaries, where flow either enters or leaves the karst, as well as no-flow boundaries, such as provided by an aquiclude beneath the aquifer or       a downfaulted impervious block along one side of the karst.
  For a given set of boundary conditions, hydraulic gradient and specific discharge can be estimated. But in    the long-term the very process of karst groundwater circulation modifies effective porosity, specific storage and hydraulic conductivity, and lowering of the outlet spring modifies hydraulic potential. Consequently, the karst circulation system undergoes more feed-back giving rise to continuous self-adjustment than occurs in any other type of groundwater system.
  The most abrupt changes to boundary conditions are brought about by geomorphologically rapid events (often associated with climatic change) that culminate in major alterations to hydraulic gradient because of modifications    to outflow conditions. For example, valley deepening by glaciation increases the hydraulic potential of the system, whereas submergence of coastal springs by glacio- eustatic sea-level rise reduces it.



Table 5.7   Specific yield Sy and transmissivity T values for some karstic aquifers (Reproduced from Castany, G., Hydrogeological features of carbonate rocks. In P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson and B. A. Memon (eds.), Guide to the Hydrology of Carbonate          Rocks. Studies and Reports in Hydrology 41, Paris: UNESCO, 47–67, 1984)

Karstic fissured	Urgonian	Salon (France)	1–5	10—3
  limestone	Jurassic	Parnassos (Greece)	5	1 to 2 × 10—3 Fissured dolomite	Jurassic	Grandes Causses (France)		10—3
Lias	Morocco	10—2 to 10—4
Jurassic	Parnassos (Greece)	3 × 10—5
Murcie (Spain)	7
Fractured marble	Almeria (Spain)	10–12
Marly limestone	Jurassic	Grandes Causses (France)	10—3



  Geological control influences karst aquifers in several ways (Table 5.8) and is discussed in more detail in Chapter 2. Boundary conditions are influenced at the regional scale through the definition of outcrop pattern, thickness and properties of karst rocks and their relation- ship to other lithologies. Tectonism affects the balance between rates of uplift and denudation and thus has a major influence on hydraulic potential. Regional structure   is also important for its control of folding and faulting.

Hydraulic head and flow fields	“Feed back”

Flow equations, Models



5.2.2 Input control
A karst aquifer can be envisaged as an open system with a boundary defined by the catchment limits and with input, throughput and output flows, mechanisms and controls. In the simplest case, only karst rocks are found within the catchment and recharge is derived solely from pre- cipitation falling directly on them—termed autogenic recharge (Figure 4.1a). However, commonly more complex geological circumstances occur  and  runoff from neighbouring or overlying non-karst rocks drains into the karst aquifer—termed  allogenic  recharge (Figure 4.1b). Whereas autogenic  recharge  is  often quite diffuse, down many fissures across the karst out-

Boundary conditions



“short c (corre

Geolomorphology (re- lief, river network), soils, vegetation, hydrometeorology, human intervention, etc.

Hydraulic properties (K, S, me, etc.) Void geometry, void distribution
Geological discontinuities fractures, faults, karst channels, etc. Parameters: orientatation, opening, spacing, connectivity, etc.

crop, allogenic recharge normally occurs as concentrated point-inputs of sinking streams. Both the water chemistry and the recharge volume per unit area are different in these two styles of recharge, with considerable conse- quences for the scale and distribution of the development    of secondary permeability.
  Emerged coral reefs provide natural examples of simple autogenic systems. Recharge is spatially uniform   and distributed through innumerable pores and fissures across the outcrop. Where thick soils cover the bedrock recharge conditions are modified. If the soil is less permeable than the rock beneath, then it provides a recharge regulator, limiting recharge to the infiltration capacity of the soil. Permeable rock formations overlying  the karst also act as percolation ‘governors’ in much the

Figure 5.14 Schematic representation of the relations between groundwater flow field, hydraulic properties and geological factors in karst aquifers. Reproduced from Kiraly, L., Karstifica- tion and groundwater flow. In Gabrovsek, F. (Ed.) Evolution of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation. Postojna-Ljubljana: Institut za raziskovanje krasa, ZRC SAZU, 155–190, 2002.

same way, their vertical saturated hydraulic conductivity being the principal control. Percolation input from a permeable soil is considered autogenic, whereas that from a permeable non-karstic caprock is considered diffuse allogenic in origin.



Table 5.8 Effect of hydrogeological setting on carbonate aquifers (Reproduced from White, W.B., Conceptual models for carbonate aquifers: revisited. In R.R. Dilamarter and S.C. Csallany (eds.) Hydrologic Problems in Karst Regions. Western Kentucky Univ., Bowling Green, 176–187, 1977)

Geological element	Control
Macrostructure (folds, faults)	Placement of carbonate rock units relative to other rocks Topographic setting	Placement of recharge and discharge regions
Stratigraphical sequence	Thickness and chemical character of aquifer  Ministructure (joints, fractures)	Orientation and transmissibility of primary flow paths Relief	Defines hydraulic gradients


  Relatively concentrated recharge occurs in autogenic systems only where solution dolines are well developed (Figure 5.15), as in carbonate and sulphate polyonal karsts (sections 9.6 and 9.13). This is because solution dolines reflect underlying spatial inequalities in vertical hydraulic conductivity that result in the development of preferred percolation paths or zones. The funnelling of rainwater by enclosed depressions positively reinforces the  significance  of  the  underlying  percolation  path  by  an autocatalytic process (Williams 1985, 1993). How- ever, the volumes of point-input recharge are small compared with those derived from allogenic basins, because of the relatively small surface areas of individual dolines.
  Concentrated inflows of water from allogenic sources sink underground at swallow holes (also known as swal-  lets, stream-sinks or ponors). They are of two main types: vertical point-inputs from perforated overlying beds and lateral point-inputs from adjacent impervious rocks. The flow may come from: (i) a retreating overlying caprock,
(ii) the updip margin of a stratigraphically lower imperme- able formation that is tilted, or (iii) an impermeable rock across a fault boundary (Figure 5.16). A perforated impermeable caprock will funnel water into the karst in much the same way as solution dolines, except that the recharge point is likely to be defined more precisely and   the peak inflow larger. Inputs of this kind favour the development of large shafts beneath. Lateral-point inputs  are usually much greater in volume, often being derived from large catchments, and are commonly associated with major river caves. The capacity of many ponors in the Dinaric karst  exceeds 10 m3 s—1  and the  capacity of  the largest   in   Biograd-Nevesinjko   polje   is   more   than  100 m3 s—1   (Milanovic´  1993).  When  the  capacity  of  the swallow hole is exceeded, back-flooding occurs and sur- face overflow may result.
  Discharge through a conduit depends either on the amount of available recharge or on the hydraulic capacity   of the passage, termed catchment control and hydraulic control, respectively, by Palmer (1984, 1991). The capa-  city of the input passages is the ultimate regulator of the

volume of recharge; thus if the instantaneous inflow from surface streams is too great then ponding occurs, giving   rise to overflow via surface channels or to surface flood-   ing in blind valleys and poljes. White (2002) refers to the discharge  ‘carrying  capacity’  for  the  conduit  drainage system, from stream-sink to spring.
  A more unusual form of input control is provided by  head fluctuations caused by floods. This may result in discharge conduits reversing their function temporarily to become inflow passages. This occurs where outflow springs discharge at or beneath river level into a major river flowing through the karst. If a flood wave generated  by heavy rain in an upstream part of its basin passes down the major river, the springs will be more deeply sub- merged and the hydraulic gradient in the karst will reverse, especially if the tributary karst catchment was unaffected by the storm. Inflow into the karst will then occur, as a form of bank storage. Water intruded by back-flooding will later be withdrawn from storage as the flood wave in the main river passes and the hydraulic gradient reverts to normal. Reversing springs of this sort  that can temporarily function as sink points are known as estavelles. There are many examples along the Green River of Kentucky (Quinlan 1983). The converse is also common: some stream-sinks become temporary springs as the water table rises. These are also estavelles.
5.2.3 Output control
Most of the largest springs in the world are karst springs (Table 5.9). Only those from volcanic rocks rival their discharge output. They represent the termination of underground river systems and mark the point at which surface fluvial processes become dominant. The vertical position of the spring controls the elevation of the water table at the output of the aquifer, whereas the hydraulic conductivity and throughput discharge determine the slope of the water table upstream and its variation under different discharge conditions.
  The difference in elevation between the spring and the water table upstream determines the head in the





Figure 5.15    The relationship between (a) surface solution doline topography, (b) underlying relief on the subcutaneous (epikarst)         water table and (c) vertical hydraulic conductivity near the base of the epikarst. Reproduced with permission from Williams, P.W., Subcutaneous hydrology and the development of doline and cockpit karst. Zeit. Geomorph. 29(4), 463–482, Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie © 1985 E. Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers.


system and thus the energy available to drive a deep circulation.  Hence  springs  exercise   considerable control on the operation of karst groundwater bodies. Furthermore, that control can vary markedly, because

springs are most  susceptible  to  geomorphological events such as glacio-eustatic sea-level fluctuations, valley aggradation, and valley deepening by glacial scour.





Figure 5.16    Recharge by allogenic streams flowing (a) from overlying beds, (b) from underlying beds exposed updip and (c) across           a faulted contact with impervious rocks. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology.


  The influence that springs exert on the aquifer which they drain depends principally upon the topographic and structural context of the spring. Springs may be classified   in several ways (Sweeting 1972, Bo¨gli 1980, Smart and Worthington 2004), but when considering their hydrologi- cal control function the following perspective is important.

1. Free Draining Springs (Figure 5.17a and b). In these cases, the karst rock slopes towards and lies above the adjacent valley, into which karst water drains freely under gravity. The karst system is entirely or dom- inantly vadose, and is sometimes termed shallow karst (Bo¨gli 1980). Complications may arise where the underlying impermeable rock is folded or has an irregular surface, because then subterranean ponding   can occur with the consequent development of iso- lated phreatic zones.
2. Dammed Springs (Figure 5.17c–e). These are the most common type of karst springs. They result from   the location of a major barrier in the path of under- ground drainage. Impoundment may be by another lithology, either faulted or in conformable contact, or

be caused by valley aggradation, such as by glacio- fluvial deposits. The denser salt water of the sea also forms a barrier to freshwater outflow. In each case, temporary overflow springs may form in response to  high water tables. The type of cave upstream of the spring will determine whether its discharge spills from    a flat passage developed close to the water table or wells up from a great depth within the phreatic zone. Thus a dammed karst outflow site typically consists of    a main low-water spring with one or more associated high-water relief springs; Smart (1983a, b) has termed these overflow–underflow systems. In some situations water escapes via a distributary system of several springs at about the same level, as described by Quinlan and Ewers (1981) in the case of the Sinkhole Plain–Mammoth Cave–Green River system.
3. Confined Springs (Figure 5.17f and g). Artesian conditions prevail where karst rocks are confined by     an overlying impervious formation. Fault planes some- times provide exit routes for the water; elsewhere it may escape where the caprock is breached by erosion. Since the emerging water is usually under hydrostatic



Table 5.9   Discharges of some of the world’s largest karst springs


Discharge (m3 s—1)

Basin area

Spring	Mean
Maximum
Minimum
(km2)
Reference
Tobio, Papua New Guinea
85–115
—
—
—
Maire 1981c
Matali, Papua New Guinea
90
>240
20
350
Maire 1981b
Trebisˇnjica,Herzegovina
80
—
—
1140
Milanovic´ 2000
Bussento, Italy
>76
117
76
—
Bakalowicz 1973
Dumanli, Turkey*
50
—
25
2800
Karanjac and Gunay 1980
Galowe, Papua New Guinea
40
—
—
—
Maire 1981a
Ljubljanica, Slovenia
39
132
4.25
1100
Gospodaricˇ and Habic´ 1976
Ras-el-Ain, Syria
39
—
—
—
Burdon and Safadi 1963
Disu, China
33
390
4
1050
Yuan 1981
Stella, Italy
37
—
23
—
Burdon and Safadi 1963
Chingshui, China
33
390
4
1040
Yuan 1981
Spring Creek, Florida, USA
33
—
—
> 1500
Smart and Worthington 2004
Oluk Ko¨pru¨, Turkey
>30
—
—
> 1000
Smart and Worthington 2004
Timavo, Italy
30
138
9
> 1000
Smart and Worthington 2004,
Frio´, Mexico
28
515
6
> 1000
Fish 1977
Ombla, Croatia
27
110
4
800–900
Bonacci 1995, Bonacci 2001
Yedi Miyarlar, Turkey
>25
—
—
> 1000
Smart and Worthington 2004
Mchishta, Georgia
25
—
—
—
Smart and Worthington 2004
Coy, Mexico
24
200
13
> 1000
Fish 1977
Buna, Herzegovina
24
—
—
110
Smart and Worthington 2004
Liulongdong, China
24
75
9
900
Yuan 1981
Kirkgozler, Turkey
24
—
—
—
Smart and Worthington 2004
Silver, Florida,USA
23
37
15
1900
Faulkner 1976
Rainbow, Florida, USA
22
—
—
> 1500
Smart and Worthington 2004
Vaucluse, France
21
100
4
1115
Blavoux et al. 1992
Sinjac (Piva), Yugoslavia
21
—
—
500
Smart and Worthington 2004
Bunica, Herzegovina
20
—
—
510
Smart and Worthington 2004
Grab-Ruda, Croatia
20
—
—
390
Smart and Worthington 2004
Trollosen, Spitzbergen
20
—
—
—
Smart and Worthington 2004
*Dumanli spring is the largest of a group of Manavgat River springs that collectively yield a mean flow of 125–130 m3 s—1.


pressure, an updomed turbulent ‘boil’ is  particularly characteristic  of  spring  pools  in  this  class, although dammed springs that are semi-confined by a particu- larly thick bed may also ‘boil’, especially during flood. Artesian springs are also  sometimes termed vauclu- sian after the type example, La Fontaine de Vaucluse (Tables 5.5 and 5.9), in the south of France (Durozoy and Paloc 1973, Blavoux et al. 1992).
  The discharge capacity of the artesian spring determines the elevation of the potentiometric surface in the aquifer   and  hence  the  depth  of  the  phreatic  zone.  Artesian springs may also have associated high-water relief springs. Many confined springs are also thermal because of the    deep circulation of the water prior to emergence. Numer-  ous examples of geothermal karst springs are found in China, Hungary and Turkey (Gu¨nay and S¸ims¸ek 2000).
  Other characteristics have also been used to classify karst springs, as noted by Bo¨gli (1980). These include:
1. 
according to the outflow
● perennial
● periodic
● rhythmic (ebb and flow)
● episodic
2. according to the supposed origin of the water
● emergence (no evidence of origin)
● resurgence  (re-emergence  of  a  known  swallet stream)
● exsurgence (autogenic seepage water)

  Periodic and  rhythmic  springs,  sometimes referred  to  as ebbing and flowing wells, are particularly interesting natural phenomena. They are usually dammed springs with a siphoning reservoir system controlling their out- flow. They are discussed by Trombe (1952), Mangin (1969), Gavrilovic (1970) and Bonacci and Bojanic´ (1991).





Figure 5.17    Types of springs encountered in karst. Note that in plan there may be a series of distributary springs at about the same      level, especially in type II dammed aggraded springs. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology        and Hydrology.


5.2.4 Throughput control
At the scale of the basin flow direction is determined by    the direction of the hydraulic gradient, but locally flow direction is determined by pathways made available by interconnected fissures and pores. The factors which determine the density, size and distribution of voids are      of fundamental importance in controlling the throughput

and storage of water in a karst aquifer, because they dictate the potential flow paths. Anticlinal and synclinal structures are associated with tension and compression, respectively, and thus with joint patterns that reflect these conditions. Joints are most readily penetrated by percolat- ing waters when under tension; thus anticlines (and domes)  are  potentially  important  sites  for  aquifer




recharge. On the other hand, synclinal troughs favour flow convergence and the accumulation of groundwater (Latt- man and Parizek 1964, Parizek 1976; Figure 2.17). Never- theless, the relationship between the specific capacity of boreholes and their association with lineaments (joints, faults, etc.) can be complex (Tam et al. 2004).
  Bedding planes also play a role in linking joint- dominated routes for downward percolation in the vadose zone, but are more important in the phreatic zone because   of their great lateral continuity. As dip becomes steeper,     so bedding-plane partings can increasingly provide recharge routes. Water confined in major bedding planes between dense, thick sheets of rock may be led to great depths in what amounts to artesian conditions, before cross-joints permit lateral movement.
  Faults often operate hydrologically like major joints. Their vertical and lateral continuity can render them particularly important features in the  orientation  of water flow in both the vadose and phreatic zones. How- ever, many fault planes are highly compressed or filled with secondary calcite of low porosity; they are then barriers to groundwater flow. Further, they are also sometimes important in introducing blocks of other lithologies that may act as barriers to water movement. This may arise from normal or reverse faulting of adjacent non-karst rocks or may involve fault-plane- guided intrusions of igneous material. These impose an impervious barrier across an aquifer, considerably inter- rupting groundwater flow and aquifer development.
  The influence of tectonic structures on karst flow patterns in the fold and thrust belt of the eastern Jura Mountains of Switzerland has been investigated inten- sively by Herold et al. (2000), who conducted three extended multitracer experiments followed by three months of monitoring at around 95 springs. They found   that fast long-distance transport along fold axes in crest    and limb areas of anticlines is related to extension joints resulting from synorogenic folds, and that concentrated lateral drainage of water flow from anticline limbs is exclusively related to pre-orogenic normal faults that were transtensively reactivated during folding. Water flow through otherwise impermeable layers was sus- pected to take place through porous calcite fault gouges      or breccias. By contrast, transpressively reactivated nor-   mal faults and synorogenic reverse faults were found to  have no influence on groundwater circulation. The results   of this outstanding study are probably applicable to many other karst areas.
  Effective porosity (equation 5.2) is strongly influenced   by pore size and determines specific storage and stor- ativity (equation 5.14). Void space (diameter or width) available for water movement ranges over seven or eight

orders of magnitude up to tens of metres, and since permeability is a function of void size it also varies over a wide range. As void size and continuity increase, permeability increases and resistance to flow diminishes; thus hydraulic conductivity (equation 5.5) is enhanced and, for a given aquifer thickness, transmissivity (equation 5.15) also grows.
  The intrinsic properties of some rocks, such as young, highly porous corals and calcareous aeolianites, immedi- ately permit significant aquifer storage and throughput even before a significant amount of dissolution has occurred, whereas at the other extreme marble and evaporites may be almost impermeable before karstifica-  tion takes place. Rocks with an initially low void density will tend eventually to develop high conduit permeability with minimal fissure storage and diffuse phreatic flow. In contrast, rocks that are quite porous, thinly bedded and highly jointed can still develop conduit permeability if point recharge occurs, but will always have a relatively   high diffuse component in the saturated zone.
  The development of secondary voids is very strongly influenced by characteristics of recharge; so much so that simply because of this effect, throughput conditions in allogenic and autogenic systems are often radically dif- ferent, even in the same rock type. Allogenic point- recharge favours the growth of large stream passages, whereas spatially diffuse autogenic recharge enhances pore and fissure porosity, but has little impact on the development of conduits. Thus for a given lithology, in     the first case rapid turbulent throughput can occur, while    in the second case flow may be mainly laminar and diffuse.
  As karstification proceeds and large secondary cavities (i.e. cave systems) develop in the phreatic zone, there is a progressive decoupling of flow between that passing relatively rapidly through the karst pipes and that in the surrounding porous and fissured matrix (White 1977b). Water movement may be rapid and turbulent in one, while slow and laminar in the other. This makes the analysis of the aquifer and its response to recharge particularly difficult. Thus, for example, the speed with which a spring responds to recharge is not a simple reflection of the velocity of water flow through the aquifer; there will be a range of velocities through different subsystems within the aquifer. Constrictions within the system, for example, can produce local pond-   ing and so exercise local control on its response to recharge that may dominate regional effects (Halihan and Wicks 1998, Halihan et al. 1998).
  As a consequence of the effects of porosity, fissuring   and differential solution, permeability may be greater in some directions than in others, as well as in certain




preferred stratigraphical horizons. However, while geo- logical factors dictate where storage is greatest, local relief normally exerts a still greater influence on the direction in which groundwater flows, because hydraulic gradient is strongly influenced by it. It is local relief that determines both the highest positions where recharge can occur and the lowest points at which groundwater outflow can take place. Where the horizontal distance between the points of input and output is minimized, the hydraulic gradient is steepest. Thus, the shortest flow path from input to output boundaries determines the direction of groundwater movement in an  isotropic aquifer,  because    its innumerable pores and fissures provide pathways for water flow in any direction; i.e. their control on flow is merely of secondary importance, a rate control. However, where strongly preferred penetrable fissure patterns cause  the aquifer to be markedly anisotropic, the orientation of maximum hydraulic gradient will reflect a balance between the direction in which resistance to flow is least (i.e. where hydraulic conductivity maximized) and    the direction in which the rate of energy loss is max- imized (i.e. the shortest and steepest route). In discussing  the origin and morphology of limestone caves, Palmer (1991) expressed essentially the same notion in a slightly different way by pointing out that passages of vadose origin are formed by gravitational flow and so trend continuously downward along the steepest available openings, whereas phreatic passages originate along routes of greatest hydraulic efficiency (least expenditure     of head per unit discharge) that conduct water to the outflow spring. Thus passages in a typical dendritic branchwork system might commence by plunging down    the dip in the vadose zone, later to follow the strike in the phreatic zone.
5.3 ENERGY SUPPLY AND FLOW-NETWORK DEVELOPMENT
5.3.1 Energy supply
The development of flow paths in karst aquifers depends upon the energy supply available and its spatial distribu- tion. This derives mainly from:

1. the throughput volume of water;
2. the difference in elevation between the recharge and discharge areas;
3. the spatial distribution of recharge, i.e. on whether it is evenly distributed (as is characteristic of diffuse autogenic recharge) or is focused (as is characteristic     of allogenic point recharge);
4. the aggressivity of the recharging waters.
  
Close to volcanic areas and in some other hot-spring regions the geothermal heat flux may also be important. Elsewhere the magnitude of the thermal flux is only sufficient to warm the groundwater flux by about 0.1○C   a—1 (Bo¨gli 1980), an effect which generally can be neglected.
  The amount of dissolution that is accomplished is directly related to the amount of rainfall, as discussed in Chapter 4, but in addition to chemical energy, the principal forms of fluid energy are potential energy, kinetic energy and internal energy. Most of the potential energy is realized as kinetic energy as the water descends through the vadose  zone,  where  much  mechanical work can be done by fluvial processes. Flowing water can be regarded as a transporting machine, the stream power of which can be determined by Bagnold’s (1966) equation

K ¼ rgQy	ð5:17Þ
where K is the gross stream power, r the fluid mass density, g gravitational acceleration, Q discharge and y is slope. From this, the energy available per unit area of channel  bed  –  termed  specific  stream  power  –  can  be derived from

 K 
o ¼ W  ¼ tv	ð5:18Þ
where o is specific stream power, W is stream width, t is mean shear stress at the bed and v is mean stream velocity (see also equation 8.1). Most of this power is dissipated in overcoming fluid shear resistance to flow; so relatively little energy surplus is available for erosion and transport   by the stream.
  The velocity of water flow in karst varies considerably both within a given aquifer and between aquifers. Within     a given aquifer and for a given hydraulic gradient, it varies over several orders of magnitude between water movement in the matrix, fissures and conduits, as indi- cated by hydraulic conductivity values in Table 5.5. Within conduits in different aquifers it also varies con- siderably, as illustrated by the wide range of groundwater conduit velocities determined by dye-tracing experiments (Figure 5.18a); a histogram of 2877 tracer tests in many different conduit systems shows the global average chan-  nel flow velocity to be 0.022 m s—1, but to vary over more than four orders of magnitude (Figure 5.18b). Milanovic´ (1981) reported that from 281 dye tests over distances of 10–15 km or more in the Dinaric karst, 70% of cases had   a flow velocity of < 0.05 m s—1, although they varied over  a range from 0.002 to 0.5 m s—1. Within a given conduit,






Figure 5.18 (a) Karst groundwater conduit velocities as a function of straight line distance travelled determined from dye tracing different systems. Reproduced from Worthington, S.R.H. (1994) Flow velocities in unconfined carbonate aquifers. Cave and Karst Science, 21(1), 21–2. (b) Frequency distribution of 2877 dye traces in karst conduit systems. Reproduced from Worthington, S.R.H., Ford, D.C. and Beddows, P.A. (2000) Porosity and permeability enhancement in unconfined carbonate aquifers as a  result of solution, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of  Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 220–3.
flow velocity normally increases substantially with dis- charge, as determined by Kruse (1980) in the Maligne River system in Canada and by Stanton and Smart (1981)  for swallet to resurgence systems on the Mendip Hills in   the UK. Figure 5.19 provides other examples.
  The rate of throughput of water through a karst system can be measured in two ways: flow-through time and pulse-through  time.  The  previous  paragraph  discussed  the rate of movement of tracer dyes through the system. When their density is about the same as water, they travel   at the same speed as the molecules of water. They therefore measure its  flow-through  time.  However, when a recharge pulse from heavy rain reaches a stream-sink it injects water and sediment into an aquifer.  The flood passes as a kinematic wave down the vadose

cave passages. But once the saturated zone is reached, the recharge wave causes a rise in the water table and a pressure pulse is forced through phreatic  conduits, giving a hydrograph peak at the spring. Kinematic waves in open channels travel about 30% faster than the water itself, in the order of tens to thousands of metres per hour, whereas pressure pulses through flooded pipes are propagated almost instantaneously (at the speed   of sound). The flow-through time of the water responsible for the hydrograph rise at a spring is much longer than  either and can be estimated from the travel velocity of the turbidity peak or of dyes injected into the flooded stream. The pressure pulse mechanism is also known expres- sively as piston flow.
  Internal energy, best expressed by rock and water temperature, is another form of energy of significance for aquifer development. However, temperature is a secondary factor that moderates mechanical processes through its influence on the dynamic (and kinematic) viscosity of water (Table 5.4), which is more than twice     as viscous at 0○C as at 30○C. The lower viscosity at higher temperatures permits a greater discharge through capillary tubes (Poiseuille’s law, equation 5.3) and increases hydraulic conductivity (equation 5.5) in gran- ular, porous media. The influence of temperature on the physics of flow therefore helps to explain some of the differences in karst encountered in the cool temperate and tropical zones,  by influencing  penetration distances    of capillary water and the consequent work that can be   done by chemical processes. Dreybrodt et al. (1999) noted that considering the temperature dependence of viscosity, breakthrough times for conduits in the initial stages of karstification are lower by about a factor of six     in tropical karst compared with cool environment karsts, other things being equal. Worthington (2001) contends that this is an important factor in deep-cave genesis.
  The temperature distribution in karst systems and the   role of air and water fluxes have been reviewed by Leutscher and Jeannin (2004). Geothermal heat flux as measured in mines and boreholes shows that rock tem- peratures increase with depth; away from volcanic areas    the standard gradient is  ~3○C 100 m—1. However, numerous temperature measurements made  in  deep caves and at karst springs show that temperatures usually  are close to the mean annual values in the outside atmo- sphere. Cave-air circulation within the highly permeable vadose zone results in temperature gradients that are similar to the lapse rate of humid air. Leutscher and Jeannin (2004) present a synthetic conceptual model of heat fluxes in a karst massif that is built on numerous field observations (Figure 5.20). Within 50 m or so of the surface they identify a heterothermic zone in which





Figure 5.19    Karst groundwater conduit velocities as a fraction of maximum annual discharge in 11 different systems. Reproduced        from Worthington, S.R.H. Flow velocities in unconfined carbonate aquifers. Cave and Karst Science, 21(1), 21–2. ©  1994 British        Cave Research Association.


seasonal variations are observed (see section 7.11 for further discussion). But deeper into the vadose zone (which can be up to 2000 m thick) conditions become homothermic, being characterized by high temperature stability. Rock, air and water are almost in thermal equilibrium, although water and rock temperatures are always slightly lower (~0.15○C) than air. Observed gradients usually vary from  0.4 to 0.6○C  100 m—1, although highly ventilated conduits near the top of the

homothermic zone show steeper temperature gradients than the more poorly ventilated deeper parts. The tem- perature gradient is close to zero in a well-karstified phreatic zone down to the bottom of the main conduit network; Benderitter et al. (1993) have modelled the heat transfer conditions there. Below the conduits or where all   of the saturated zone has poorly developed permeability,   the temperature gradient may be strongly affected by the geothermal heat flux (Liedl and Sauter 1998).



    	water flow: ~ 10-50 ls–1km–2 air flow: ~ 75-150 m3s–1km–2
1500 m a.s.l



1000 m


500 m







6°C

6.5°C
7°C
7.5°C

8°C
8.5°C

8.5°C


Temperature gradients within karst systems

Winter  Summer
heterothermic zone


Temperature gradients within karst systems
Winter    Summer
heterothermic zone

6°C
6.5°C
7°C
7.5°C
8°C


15°C
21°C



 	15°C


27°C



Geothermal heat flux

Geothermal heat flux


Conduit network	Unsaturated zone	Phreatic zone	Low permeable level

Figure 5.20    A conceptual model of the temperature distribution within a karstified massif. Reproduced from Leutscher, M. and       Jeannin, P.-Y. Temperature distribution in karst systems: the role of air and water fluxes. Terra Nova, 16, 344–50 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing.




  Lismonde (2002, cited by Leutscher and Jeannin 2004) calculated that the loss of potential energy of water during its vertical transit is 9.81 J kg—1 m—1  and showed that if this energy is fully transformed into heat by friction, then it leads to a temperature increase of 0.234○C 100 m—1. By this  means, the heat supplied annually by the work of gravity to the homothermic zone is proportional to the annual recharge. In a vadose  zone 1000 m thick with a recharge of 10–50 L s—1 km—2, this amounts to between 3 × 109 and 1.5 × 1010 kJ km—3 annually. When considering the relative importance of the roles of air and water in heat transfers within the vadose zone, Leutscher and Jeannin (2004) concluded that air circulation plays the dominant role, although the relative effect of water on heat transfers is likely to increase at greater depth where air circulation is reduced.  Air flow is also relatively less important in promoting heat flux in areas such as the tropics where there is little seasonal contrast in outside air temperatures. Leutscher and Jeannin’s model is based on the assumption that the ‘chimney effect’ is at the origin of most air  circulation observed within alpine caves, although they  recognized that barometric fluctuations are also important in promoting air flows in larger systems. Such fluctuations will increase the  influence  of  air  flow  in  the  flux  of  heat.  A classic example is Castleguard Cave, Canada, a  lengthy relict conduit which passes through a glacierized  mountain; it displays both chimney effect and barometric air flows, but temperatures rise to þ3○C in the centre due to the geother- mal flux, while water temperatures in the phreatic conduits underneath are only 0.5–1.0○C (Ford et al. 1976).
  Temperature plays a role in influencing total chemical energy for dissolution, which can be viewed as the product of the volume and aggressivity of the solvent throughput. Kinetic factors, which are largely tempera- ture dependent, determine the rate at which dissolution occurs; while equilibrium factors determine the ultimate solute concentrations that can be achieved given suffi- cient time (as explained in Chapter 3). In a conduit- dominated groundwater system, throughput is fast and there is likely to be insufficient time for most of the water   to reach equilibrium solute concentrations; thus for a given discharge kinetic factors dictate both the location    and the total amount of work done by chemical processes.  In a preponderantly porous carbonate rock with a diffuse, largely laminar flow system, kinetic factors still deter- mine where most chemical energy is expended (in the upper part of the vadose zone), but for a given water throughput it is equilibrium considerations that determine  the total chemical load discharged from the system.
  So far the discussion has centred on meteoric water and carbonic acid derived principally from soil CO2, but it should  be  noted  that  hot  hypogean  waters  from

deep-seated sources, often associated with  H2S  and CO2, can also sometimes be a source of aggressive water capable of enhancing porosity at depth (Figure 5.3) and dissolving cave networks (Palmer 1991).
  Where water is stored under confined artesian condi- tions, the influence of another form of energy can some- times be observed. Water levels in artesian bores can fluctuate twice daily by several centimetres as a conse- quence of earth tides (Figure 5.21). These are caused by    the same mechanism that produces marine tides, the moving tidal bulge in the solid earth causing the reservoir rocks to compress and relax and thus the fissures to close and open. The pumping action of earth tides may be especially significant in the earliest stages of karstifica- tion, when it is difficult to initiate a secondary perme- ability because of the short penetration distance of groundwater before it becomes fully saturated with respect to calcium carbonate (Davis 1966).
  As relief is lowered by karstic denudation, regional precipitation and hence recharge may also be reduced, thus further diminishing available total energy and the depth of active circulation. Ancient peneplained karsts with only a small local relief have relatively little energy   for water circulation, but they may possess very con- siderable storage in ancient flooded cavities.
5.3.2 Flow network development
We may conclude from the above discussion that, given sufficient hydraulic potential, the style of recharge has a strong influence on the occurrence, density and size of conduit permeability (although not on the process of conduit development). The following end-member con- ditions occur in the development of flow networks.

1. Diffuse recharge onto a carbonate rock with high primary porosity, e.g.rain on aeolian calcarenite or uplifted coral, when few or no karst conduits form until subaerial diagenesis (case hardening) focuses recharge;
2. Widely spaced, large volume, point recharge into a dense carbonate rock with well-developed fissures, e.g. recharge windows in a breached caprock over massive limestones, when a few very large diameter conduits  form commensurate in size with their throughput discharge. Competition is limited to corridors down- stream of recharge points that are separated by unkar- stified rock beneath the umbrella of still intact caprock.

  Doline karst falls between these two recharge extremes because, although the recharge is autogenic in origin, the flow is internally focused through a large number of point inputs of modest volume (Figure 5.15).





Figure 5.21 Earth tide effects as measured (a) in a borehole and (b) in an artesian karst spring. Adapted from Mangin, A. Contribution a l’etude hydrodynamique des aquiferes karstiques. Univ. Dijon These Doct. es © 1975 and Sci. Annales et Speleologie, 29(3), 283–332; 29(4), 495–601, 1974; 30(1), 21–124. © 1974 Taylor and Francis; and Williams, P.W, Hydrology of the Waikoropupu Springs: a major tidal karst resurgence in northwest Nelson (New Zealand). Journal of Hydrology, 35, 73–92. © 1977 Elsevier.


  Once water has recharged the karst, the various forms     of available energy mentioned above are expended in the enlargement of selected primary pores and fractures into secondary conduit networks. This process is discussed in detail  in  Chapter  7,  so  suffice  it  to  say  here  that  White (2002) has noted that in the early stages of this process three thresholds are crossed when fracture   apertures exceed about 0.01 m: (i) a hydrodynamic  threshold that permits the breakdown of laminar flow and the onset of turbulent flow; (ii) a kinetic threshold that marks a shift in dissolution  rate  from  the  fourth-order  kinetics  to linear kinetics (see Chapter 3); and (iii) a transport threshold that enables flow velocities to be sufficient for  the  physical entrainment  and  transport  of  insoluble  clastic material. White pointed out that the coincidence of all three thresh- olds at an aperture of 0.01 m provides a natural dividing line between fracture aquifers and conduit aquifers and, further, that it separates the process of conduit develop- ment into an initiation phase as the protoconduit grows to critical threshold dimensions and an enlargement phase as it then expands to the size of typical cave passages. After breakthrough of the protoconduit at the outflow boundary (and consequently the development of a spring from what was previously just a seepage), there is a  fairly sudden transition to rapid dissolution throughout the entire sub- terranean flow path. The entire route then   enlarges

rapidly. Most caves formed in this way by meteoric waters are dendritic branchworks (Figure 5.22), but many other cave network patterns can develop, depending on the style  of recharge and the kind of pre-solutional porosity that these processes act upon (Figure 5.23).
  Thus conduit networks integrated from recharge points   to springs extend like a plumbing system right through the karst and drain it effectively. This may seem obvious enough when rivers are observed to disappear under- ground into caves, but efficient, integrated drainage networks also underlie fields of dolines, for dolines and conduit networks develop simultaneously. And even in carbonate terrains where stream-sinks and dolines are rare or absent, as in much of the European chalk, caves   with turbulent flow are known and borehole evidence reveals many solutionally enlarged voids (Banks et al. 1995, Waters and Banks 1997, Matthews et al. 2000). In   the Chalk of northern France a fracture maze cave of over    1 km has been mapped (Rodet 1996) and numerous conduits have developed under the edge of overlying clastic deposits that shed allogenic runoff (Crampon et al. 1993). Only in argillaceous limestones are enlarged fissure networks uncommon or ineffective, largely because of their clogging by insoluble residues.
  The continued dissolution associated with groundwater circulation ensures that the void volume of the network





Figure 5.22 Typical dendritic flow networks in carbonate karsts formed by meteoric waters. Reproduced by permission of Worthington,  S.  R.  H.,  Ford,  D.  C.  and  Beddows,  P.  A.  2000. ‘Porosity and permeability enhancement in unconfined carbonate aquifers as a result of solution’. In Klimchouk, A.B., Ford, D.C., Palmer, A.N. and Dreybrodt, W. (Eds), Speleogenesis: Evolution of Karst Aquifers. 220–223 © 2000 National Speleological Society.
increases over time and so, as a result, and provided that



lishes beneath the surface. On Niue Island for example, which is a coral atoll in the Pacific uplifted during the Pleistocene  and  with  no  rocks  other  than  carbonates,  the water table is always within a few metres of sea level, and even 6.5 km inland from the coast has an elevation of only 1.6 m (Williams 1992). The permeabil-   ity is so high (typically > 25%) that in the centre of the island the water table 60 m below the surface responds diurnally by a few centimetres to marine tidal fluctua- tions. There is little scope for lowering the groundwater level because it is already close to sea level and con- tinued groundwater circulation will result in minimal increase to the already high effective porosity because of high saturation levels. However, dissolution at the freshwater–saltwater interface has enhanced secondary porosity in the mixing zone and has encouraged the focusing of freshwater discharge at springs around the coast (see Figure 5.37); thus despite the high porosity the aquifer has developed conduits within the zone of palaeo- sea-level variation.

5.4.2 Karstic enhancement of porosity
Massive limestone typically has very low primary por- osity and consequently very low permeability, but groundwater circulation increases it over time. If a typically anisotropic karst aquifer is conceptualized as behaving hydrologically like rock pierced by straight, parallel capillary tubes, it is possible to illustrate the way    in which increasing tube diameter and percentage poros-    ity affect hydraulic conductivity in the direction of the tubes, assuming laminar flow (Figure 5.24) (Smith et al. 1976). Secondary enlargement of the fissure network can lead to at least an order of magnitude increase in porosity
5

recharge throughput remains constant, the level of the

and more than 10

increase in hydraulic conductivity. For
7

zone of groundwater saturation gradually falls. We can

example,  there  is about  10

difference  in hydraulic

appreciate from the foregoing that there are considerable variations in the size and distribution of secondary voids     in karst, and therefore in the ease with which water is transmitted through them. As a consequence the water table is seldom flat, as the term might suggest, but is more often irregular – even sometimes disjointed – and slopes towards the discharge boundary.

5.4 DEVELOPMENT OF THE WATER TABLE   AND PHREATIC ZONES
5.4.1 Pre-established water tables
Nevertheless,   there   are   some   circumstances   when   the effective primary porosity is so high that when the limestones are first occupied by fresh waters a saturated  zone with a very low-gradient water table readily estab-

conductivity between matrix and secondary channels in
the Mammoth Cave region (Table 5.5). Thus the phreatic zone can acquire considerable storage capacity and fast throughput potential.

5.4.3 Changes in the phreatic zone
Once percolating water reaches the water table, the energy  of water per unit mass, the hydraulic potential, is deter- mined by gravitational acceleration times the local head,
i.e. by the height of the water table above the outflow spring. It is this energy coupled with the vertical hydraulic conductivity characteristics of the phreatic zone that determines the depth to which groundwater can circulate, and hence the thickness of the phreatic zone: the larger the hydraulic potential the deeper the circulation. It tends to be particularly great when massively bedded, steeply dipping





Figure 5.23   Summary of cave patterns and their relationship to types of recharge and porosity. Reproduced from Palmer, A.N., Origin    and morphology of limestone caves. Geological Society of America Bulletin 103, 1–21. © 1991 Geological Society of America.


limestones slope towards the outflow boundary. Under such circumstances flow paths tend to become trapped in plunging bedding planes with only occasional cross-joints   to lead water back to higher levels. The outcome is conduit systems with deep phreatic loops that can penetrate in excess of 400 m below the water table. At the other end of the spectrum are thinly bedded, fractured limestones with shallow dips. Under these circumstances and for the same throughput discharge, very high permeability develops and   a lower hydraulic gradient, and so consequently a shal- lower circulation is supported and the phreatic zone is not very deep. Worthington (2001, 2004) provides empirical evidence that the depth of the conduit flow path is directly proportional to flow-path length, stratal dip, and fracture anisotropy, thus

D ¼ 0:18ðLyÞ0:79	ð5:19Þ
where D is the mean depth of flow in metres below the water table, y is the dimensionless dip (equal to the sine     of the dip in degrees) and L is the flow-path length in metres. However, Ford (2002) contested this relationship   on several grounds.
  
When significant secondary porosity develops in the zone where the water table fluctuates above its basal level (the  epiphreatic  zone),  two  things  happen:  (i)  the increased  horizontal  hydraulic  conductivity  favours greater water movement in the shallow phreatic zone rather than at depth and (ii) the increased storage lowers    the water table gradient and thereby extends the vadose zone. Circulation in the deep phreatic zone becomes less vigorous and, as karstification continues, the increasingly active shallow phreatic zone may lead to relatively stagnant conditions in the deepest phreatic voids. A stagnant phreas can also be produced as a consequence     of positive baselevel changes. A rising sea level, valley aggradation or tectonic subsidence can submerge a pre- viously active phreatic region beyond the zone of con- temporary  circulation.  It  then  becomes  a  variety  of palaeokarst and may be simply a passive store or vessel     for the receipt of the finest suspended sediment. Such features are known to depths greater than 3 km in oil wells. Estimates of phreatic zone thickness are required for  the calculation of transmissivity (equation 5.10) and storativity (equation 5.11). It is not necessarily the entire depth of the phreatic zone to the base of karstification that





Figure 5.24 (Upper) Relationship of primary and secondary porosity and pore size to the hydraulic conductivity of karst rocks. The limestone is considered an equivalent porous medium consisting of straight tubes. Reproduced from Smith, D.I., Atkinson, T.C. and      Drew, D.P. (1976). The hydrology of limestone terrains, in The Science of Speleology (eds T.D. Ford and C.H.D.  Cullingford),      Academic Press, London, pp. 179–212. (Lower) Model of the changes in porosity and equivalent pore diameter in limestones from        their initial state after deposition, through burial, uplift and exposure to surface karstification (telogenetic karst). A short circuit can        occur when young limestones are karstified during diagenesis (eogenetic karst). The labels N/A on the dashed lines refer to equivalent     tube density in number of tubes per square centimetre. Reproduced from Vacher, H.L. and Mylroie, J.E. (2002) Eogenetic karst from         the perspective of an equivalent porous medium. Carbonates and Evaporites, 17(2), 182–96.


should be used, because only the upper part of the phreatic zone may be involved in active groundwater circulation over the span of a few years. Atkinson’s (1977b) solution to this problem in the Mendip Hills,

England, was to estimate the depth of active circulation  from the elevation range of the phreatic looping of a trunk  conduit  leading  to  Wookey  Hole  spring  –  one  of the  main  resurgences  in  the  region  (Figure  7.15).




However, information of this kind is available only if springs have been dived for long distances. Alternatively     it could be estimated using Worthington’s (2001, 2004) approach (equation 5.19).
  Transmissivity calculations for the entire phreatic zone will take into account the aquifer thickness from the water table to the base of karstification. However, since porosity and hydraulic conductivity usually diminish with depth through the aquifer, total transmissivity can be envisaged as comprising the sum of the transmissivities      of different subzones within the phreas (Figure 5.12).
  Active aquifer thickness varies spatially and tempo- rally. The depth of active circulation may be less when  close to the spring than when further into the aquifer and     it may also be less under baseflow than under flood conditions. Where there is a stagnant phreatic zone, the karstified rock may have a high permeability and storage capacity, but zero specific discharge if there is no pressure gradient to drive the flow. Hence total aquifer thickness can be appreciated to be a sum of several parts;  the different dynamic zones of the aquifer.

5.5 DEVELOPMENT OF THE VADOSE ZONE
5.5.1 The vadose zone as a resultant following phreatic drawdown
Most unkarstified crystalline carbonate rocks have a very low primary porosity (typically < 2%). So when they are first invaded by fresh waters the standing water level in     the rock is close to the surface. But the porosity and permeability of karst increases over time, so progres- sively more void space becomes available to store and transmit the groundwater. As a result the standing water level gradually falls and so the aerated zone becomes deeper. However, while this is happening the surface also lowers by denudation. Consequently, the resultant thick-  ness of the vadose zone is the outcome of the relative rates of movement of its upper and lower boundaries: the rate of surface lowering and the rate of water table lowering (which also responds to outflow boundary low- ering caused by valley deepening). Speleological explo- ration in the western Caucasus Mountains shows that the vadose zone in well-karstified rocks can sometimes extend as much as 2 km below the surface.
  Variability in lithology, structure and geomorphology causes contrasts in the course of evolution of the vadose zone. Thus in coral reefs interconnected primary porosity can exceed 20% and so, following reef emergence, a freshwater lens establishes near sea level with a very permeable vadose zone above it. In active alpine zones rapid rates of uplift, denudation and valley incision can   give rise to rapid unloading of exposed rocks and to rearrangement of stress fields. This creates a series of

unloading fractures subparallel to the surface that are superimposed upon older joint and fault systems that may also gape. As a consequence, all these fissures are relatively open near the surface where pressure is least, but close with depth. Even the early water table in such cases may be hundreds of metres below the surface, especially where climates are relatively arid. With subsequent dis- solutional enlargement of the fissure systems’ void space gradually increases at depth and the zone of saturation in   the rock falls, thus deepening the vadose zone.
  Sometimes heavy rain causes deep back-flooding and temporary pressure flow in subvertical drains passing through  deep  vadose  zones,  giving  rise  to  processes  that interrupt the evolution of regular vadose conduit morphology. This contrasts with the normal drawdown effect of a gradually falling water table by providing short-lived episodes of rising water table – a flood water invasion effect.
5.5.2 Epikarst development
The epikarst (also referred to as the subcutaneous zone) occupies the top of the vadose zone (Table 5.1). It consists usually of a particularly weathered zone of limestone that lies immediately beneath the soil, and it gradually gives way to the main body of the vadose zone that comprises largely unweathered bedrock. The epikarst   is typically 3–10 m deep, but its characteristics can vary considerably. Sometimes there is little or no soil, for example in the arid zone and in glacially scoured regions, and if the rock is especially massive and has a low density  of fissuring it can be 30 m or more deep. The develop- ment of the epikarst is explained by Mangin (1975), Williams (1983), Klimchouk (2000a) and by several contributors to Jones et al. (2004).
  Chapters 3 and 4 explained that the greatest expendi-   ture of chemical energy on the dissolution of carbonate  rocks occurs near the surface, because of proximity to the main source of CO2 production in the soil. These dis- solutional processes act on fissure systems that may themselves be evolving, because of stress release follow-  ing unloading. We also noted in Chapter 4 that up to about 80% of solutional denudation in the catchment is accomplished within the top 10 m or so of the limestone outcrop and that the effectiveness of corrosional attack gradually diminishes with distance from the surface (and from the CO2 supply). The outcome of this is that the network of fissures through which percolation water passes is widened by solution near the surface, but the extent and frequency of widening diminishes gradually with depth. Solutionally widened joints taper downwards  and become less numerous. This can be readily observed    in quarries (Figure 5.25). A consequence of this is that





Figure 5.25   ‘Pinnacle and cutter’ relief exposed in a limestone quarry face in Kentucky. This illustrates the tapering closure of solutionally enlarged joints with depth in the epikarst.


permeability also diminishes with depth (Figure 5.26). Porosity in the epikarst typically exceeds 20%, whereas      in the relatively unweathered rock beneath it is com- monly < 2%. This gives rise to a contrast in hydraulic conductivity and so, as a consequence, water tends to accumulate at the base of the epikarst, because it cannot escape as freely as it came in. However, not all fissures  close and a few of them can be observed to penetrate as major openings right through the rock (Figure 5.27). As a


Figure 5.26 Variation of permeability with depth in the epi- karst at Corconne, France. Gouisset divided the epikarst into two zones based on contrast in permeability. Reproduced from Gouisset 1981, cited in Smart, P.L. and Friederich, H. Water movement and storage in the unsaturated zone of a maturely karstified carbonate aquifer, Mendip Hills, England, Proceedings    of Conference on Environmental Problems in Karst Terranes and their Solutions 59–87, © 1987 National Water Well Association.





Figure 5.27    Very high fissure frequency exposed  in a  quarry  face near Te Kuiti, New Zealand. The vertical feature to the right   of the figure is a minor fault and is the kind of discontinuity that permits doline initiation by providing a preferred drainage path     for infiltrating rainwater. Reproduced from Williams, P.W., Polygonal  karst  and  palaeokarst  of  the  King   Country, North Island, New Zealand. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Suppl. Vol 136, 45–67, Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie © 2004.




result, these become the main drainage routes for water passing downwards to the vadose zone. They act as centripetal flow foci that funnel water from the fissured epikarst. These sites of flow concentration become the distal tributaries of drains through the vadose zone and are the main routes by which diffuse autogenic recharge      is transmitted to conduits in the unsaturated zone and thence to the phreatic zone. Smart and Freiderich (1987) estimated that in the epikarst of the Mendip Hills in England as much as 77% of annual recharge is trans- mitted via the highest capacity flow routes (shaft flow to subcutaneous flow), whereas only 23% percolates via the narrow low-capacity seepage and vadose flow routes.
  The epikarst is therefore underdrained. Klimchouk (1995) explained how the concentration of flow at the base of the epikarst encourages the formation of shafts and, in a particularly well-illustrated paper, Klimchouk et al. (1996) provided convincing field evidence of the efficacy of the process from the Sette Communi Plateau      in the Italian Pre-Alps. These blind vertical shafts are known as avens by cavers. Although they develop down- wards from the base of the epikarst, they can eventually     be exposed by collapse as the surface lowers, and many become the main drainage route beneath dolines.
  If the rate of recharge during heavy rain is greater than  the maximum rate of vertical throughput, then excess recharge is stored in the void space of the epikarst, i.e. in  the widened fissures and in the intergranular porosity of   any fill they may contain. Water stored in that way constitutes  an  epikarstic  aquifer  that  is  perched  above   a leaky capillary barrier (Figure 5.28). Its piezometric surface is drawn down over the main leakage paths afforded by shafts  developed  down  major  joints (Figure 5.15), and the direction of subcutaneous flow is down the hydraulic gradient. After a long dry period the epikarst drains almost entirely, although some water remains held by capillary tension. The processes of infiltration and percolation through the epikarst are dis- cussed more fully in section 6.3.
  In many alpine regions, where the carbonate rock has been tectonically stressed and deformed during uplift and then later unloaded by rapid erosion and deep valley incision, fissures can be deep and their apertures can be relatively wide. Conditions are then favourable for the development of deep vertical shafts. As a result surface drainage is facilitated and there may be relatively little water storage capacity in the epikarst except under patches of karrenfeld (Figure 9.6), although there may be considerable seasonal storage of snow. Klimchouk (2000a) also pointed out that in alpine regions in summer condensation recharge can be significant as air is drawn   into the karst at high altitudes and cools to dew point in    the epikarst zone.
5.5.3 
Case-hardening and the reduction of vadose porosity
Although the top of the vadose zone in dense crystalline carbonate rocks generally experiences the enhancement of secondary permeability as a result of intense dissolution, where the rocks have high primary porosity    the opposite may occur because porosity is reduced (Figure 5.3) during meteoric zone diagenesis by a process known as case-hardening. This involves redeposition in primary pores further down the profile of calcite dis- solved near the surface, redeposition usually occurring within a few metres. The effect is to produce a concrete-  like calcrete crust and to reduce the primary porosity of     the surface rock by a factor of 10 or more. It is especially common in porous rocks such as aeolian calcarenite (carbonate dune sands), coral and some chalky lime- stones, particularly in warm temperate to tropical zones where strong drying cycles follow rain. Carbonate deposition closely follows dissolution because of eva- poration and CO2  degassing in cavities well connected to  the outside atmosphere. Frequent wetting and drying accelerates the process. The significance of case-hard- ening for karst is discussed further in section 9.12.

5.6 CLASSIFICATION AND   CHARACTERISTICS OF KARST AQUIFERS
Significant characteristics that might be incorporated into     a classification of karst aquifers include: style of recharge, flow media, flow type, conduit network topol-  ogy, stores and storage capacity, and outflow response to recharge. Depending on the purpose of the classification,  one or more of these may be emphasized or neglected.
  An important starting point for the more useful general classifications is the conceptualization of recharge and flow type. Burdon and Papakis (1963) first drew attention   to this, distinguishing diffuse infiltration from concen- trated infiltration and diffuse circulation from concen- trated (or localized) circulation. They also pointed out that the style of recharge may not precondition the type      of flow in the saturated zone: thus concentrated circula-   tion can occur even if recharge (infiltration) is diffuse and vice versa. White (1969) termed these flow styles ‘diffuse’ and ‘conduit’. He also suggested how  the occurrence of these contrasting forms of circulation might be deduced from readily observable geological variables. Thus his classification of carbonate aquifers (Table 5.10) is of value in identifying the range of aquifer types that occur.
  Chemical contrasts in groundwaters draining from aquifers that are dominantly porous, fissured or cavernous (conduit) have encouraged the view that to consider





Figure 5.28   Drawdown doline initiation in the subcutaneous (epikarst) zone. Reproduced from Williams, P.W., The role of the subcutaneous zone in karst hydrology. J. Hydrol. 61, 45–67.© 1983 Elsevier.


carbonate flow media as being essentially bimodal is too simple (Bakalowicz 1977). Thus Atkinson (1985), also citing data from China (Yuan 1981, 1983), suggested that    a more appropriate way of representing the older concept    of granular, fracture and conduit aquifers would be its visualization by means of a ternary or three end-member spectrum (Figure 5.29a). This conceptual classification of flow media is then related to presumed phreatic flow regimes (Figure 5.29b). Hobbs and Smart (1986) elabo-  rated this approach. They proposed a model in which the three fundamental attributes of recharge, storage and transmission are ranged between end-members; thus giv-  ing a three-dimensional field into which carbonate aqui-   fers may be conceptually plotted (Figure 5.30).
  
Work in France by Mangin (1975) and Bakalowicz (1977) brought closer attention to the structure and transfer functions of drainage systems within karst (see section 6.5). Spring hydrograph response to recharge was used as a measure of aquifer karstification  (Bakalowicz   and Mangin 1980), four groups of karst systems being recognized that range from aquifers with extremely well- developed speleological networks to those carbonate terrains which can barely be considered karstified. How- ever, external factors that can also be responsible for variation in spring discharge (e.g. the influence on hydro- graph form of climate, recharge variability, recharge regulation by overburden, and outflow distributaries) were not fully considered.



Table 5.10   Hydrological classification of carbonate aquifers (Reproduced from White, W.B Conceptual models for carbonate      aquifers. Ground Water 7(3), B97515 21 © 1969 Blackwell Publishing)

Flow type
Hydrological control
Associated cave type
Diffuse flow
Gross lithology.
Caves rare, small, have irregular patterns

Shaley limestones; crystalline dolomites; high primary porosity

Free flow
Thick, massive soluble rocks
Integrated conduit cave systems
Perched
Karst system underlain by impervious rocks near or above base
Cave streams perched, often have free

level
air surface
Open
Soluble rocks extend upwards to surface
Sinkhole inputs; heavy sediment load;


short-channel-morphology caves
Capped
Aquifer overlain by impervious rock
Vertical shaft inputs; lateral flow under


capping beds; long integrated caves
Deep
Karst system extends to considerable depth below base level.
Flow is through submerged conduits
Open
Soluble rocks extend to land surface
Short, tubular abandoned caves likely
to be sediment-choked
Capped	Aquifer overlain by impervious rocks	Long, integrated conduits under caprock.
Active level of system inundated
Confined flow
Structural and stratigraphical controls

Artesian
Impervious beds which force flow below regional base level
Inclined three-dimensional network of caves
Sandwich
Thin beds of soluble rock between impervious beds
Horizontal two-dimensional network caves


  Figure 5.31 expresses our understanding of possible structural linkages within karst groundwater systems, although not all the characteristics shown are possessed     by any one system. The dynamic relationships between the components and aquifer properties are best examined   by computer modelling techniques, which we discuss in section 6.11. However, it is now common in computer modelling  to  represent  karst  aquifers  being  examined    in terms of single, double and triple porosity types (Table 5.11), although most karst aquifers are best considered triple porosity.
5.7 APPLICABILITY OF DARCY’S LAW TO KARST
5.7.1 When and when not does Darcy’s Law apply
It is of fundamental importance to establish whether or not it is justified to treat a karst aquifer as a granular, porous medium in the Darcian sense (i.e. a single-con- tinuum porous equivalent) or even a double-continuum porous equivalent with a fractured continuum as well as a porous matrix. An implication of accepting the Darcian approach is that the rock is considered as a continuum of voids and solid matter for which certain generalized macroscopic  parameters  (such  as  K)  can  be  defined,  that represent and in some sense describe the true micro- scopic behaviour. In karst this means that the fractured rock penetrated by solution conduits would be replaced

by a conceptual representative continuum for which it is assumed possible to determine hydrologically meaningful macroscopic parameters.
  In Darcy’s experiment, discharge was measured from a given cross-sectional area a of the saturated medium. Hence in equation (5.4) Q/a is an expression of the discharge per unit area. It therefore has the dimensions of a velocity and is sometimes simply denoted by u, the specific discharge (filtration velocity or Darcy flux). However, the flow does not issue from the entire cross- sectional area, but only from the voids between the solid grains. It follows then that the real microscopic velocities   of flow through the interstitial spaces must be considerably larger than the averaged, macroscopic velocity denoted by   u and that at some stage laminar flow will give way to turbulent flow. When this occurs is shown in Figure 5.32. Freeze and Cherry (1979) pointed out that Darcy’s Law is a linear law and that if it were universally valid a plot of   the specific discharge against hydraulic gradient would reveal a straight line gradient for all hydraulic gradients. This is not the case and at relatively high rates of flow Darcy’s Law breaks down. Darcy’s Law imposes a statis- tical homogeneity, but since the distribution of karst voids has a hierarchical nature, it cannot be treated as random,   and the average total permeability is a function of the volume of the rock (aquifer) considered.
  Since the specific discharge defines the macroscopic velocity through the medium, the average microscopic velocity u* can be determined by taking into account the






Figure 5.29   (a) Conceptual classification of karst aquifers and
(b) their presumed relationship to predominant flow regimes. Modified from Atkinson, T.C., Present and future directions in   karst hydrogeology. Annales de la Societe Ge´ologique de Belgi- que, 108, 293–96, 1985.
actual cross-sectional area of voids through which the flow occurs. This depends upon the porosity n (equation  5.1) and hence
Q
um ¼ na	ð5:20Þ
If pore spaces through which water flows comprise 20%     of the rock (n ¼ 0:2), then u* is about five times the Darcy flux. However, since water follows relatively long tortuous flow paths through the rock, the actual velocities must be greater still.
  Bear (1972) concluded from experimental evidence that Darcy’s Law remains valid provided Re does not exceed 1 to 10. Since fully turbulent flow does not occur until velocities are high and Re is in the range 102 to 103, there is an interval between the turbulent and linear laminar regimes characterized by  non-linear  laminar flow (Figure 5.32). It should also be noted that dynamic

viscosity m varies markedly with temperature, in the tropics being about half that encountered in the cool temperate zone (Table 5.3). Thus under some conditions, turbulent flow will occur in the tropics when it would be laminar in a cooler groundwater environment.
  In a comprehensive series of experiments, Ford and Ewers (1978) showed that the law applies strictly when solutional protoconduits up to 1 mm diameter are first extending through a fissure (Figure 7.5a), but that it ceases to apply once the extension is completed and the proto- conduit is connected to others. Reviewing recent evidence, White (2002) concluded that for normal hydraulic gradi-  ents the onset of non-Darcian behaviour occurs in conduits when apertures exceed about 1 cm. Nevertheless, conduit flow can remain in the laminar regime in pipes up to about
0.5 m   diameter   provided   velocity   does   not   exceed   1 mm s—1 (Figure 5.33). It is therefore evident as Mangin (1975) noted that in karst the range of conditions under which Darcy’s Law can be considered valid is very restricted. It only applies in conditions that permit velo- cities to be low, and this usually involves some combina- tion of relatively small aperture and low hydraulic gradient. Darcy’s Law also assumes  isotropic  conditions and will not apply to an aquifer that is  anisotropic and heterogeneous. Nevertheless, this variability may become relatively less important as scale increases.
  We can see from Table 5.2 that even in aquifers as highly karstified as Mammoth Cave most storage is in the rock matrix. In spite of there being 550 km of cave passages in the area, the porosity attributable to the cave is less than 0.1% and that the chance of a drilled well hitting a  conduit is only  about 1.4% (Worthington     et  al.  2000). Thus most bores would miss the cave and  well tests would be undertaken in conditions acceptable     for the application of Darcy’s Law. But this manifestly does not mean that the aquifer as a whole is Darcian, because 99.7% of flow passes through the conduit system (Table 5.6). In most karstified aquifers, it is probable that well testing using darcian assumptions is more-or-less acceptable in many cases, but it would be totally erroneous  to  conclude  from  that  that  the  management  of water resources (and pollution transport) in the groundwater basin as a whole can be based on Darcian principles. Even the Cretaceous Chalk of Britain and northern France, which has long been considered an archetypal porous aquifer, is now known to possess significant conduit porosity (Crampon et al.  1993, Banks et al. 1995, Rodet 1996, Waters and Banks 1997). Flow is Darcian in parts of the aquifer, but turbulent and non-Darcian elsewhere.
  Wide international experience now shows that with respect to unconfined carbonate aquifers ‘the prudent





Figure 5.30    A conceptual three-dimensional field model of recharge, storage and transmission in karst aquifers. Reproduced from     Hobbs, S.L. and Smart, P.L. Characterization of carbonate aquifers: a conceptual base. Proc. 9th International Speleological Congress, Barcelona 1, 43–46, 1986.


default   position   should   be   to   assume   karstification’. However, if diagnostic tests (see section  6.4) fail to support this, then it is justified to assume  that Darcy’s Law is applicable within the locality   considered (although not necessarily over the wider region).
5.7.2 A question of scale of investigation?
Karst aquifers often comprise a thick, fissured mass of rock, often layered and traversed by a large branching pipe network that transmits the flow of an underground   river and its tributaries to a spring or springs. Within the areally extensive body of rock the continuum approach using Darcy’s Law can sometimes be justified to obtain spatially defined values  of hydraulic characteristics,  but  this is totally inappropriate for describing flow in indivi- dual major conduits. The continuum representation of the aquifer is often an acceptable generalization when hydraulic gradients are low and storage very large. It is largely a matter of void/fissure frequency and scale. It is evident that small samples, as used in core and pump tests, yield inadequate estimates of basin-wide hydraulic characteristics (Figure 5.2). Halihan et al. (1999) under-  took a very thorough investigation of the effect of scale of measurement on permeability (k) estimates in the karsti-

fied Edwards aquifer in Texas, and found permeability estimates to vary by up to nine orders of magnitude, depending on the scale and direction of measurement. Worthington et al. (2002) collated data from six carbo- nate rocks that illustrate the difficulty of obtaining repre- sentative hydraulic conductivity (K) estimates from conventional techniques (Figure 5.34). From core tests, two Palaeozoic carbonates have very low K values for the matrix   (10—11–10—10 m s—1),   three   Mesozoic   aquifers have moderate values (10—8 m s—1) and the  Cenozoic aquifer has the highest value (10—4 m s—1). All estimates are higher when evaluated at larger scales (using pump tests and regional evaluations) and show a much smaller range (from 10—4  to 10—1 m s—1).
5.7.3 Alternative approaches
An alternative to Darcian-based techniques of aquifer analysis is to accept the anisotropic and heterogeneous nature of a karst aquifer and to treat it as an inter- connected  system  of  conduits  and  fractures  embedded   in a more-or-less porous matrix. This is closer to the Hagen–Poiseuille approach in which the hydraulics of flow in individual fractures and pipes are considered. Methods used to simulate flow and transport through





Figure 5.31   Stores and linkages in karst drainage systems. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology.


karst in this way have varying degrees of complexity. For example, black-box models (input–output models) examine the relationship between input characteristics,    such recharge by rainfall, and output response, such as  water quantity and quality variations, and focus parti- cularly on spring hydrographs (Atkinson 1977b, Baka- lowicz and Mangin 1980). The assumption made is that       a spring hydrograph provides an integrated representa-     tion of the network of stores and passages delivering water to the aquifer outflow point, and that both the quality and the quantity of the water are of diagnostic importance for understanding the functioning of the system. However, as Teutsch and Sauter (1998) pointed   out, due to their non-physical nature black-box models     can describe only the flow and transport behaviour within observed ranges of input and output functions

and therefore  often  lack  predictive  power.  By contrast, distributed parameter models integrate the physics  of  flow  and  transport  processes  in  conduits   and in porous  media and  so have more  predictive power (see section 6.11 for further discussion of hydro- geological modelling).
  A wide range of aquifer types are encountered in karst and, further, investigations are on difference scales and for different purposes. So we must conclude that the most appropriate tool for quantitative description and simula-   tion of flow and transport through karst groundwater systems must be chosen with the nature of the aquifer and the objective of the investigation in mind. Different approaches to aquifer analysis have their place as will be seen  in  Chapter  6,  but  whereas  analyses  using  Darcy’s Law are usually appropriate for individual wells, they are



Table 5.11 Principal differences between single-, double- and triple-porosity aquifers. Most karst aquifers have triple-porosity characteristics Reproduced from Worthington, S. R. H., and Ford, D. C.,  Chemical hydrogeology of the carbonate bedrock at Smithville. Smithville Phase IV Bedrock Remediation Program. Ministry of the Environment, Ontario, 2001



Aquifer type


Single porosity

Triple porosity
Parameter
(porous medium)
Double porosity
(karst)
Flow components
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix


Fracture
Fracture



Channel
Flow laws
Darcy
Darcy
Darcy


Hagen–Poiseulle
Hagen–Poiseulle



Darcy–Weisbach
Flow modes
Laminar
Laminar
Laminar



Turbulent
Flow lines are
Parallel
Mostly parallel
Convergent to channels


inappropriate for the groundwater basin as a whole, because most of the assumptions applicable to flow through Darcian media are violated in karst systems.
5.8 FRESHWATER–SALTWATER   INTERFACE
We conclude this chapter by considering the unusual conditions encountered near the coast. The water table declines towards sea level and water quality analyses

from samples taken at various depths from bores just inland show that fresh water overlies salt water, which penetrates the aquifer at depth. This interesting phenom- enon was first investigated by two European scientists, Ghyben(1889) and Herzberg (1901), whose names are lent to the relationship they found (Reilly and Goodman 1985). The depth below sea level Zs at which the freshwater–saltwater interface (the halocline) occurs is related to the elevation of the water table above sea level





Figure 5.32   Range of validity of Darcy’s Law. Reproduced from Freeze, R.A. and J.A. Cherry, Groundwater, p. 604 © 1979 Prentice Hall, Inc.









Figure 5.33   Values of Reynold’s number at various velocities and pipe diameters, with fields of different flow regimes. Reproduced with permission from Smith, D.I. and T.C. Atkinson, ‘Process, landforms and climate in limestone regions’. In E. Derbyshire (ed.) Geomorphology and Climate 369–409.
© 1976 John Wiley and Sons.
hf and to the density of the fresh rf and salt rs waters respectively. The Ghyben–Herzberg principle can be expressed as
rf

Figure 5.34 Scaling of hydraulic conductivity in six carbonate aquifers. The key lists carbonates in increasing order of age from Cenozoic (Yucatan) to Palaeozoic  (Smithville). Reproduced from Worthington, S. R. H., Schindel, G. M., and Alexander,
E. C, Techniques for investigating the extent of karstification in    the Edwards Aquifer, Texas. In Martin, J B, Wicks, C M and Sasowsky,   I   D   (eds),   Hydrogeology   and   Biology   of   Post- Paleozoic Carbonate Aquifers © 2002 Karst Waters Institute.

(vruljas) in karst terrains is a well-known phenomenon recognized from at least the first century BC (Herak 1972). Their occurrence implies confined pipe flow at depth and their location below present sea level may be partly related to the position of springs developed during low stands of the sea in glacial episodes (section 10.3). High secondary porosity below present sea level in the zone of

Zs ¼
s —
· 
hf	ð5:21Þ
f

mixing is also a consequence of the geochemistry of brackish water (Back et al. 1984) – see section 3.6.

Thus if the density of the fresh water is 1.0 and that of the salt water is 1.025, then under hydrostatic equilibrium the depth to the saltwater interface is 40 times the height of    the water table above sea level. A practical consequence     of this is that if the pumping of a bore in a coastal aquifer causes the water table to be drawn down by 1 m, then salt water will intrude upwards beneath the well by a distance   of 40 m. Excessive pumping can therefore risk contam- ination by saline water, as discussed by Mijatovic (1984a)  in cases of seawater intrusion into aquifers of the coastal Dinaric karst and elsewhere.
  The interface between fresh and salt water can be seen from isochlor values in Figure 5.35 to be a zone of transition rather than an abrupt discontinuity. It is also evident from the equipotential lines in Figure 5.35 that much of the fresh water must escape through the sea bed    in the nearshore zone. The existence of submarine springs
  
The Ghyben–Herzberg principle of gravitational equi- librium simplifies the relationship usually found in nat- ure, because the two fluids are treated as immiscible and groundwater conditions are normally dynamic rather than static. Hubbert (1940) showed that the interface is deeper under dynamic conditions than under static. He treated the interface as a boundary surface that couples two separate flow fields, with continuity of pressure being maintained across the interface (Figure 5.36). Assump- tions of essentially horizontal flow (termed Dupuit approximations) are combined with gravitational equili- brium in so-called Dupuit–Ghyben–Herzberg analysis (Bear 1972) to determine the position of the saltwater– freshwater interface.
  Within simple carbonate islands such as uplifted coral reefs, the freshwater body is often described as an idealized freshwater lens. Vacher (1988) provided an





Figure 5.35   Freshwater–saltwater mixing zone in the Biscayne aquifer, Florida. Reproduced from Kohout and Klein, in Ward,
R. C., Principles of Hydrology, 2nd edn, p. 403 © 1975 McGraw Hill.

authoritative explanation of the process and explained why groundwater lenses beneath islands can vary from their idealized lenticular form. The unexpected complex-   ity of the apparently simple carbonate island case is amply illustrated by numerous contributions in Geology  and Hydrogeology of Carbonate Islands (Vacher and Quinn 1997). For example, differences in porosity and permeability of the fore-reef, main reef and back-reef facies of the carbonate host rock can be considerable, and this heterogeneity is reflected in the topography of the piezometric surface of the lens (Figure 5.37). Further- more, Elkhatib and Gu¨nay (1993) pointed out that in anisotropic and heterogeneous karst aquifers the form of   the interface is difficult to predict and concluded that the configuration of the saltwater wedge depends mainly on    the structure of zones of high karst permeability and the geology of the coastal region.
  The dynamic circulation of fresh waters towards the   coast is thought to induce entrainment of the underlying saline water, which results in an inflow of saline water at depth, a mixing zone of saline with fresh water and the discharge of brackish water along the coast. The Wai- koropupu Springs in New Zealand provide evidence for    this (Williams 1977). The springs are artesian, have a mean flow  of  15 m3  s—1 and are  located  2.6 km  inland from the head of tide. The main vent is 7.1 m above sea level  and  draws  water  from  a  marble  aquifer  that

extends well below sea level and continues beyond the coastline. The spring water contains from 0.4 to 0.6% salt water with values increasing as discharge increases, indicating that the more dynamic the outflow the greater   the entrainment of saline water (note that no evaporite    beds are known in the region that could provide an alternative source of salt). Other examples are provided      by Drogue (1989, 1990, 1993), Ghannam et al.  (1998) and Arfib et al. (2002) for cases around the Mediterra-   nean coast.


Figure 5.36 Illustration of the Ghyben–Herzberg principle under hydrodynamic conditions. Reproduced from Hubbert, M.K., The theory of groundwater motion. J. Geol., 48, 785–944 © 1940 University of Chicago Press.



Figure 5.37   The freshwater lens in an uplifted coral reef, Niue Island, Southwest Pacific. This entirely carbonate island is built on a volcanic base 400m below sea level. Uplift has raised the former atoll rim almost 70m and the atoll floor 35m above present sea level.      The configuration of the piezometric surface mainly reflects variations in phreatic hydraulic conductivity related to variations in reef      facies and dolomitization. Conductivity measurement in boreholes determined the deepest transition to saline water (1000 mS) at 39m   below sea level. Reproduced from Williams, P.W., Polygonal karst and palaeokarst of the King Country, North Island, New Zealand. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Suppl. Vol 136, 45–67, Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie ©  2004 E. Schweizerbart’sche  Verlags- buchhandlung, Science Publishers.




  Recent interesting work in the low-lying carbonate platform of the Yucatan Peninsula between the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea sheds further light on these ideas. The Cenozoic limestones are comparatively porous, have both high permeability and hydraulic conductivity (Table 5.5 and Figure 5.34), and contain well-developed cave systems that convey 99.7% of groundwater flow (Table 5.6). Beddows et al. (2002) noted that cave-diving exploration along the Caribbean  coast has identified at least 74 horizontally extensive submerged cave systems with a combined length of more than 400 km and at an average depth of —16 m. They also observed that the Yucatan caves contain numerous speleothems and so must have been resub- merged after having formed during previous high sea- level stands. They reported that during diving  the mixing zone can be observed as a defined interface in the middle of some of the passages, and comment that       the enhanced aggressivity of water in the mixing zone (section 3.6) supports the hypothesis that mixing corro-   sion is responsible for much cavern enlargement at this  level. They found that some coastal springs on the Yucatan Peninsula discharge water up to 75% marine salinity, but their observations indicated that not all of       the saline water comes from entrainment. Dye-tracing experiments  and  current-meter  observations  showed that  at  least  some  saline–water  is  recharging  inland  via flow in caves beneath the saline–freshwater inter- face. They observed that ocean water circulates to more   than 9 km inland and that tidal rise can still be measured     at  that  distance.  Incorporation  of  saline  groundwater  into the overlying fresh water occurs progressively seawards at a relatively slow rate, but becomes more

rapid within 1 km of the coast. Recharge of saline water beneath the freshwater body was found to be driven by  rising net ocean level, with discharge back to the sea occurring as net ocean level fell over several days. These processes were generated even though the ampli-   tude between net high and low ocean levels was only a matter of decimetres. Saline groundwater flow veloci- ties were measured up to 2 cm s—1.
  James (1992) also reported visually distinct freshwater– saltwater interfaces some 25 km inland from the coast of   the Great Australia Bight in large flooded caves in late Eocene limestones of the Nullarbor Plain. She also provided evidence for the operation of three mixing zones:

1. close to the water table in cave lakes and canals where low ionic strength recharge from storms rests as a layer up to 2.5 m thick on underlying high ionic strength (brackish) water;
2. close to the water table in the rock matrix where variable ionic strength percolation waters encounter brackish groundwater;
3. at the halocline, which is usually about 20 m below the surface of cave lakes, where brackish water rests     on water of ionic strength similar to sea water.

  In conclusion, the Dupuit–Ghyben–Herzberg model provides a theoretical basis for understanding the config- uration and hydrology of coastal karst aquifers, but field studies have revealed that secondary porosity distribution and changing aquifer boundary conditions (sea level) can   be important controls on the fresh and saline groundwater flows.


6

Analysis of Karst Drainage Systems



6.1 THE ‘GREY BOX’ NATURE OF KARST
Determining the structure and properties of karst aquifers presents severe practical problems because of the  aniso- tropic and severely heterogeneous nature of most karst, and the sparseness of information about it. Yet it is essential for water resources estimation, planning and  manage- ment to be able to answer such questions as how much water can be used, where is it coming from,  and what are the physical parameters characterizing  the aquifer? The ability to be able to predict is important both for the management of water resources and for the development of protection strategies against pollution. But it is diffi- cult to generalize about karst aquifers, because so many different geological contexts, storage and flow conditions exist. However, there is sometimes  the opportunity to make direct observations  underground, in caves, even though accessible passages penetrate only a small part of any given karst terrain.
  With  direct  observations  limited  to  caves,  boreholes, inputs and outputs, the remaining aquifer  characteristics must necessarily be deduced. Sometimes a choice is made when modelling aquifer functions in  terms of rainfall– response (input–output) relationships  to treat the system as a ‘black box’ (Knisel 1972, Dreiss 1982, 1989), but this can be fairly far removed from physical reality and tell us little about the structure of the aquifer and how it really operates. More realistic is a ‘grey box’ approach that uses such information as is available on the subterranean condi- tions to clarify the structure of the system and help explain its observed behaviour; such model representations of karst aquifers are discussed later in the chapter. Although each karst  aquifer is  unique  in  its  individual  characteristics, some structural components are widely found (Figure 5.31), although they vary in relative significance in  different systems.
  
Comprehensive   analysis   of   karst   drainage   systems involves determining the following:

● the areal and vertical extent of the system
● its boundary conditions
● input and output sites and volumes
● the interior structure of linkages and stores
● the capacities and physical characteristics of the stores
● the relative importance of the flow paths
● throughput rates
● the response of storage and output to recharge
● the system’s response under different flow conditions.

The information required can be obtained by taking five complementary approaches: water balance estimation, borehole   analysis,   spring   hydrograph   analysis,   water tracing and aquifer modelling. Water balance estimation and borehole analysis apply conventional  techniques of water resources surveys to karst,  whereas water tracing and spring hydrograph analysis  have been mainly devel- oped for karst. Aquifer  modelling  is  widely  applied  in groundwater  hydrology,  but  most  of  the  conventional techniques are inappropriate for karstified aquifers because Darcian  porous media assumptions do not apply. Conse- quently, an alternative set of models designed specifically for karst have been developed (section 6.11).
  Decisions are often made about the most  appropriate form of analysis that depend on certain  initial assump- tions about flow and aquifer  characteristics (Table 6.1). Such assumptions, for  example that the aquifer is iso- tropic and flow is laminar, should be recognized as such and treated as working hypotheses that may be modified in the light of field results. This chapter elaborates these points and  discusses methods available for exploration, survey, data analysis and interpretation – the clarification of the grey box.



Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd



Table 6.1   Assumptions and decisions made about the nature of a karst aquifer and appropriate methods for its analysis (After  Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology)

Flow conditions
Boundary conditions
Aquifer characteristics
Scale and state
Form of analysis
Linear-laminar
Infinite areal extent
Confined/unconfined
Site specific
Borehole dilution
(diffuse Darcian)
Impermeable/leaky
Constant/variable
Local
Borehole recharge
Mixed laminar and
upper and lower
thickness
Regional
Borehole pumping
turbulent
boundaries
Homogeneous/
Groundwater basin
Recharge response
Turbulent
Spatially uniform/variable
heterogeneous
Steady state
modelling
(conduit flow)
vertical recharge
Isotropic/anisotropic
Transient state
Water budget

Constant/variable potential


Spring hydrograph

recharge boundary


and chemograph

Constant/variable potential


Aquifer modelling

discharge boundary



Fixed/mobile phreatic
divides


6.2 SURFACE EXPLORATION AND SURVEY TECHNIQUES
Practical   methods  for   the  evaluation   of   groundwater resources in general are explained in a  wide variety of excellent publications, for example by Freeze and Cherry (1979), Todd (1980), Castany  (1982), UNESCO/IAHS
(1983),  Ho¨tzl  and  Werner  (1992),  and  Domenico  and Schwartz (1998). Repetition of material presented there is unnecessary, but evaluation of its applicability to karst is essential, because most groundwater texts deal  inade- quately with karst aquifers. However, engineering geology texts by Milanovic´ (2000, 2004) are devoted exclusively to karst.

6.2.1 Defining the limits of the system
All aquifers have boundaries that modify flow conditions as discussed in section 5.2. For example, transmissivity is limited by the confining beds of an artesian aquifer, and by both the water table and lower limit of karstification in an unconfined aquifer. These factors determine  vertical boundary conditions. Also very important are those that limit the horizontal extent of an aquifer; here, discharge and impermeable boundaries should be  distinguished from recharge boundaries.
  In non-karstic terrains, groundwater divides are assumed to directly underlie the surface topographic divides as determined from contour maps, aerial  photo- graphs, etc. This approach is acceptable in karst only as an initial working hypothesis, because  experience in innumerable karst catchments has shown  phreatic and vadose divides to deviate significantly in  plan position from overlying surface watersheds. For  example, the

Continental Divide between Atlantic and Pacific  catch- ments is breached in this manner in the Rocky Mountains. Furthermore, phreatic divides may migrate laterally in res- ponse to changing water-flow conditions. A groundwater divide determined at low water-table  levels may not be valid when the piezometric surface is higher.
  Within a simple karst aquifer there may be several groundwater basins with minimal hydraulic  connection, each draining to a different spring (or set of springs). In an unconfined aquifer, the limits of each system can be determined:

1. by mapping piezometric contours and thus establishing regions of divergence of flow (groundwater divides);
2. by water tracing, perhaps using fluorescent dyes  or isotopes (section 6.10).

In a study in Kentucky, Thrailkill (1985) showed that dye tracing can reveal narrow groundwater basins that cannot be identified by interpretation of groundwater contour patterns. This and many other dye-tracing studies indicate that water tracing should be used to verify groundwater divides determined from water-table maps. Groundwater divides may also be deduced from the potentiometric surface in confined aquifers, but since flow-through times are likely to be much longer than under unconfined conditions, water tracing by dyes may not be  practical. Instead, the provenance of groundwaters may have to be determined using environmental isotopes or  by pulse- train analysis (section 6.10).
  The impervious basin area that sustains any allogenic inputs along recharge boundaries can be determined accurately   by   conventional   plan   mapping   of   surface




watersheds. However, the swallow holes where  surface streams sink are less easily located, especially if the sites are small or under forest. Influent rivers that  gradually lose their flow over several kilometres are  also difficult to detect, especially if not all of the  flow is lost. Field mapping and discharge measurement is the only sure way of obtaining accurate information, but aerial photograph interpretation is of considerable assistance.
6.2.2 Estimating the water budget
An important first step in the management of water resources is to estimate the size of the reserves and the gains and losses to the system. Water-balance calculation provides an order of magnitude estimate of reserves and storage changes. This is undertaken by  preparing a hydrological budget, which is a  quantitative evaluation of inflows, outflows and changes in storage over a speci- fied period of time, usually a hydrological year, although it can be applied to longer or shorter periods. A hydrological year runs from dry season to dry season, i.e. it starts and ends when storage is at a minimum, and so it often does not correspond to a calendar year.
  With respect to surface streams, the water balance equation in its simplest form is usually written

Q ¼ P — E T DS þ e	ð6:1Þ

Where Q is runoff, P is precipitation, E is evapotranspira- tion, TDS represents withdrawal from or  replenishment of storage and e represents error.  Evapotranspiration includes interception losses,  transpiration and evapora- tion from wet surfaces, and is the most difficult term to estimate. Average catchment  precipitation can also be quite difficult to evaluate, because the distribution of rain gauges   may   not   provide a representative sample of average precipitation across the catchment. Nevertheless, knowing the catchment area A, the acceptability of  the estimates can be checked by comparing water  surplus calculated from P — E with measured Q.  Dunne and Leopold (1978) expand on this approach. However, in a groundwater context  the  perspective   may   sometimes differ;  thus  the  US  Department  of  the Interior (1981) suggested that the hydrological budget may be summar- ized as

P — E T R T U ¼ DS	ð6:2Þ

where R is the difference between stream outflow (—) and inflow (þ), and U is the difference between deep ground- water outflow (—) and inflow (þ); with DS  being the

resultant change in total storage in groundwater, soil moisture, channels and reservoirs. The groundwater com- ponent of this is DSg and can be estimated from

DSg ¼ G — D	ð6:3Þ

in which G represents recharge to groundwater and D the discharge   from   it.   Recharge   to   groundwater   can   be assessed from

G ¼ P — ðE þ QsÞ	ð6:4Þ

in which Qs represents surface runoff.
  Blavoux et al. (1992) provide a particularly good example of water-budget estimation for the basin that sustains  the  flow  of  the  famous  Fontaine  de  Vaucluse in southeastern France. Its mountainous catchment rises to 1909 m, has an area of 1115 km2,  and an average altitude of 870 m. The boundaries of  the basin area were determined from dye tracing and  geological con- siderations. An altitude-belt model was used to calculate the moisture balance, using local precipitation and tem- perature gradients. Because  precipitation increases by about 55 mm 100 m—1 and  temperature decreases about 0.5○C 100 m—1, actual  evapotranspiration loses are rela- tively uniform with   altitude. The weighted effective rainfall ðP — EÞ is  ~570 mm yr—1 for the whole basin. About 75% of the total and the whole of the dry season effective rainfall  occur at elevations higher than the average altitude. Weak summer rainfalls do not influence discharge, but  the spring responds to heavy rain in 1–4 days. The mean spring discharge of 21 m3 s—1  (range of
3.7 to  >100 m3 s—1) is  consistent  with the  calculated
effective rainfall and the estimated basin area.
  Whereas the above example is from a well-researched catchment, many other karst areas have been less  well studied and do not have good background data.  Two cases from the ‘classic’ karst of Slovenia illustrate why derivation of a water budget in karst is not always straight forward. Trisˇicˇ (1997) investigated the water balance of the area draining to the karstic springs of  the Vipava
River. The catchment area was estimated as 125.25 km2,
but  could  not  be  determined  accurately  because  of  its karstic nature. Average annual rainfall is 2024 mm  but evapotranspiration withdraws about 31%. The measured average discharge of the springs is 6.78 m3 s—1, which proved to  be  more than  could  be  accounted for by the estimated size of the catchment.  Increasing its area to
~150 km2  made the precipitation and discharge data
compatible but, to accept a basin size adjustment of this magnitude would require independent support by




water tracing. It also assumes that the other terms of the water balance were not in significant error. A similar problem was encountered by Trisˇicˇ et al. (1997) in the water balance in the Bohinj region of the Julian Alps. In this   mountainous   area   it   is   particularly   difficult   to estimate precipitation  accurately  because  it  falls   as snow and there are few measurement stations at  high altitude. Having estimated the water balance  compo- nents, they encountered major discrepancies  between calculated runoff ðP — EÞ and measured  runoff at gau- ging stations. They concluded that the  main problem was incorrect data on catchment area  size, which had
been  estimated  as  94 km2,  because  compared  with  cal-
culated  runoff  the  measured  discharge  in  the  Bohinjka catchment was 10% too small. Dye tracing  of stream- sink to spring linkages was therefore  undertaken to improve catchment definition.
  Bonacci (2001) pointed out that in many small  karst catchments only limited precipitation data are  available and yet, for engineering practice and water  resources management, water-balance estimates are required. Con- sequently it is valuable to have a reliable estimate of the regional effective infiltration coefficient, defined as the ratio of effective precipitation to total  precipitation, because this knowledge permits transfer of hydrological information from catchments having adequate hydrolo- gical and meteorological measurements to those where they are insufficient. Bonacci (2001) reviewed methods for estimating monthly and annual effective infiltration coefficients, and  concluded that antecedent conditions must be taken into account and that rainfall distribution during the year has  a significant effect on the coeffi- cients calculated.
  The   two   most   important   problems   encountered   in calculating the water balance in karst areas are,  firstly, determination of effective precipitation and,  secondly, determination of the catchment boundaries,  not least because in karst the recharge area often  varies in time depending on groundwater levels. These examples show that derivation of accurate water-balance equations with acceptable and known errors can be  challenging. This issue is taken up again in section  6.3, when we discuss recharge and percolation in the vadose zone.
  A good example of large-scale karst water-balance estimation  was  given  by  Bocker  (1977).  The  aim  was to investigate the environmental impacts of coal  and bauxite mine dewatering operations in the 15 000 km2 of the Transdanubian Mountains, Hungary. A  finite- element model using 4 km2 elements was  developed. Infiltration  into  each  element  was  estimated from an algorithm derived from a 15-year field experiment, and data from 480 waterworks, 93 mines, 270 observation

wells and 155 meteorological stations were included in this major computation.
6.2.3 Remote sensing using multispectral techniques
Remote sensing using conventional stereoscopic aerial photographs as well as multispectral imagery from  air- craft and satellites is an important reconnaissance tool in hydrology and water resources management (Schultz and Engman 2000), including groundwater   investigations (Farnsworth et al. 1984, Meijerink  2000). For example, Lopez Chicano and Pulido-Bosch  (1993) undertook a detailed analysis of fracture patterns in the Sierra Gorda karst of Spain using aerial photographs and field mapping (Figure 6.1); Kresic  (1995)  provided  evidence  of  the control of groundwater flow in the Dinaric Karst by tectonic fabric  interpreted from aerial photographs and satellite images; and Tam et al. (2004) investigated the relationship between lineaments and borehole capacity in Vietnam.
  A  general  review  of  multispectral  remote  sensing  in karst was presented by Milanovic´ (1981). LaMoreaux and Wilson (1984) demonstrated the particular importance of thermal infrared imagery in identifying  recharge and especially discharge points, including submarine springs (Gandino and Tonelli 1983).  Thermographic techniques have great (and still largely  unrealized)  potential  for identifying   springs,   especially in winter  in  areas  of deciduous forest,  with modern instrumentation capable of resolution to a few metres.
6.2.4 Electrical resistivity, ground-penetrating radar and other geophysical techniques
Remote sensing using geophysical techniques is a  long- established and widely accepted tool in   groundwater hydrology. Milanovic´ (1981), Arandjelovic (1984), Astier (1984) and Stierman (2004) have  explained the general application of the methods to karst.
  Deep exploration typically uses a combination of techniques such as three-dimensional seismic imagery supported by drilling. In this way an Oligo-Miocene palaeokarst   surface   buried   beneath   1200 m   of   Mio- Pliocene sediments was mapped at 1320–1360 m depth in   Cretaceous   limestones   beneath   the   Adriatic Sea (Soudet et al. 1994). Within the  palaeokarst, a palaeo- epikarst zone of 35 m thickness was distinguished from an underlying palaeopercolation zone of 15–45 m thick- ness above a palaeophreatic   zone with conduits of 35–79 m thickness. The  karstified limestones host an oil column about 140 m high.
  For shallower exploration, electrical resistivity surveys have proved to be particularly important, especially  for





Figure 6.1 Fracture pattern in the high Sierra Gorda karst, Spain. The cumulative length of the 2904 fractures mapped is 358.6 km with fractures having an average length of 165 m. Inset: orientation direction of (A) number of fractures and (B) cumulative length. Reproduced from Lo´pez-Chicano, M. and Pulido-Bosch, A., The fracturing in the Sierra Gorda karstic system (Granada), in Some Spanish Karstic Aquifers (ed. A. Pulido-Bosch), University of Granada, pp. 95–116, 1993.


establishing  the  vertical  dimensions  of  a  karst  aquifer, because the method can distinguish between  compact limestone, water-saturated karstified limestone  and dry karstified limestone (Figure 6.2). Resistivity   imaging introduces artificially generated electric   currents into the ground and resulting potential  differences are mea- sured at the surface. Dry air-filled caves and fissures will have relatively high resistivity  values, whereas values will be relatively low if they are water-filled. Resistivity surveys use a grid of survey  points, and the procedure involves measuring a series  of traverses with constant separation between the electrodes and then repeating the traverses  with   increased electrode separation several times. The  increasing separation leads to information being obtained from successively greater depth. Vertical

contoured sections are then produced that display the variation of resistivity both laterally and vertically  over the  surveyed  section.  Arandjelovic’s   (1966)   work in Bosnia-Herzegovina, interpreting the base of  karstifica- tion in the Trebisnjica valley (Figure 6.3),  provides  an especially  good  illustration  of  the  value  of resistivity surveys. From geophysical and other  data, Milanovic´ (1981) considered the base of karstification in the Dinaric region to be usually no deeper than 250 m.
  Resistivity and microgravity methods are often used to map  shallow  subsurface  karst  features  (Patterson  et  al. 1995, Rodriguez 1995, Crawford et al. 1999,  McGrath et al. 2002). Gravity surveying measures  variations in Earth’s gravitational field produced by  density differ- ences in subsurface rocks. Caves and  depressions cause





Figure 6.2  Typical electrical resistivity sounding in a calcareous zone. The depth of rock mass investigated increases with  the electrode spacing AB/2. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology, after Astier 1984.


a  reduction  in  the  gravitational  acceleration  over  them because of the missing mass associated with the  void, whereas topographic highs on the bedrock  surface will exert greater gravity pull than the surrounding less dense material.   However,   microgravity variations are very small, so very high-precision instruments and meticulous field   techniques are essential. The survey involves establishment of a regular grid of observation points over the survey area with station spacing depending on the possible size and depth of the cavities that are to be detected. The microgravity data recorded are then pre- sented as a residual Bouger anomaly map (e.g. McGrath et al. 2002).
  Rodriguez  (1995)  described  what  he  called  the  Inte- grated Geophysical Approach in which three geophysical methods are combined to optimize data  quantity and quality acquisition, and yet to be cost  effective. He recommended an initial strategic  investigation of the site using a microgravity survey followed by a resistivity survey over the same grid.  This is then followed by a high-resolution seismic  survey and microresistivity sur- vey in combination to  map in detail the karst features found in the first stage.
  McGrath et al. (2002) compared the results of micro- gravity surveying and resistivity imaging over a  spring conduit that had been explored by cave diving in an area of dense Carboniferous Limestone in South Wales, UK.
They used an observation-station spacing of 2.5 m on  a 30 × 50 m grid  to  detect  conduits  a  few  metres  wide at depths up to 10 m below the surface. A  residual micro- gravity map of the resurgence zone  was produced that
successfully   identified   subsurface   karst   channels   and

probable feeder conduits. They then followed this up with a resistivity survey in which profiles were  aligned perpendicular  to  the  already  identified  negative micro- gravity anomalies. Fifty electrodes were deployed with 1 m spacing so that a depth penetration of 7 m could be attained. The result showed a   low-resistivity layer around 2–4 m depth that  corresponded well with the negative amplitude  microgravity anomaly. The depth scale from the electrical resistivity section could be used as an  independent constraint allowing inversion of the microgravity data to give the thickness of the under- ground cave system. These results are reassuring, because they demonstrate that voids can be detected in areas using remote geophysical techniques where other direct methods have shown them to exist.
  With recent attention being focused on the near-surface zone of karst, because of problems of building founda- tions and spillage of pollutants, the potential of ground- penetrating radar (GPR) is becoming more widely realized. Al-fares et al. (2002) provided a particularly good illustration of its capabilities. They investigated a site on the Hortus karst plateau near Montpellier in southern France, and concluded that GPR is particularly well-adapted to the analysis of the near-surface (< 30 m depth) structure of karst, especially when clay or soil that would otherwise absorb and attenuate the radar signal is thin or discontinuous. They conducted six parallel 120 m long radar traverses spaced at 15 m intervals over  the course of a shallow karst conduit leading to  Lamalou spring, and used a low frequency (50 MHz) signal. The radar interpretation was verified by  comparing it with data available from 10 boreholes  (of 32–80.5 m depth)





Figure 6.3   (a) Results of an electrical resistivity investigation along a cross-section in the right abutment of the Bileca reservoir and
(b) contour map of the base of karstification beneath the Trebisnjica valley, Croatia/Bosnia-Herzegovina. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology, after Arandjelovic 1966.





Figure 6.4   Radargram of ground-penetrating radar profile in the Lamalou experimental site, France, with interpretation  aided by data from neighbouring borehole: A, fractured and karstified limestone in the epikarst; B, massive and compact  limestone; C, Lamalou Cave; D, pothole inlet to cave; F, fault; L, karren; P1, 2, 3, bedding planes; X, unknown cave. The ‘interface’ marks the approximate base of the epikarst. Reproduced from Al-fares W., Bakalowicz M., Guerin R. and Dukhan M, Analysis of the karst aquifer structure of the Lamalou area (Herault, France) with ground penetrating radar. Journal of Applied Geophysics  51(2–4), 97–106. © 2002 Elsevier.

and from a vertical shaft giving access to the underlying cave (Figure 6.4). The conclusions were that the relative absence of electrically conductive sediments on the surface made the use of a low GPR frequency efficient, and that discontinuities in the bedrock such as bedding planes, faults and fractures could be distinguished. A strongly fissured epikarst of 8–12 m thickness could be readily separated from the underlying more massive limestone, and a cave could be clearly identified 20 m below the surface. They also considered that the results can probably be generalized to karstic aquifers of the Mediterranean type.
  Although thick soils and cover deposits attenuate the GPR signal, a study by Collins et al. (1994) clearly revealed solution pipes in limestone bedrock covered with   a   clay   layer   in   Florida.   Further,   Mellett   and Maccarillo (1995) provided a good demonstration  of how useful GPR can still be in areas with  particularly thick drift cover over karstified limestone. They inves- tigated a site adjacent to a major highway that had been experiencing cover collapse, probably  exacerbated by runoff from the road. They repeated GPR surveys at 2- year intervals across the same traverse and detected very clearly the progressive upwards  development of cylin- drical subsidence structures   through  thick  sediment

overburden. Radar penetration was achieved to a depth  of about 6 m.
  Currently the only proven geophysical technique  that responds to the movement of fluids, rather than just their presence, is the natural-potential (NP) method. Lange and Barner (1995) explained that this method measures nat- ural voltage at the Earth’s surface resulting from ambient DC electric currents  that occur  everywhere on land and sea. Such currents can arise from a variety of sources, but especially from the flow of water through pores, fissures and conduits in the ground, the electrokinetic effect. In a survey to locate karst conduits on the island of Guam in the western Pacific, they identified ten NP anomalies as targets for drilling. Drill  depths ranged from 9 to 28 m and eight intercepted  cavernous zones and water-filled cavities up to 2 m  high. Lange and Barner (1995) also noted that experience elsewhere showed that surface NP signals related to caverns could be identified through up to 280 m of rock.
  We  must  caution,  nevertheless,  that  all  these  remote geophysical techniques have their limitations, especially with respect to the size of cavities that can  be detected and the depth below the surface that can be explored with confidence. Geophysical methods usually  become more difficult to apply in areas of rugged  topography, and




whereas   resistivity   requires   electrodes   to   have   good ground contact in soil, too great a thickness of soil reduces the effectiveness of GPR by attenuating the signal. In all cases, geophysical results must be treated with caution and only be accepted for planning purposes where confirmed by independent methods such as drilling.
  In  spite  of  that,  it  must  be  said  that  a   problem particularly amenable to geophysical study is  found in coastal aquifers: that of determining the  depth to the saltwater–freshwater interface (section  5.8). Since its position cannot be located very  accurately using the Ghyben–Herzberg principle  (equation 5.20), electrical resistivity surveys (usually  combined with drilling) are often conducted to determine the distance to the interface. This technique is appropriate because in a saturated rock of given density  and porosity, the resistivity is largely dependent on the salinity of the saturating fluid. Investi- gations of the groundwater hydrology of Niue and Nauru islands, two uplifted subcircular coral atolls in the south-
west Pacific of 259 and 22 km2  respectively, provide
excellent illustrations of the technique. These islands have  been  raised  60–70 m  above  sea  level  and  consist of about 400–500 m of carbonate rock on  basaltic sea- mount pedestals. In their survey of Niue Island, Jacobson and Hill (1980) determined the depth  to the saltwater– freshwater interface by electrical  resistivity, its general location having been ascertained by electrical conductiv- ity profiles down deep boreholes. Their work showed the existence of a broad transition zone rather than a sharply defined boundary, and a  freshwater body that did not conform to the ideal lenticular shape, but had the form of a ring-doughnut  (Figure 5.37). Further detail has been added to their work by Williams (1992) and Wheeler and Aharon  (1997). A similar investigation was made on Nauru  Island  by  Jacobson  et  al.  (1997),  who  showed that  the island is underlain by a discontinuous layer of fresh water averaging 4.7 m thick distributed in two main lenses. The water table has an average elevation of only
0.2 m above sea level, yet the underlying mixing zone of brackish water is up to 60 m thick. They attributed  the unusually thick mixing zone to high permeability in the limestone with open karst fissures allowing  intrusion of sea water throughout the island’s  substructure. Cavities over 5 m deep were encountered  below sea level when drilling. Seismic refraction,  resistivity and salinity pro- files were also used successfully to determine the base of the freshwater lens  on Pingelap Atoll by Ayers and Vacher (1986).
  We  conclude  that  for  the  karst  hydrogeologist,  geo- physical techniques need to be useful to depths of a few hundred metres in most instances, but drilling is always necessary to confirm interpretation.
6.3 
INVESTIGATING RECHARGE AND PERCOLATION IN THE VADOSE ZONE
6.3.1 Autogenic recharge
When discussing input control in section 5.2 it was noted   that   recharge   into   karst   can   be   autogenic   or allogenic (Figure 4.1). Autogenic recharge is often  dif- fuse and slow (although it is more concentrated and rapid when focused by dolines), whereas allogenic  recharge normally occurs as concentrated, very rapid point inputs of  sinking  streams  from  adjacent  non-karst terrains. It follows therefore that recharge is  highly variable in space, and because of the  changeability of weather and climate it is also highly variable in time.
  In this section we confine our attention to the autogenic component of recharge. Only a proportion of rain  that falls on the surface recharges the groundwater  system, because part is intercepted by vegetation,  where it sub- sequently evaporates from leaves and branches, and some is transpired by plants (equations  6.1 and 6.2). These processes return water to the atmosphere as vapour. Some- times rainfall is so intense that not all the water reaching the ground can be absorbed because the infiltration capa- city of the surface or  subsoil horizons is exceeded. This infiltration excess component therefore runs off across the surface or passes laterally through the soil as throughflow and ultimately reaches surface streams. It is the component that does  not vaporize or runoff, but percolates down through the soil and epikarst that concerns us here, because this is usually the major source of groundwater recharge.
  A conceptual model by Sauter (1992) for calculating components of autogenic recharge is illustrated in Figure 6.5. It takes account of rainwater passing through a canopy store, a tree-trunk store and a soil-moisture store before recharging the underlying limestone.  Appropriate techniques for calculating potential evaporation and soil- water balance are discussed by Fowler (2002). The field capacity of soils over karst  varies considerably from almost zero in thin skeletal soils to 150 mm or more of water in deep loams and clays, and so must be assessed on a site-by-site basis. This is important, because according to Sauter’s model groundwater recharge occurs only if field capacity is exceeded. However, even when there is a soil- moisture  deficit in summer, heavy rain has often been observed to stimulate a percolation  response in  stalactite drips in caves; thus bypasses must occur by  way of macropores and desiccation cracks in the soil.  This is recognized in the term RR in the model, and comes into effect when a threshold effective daily  rainfall amount has been exceeded. This was set at 6 mm by Sauter (1992) for the Swabian Alb karst in southwest Germany. Other parameter values used are  shown in Table 6.2.





Figure 6.5 Conceptual model of procedure for calculating autogenic recharge. Reproduced from Sauter, M., Quantification and forecasting of regional groundwater flow and transport in a karst aquifer. Tu¨binger Geowissenschaftlichen Abhandlungen, Reihe C, 13, p. 150, 1992.


The region has soils of 20–80 cm thickness over Jurassic limestones, and about 60% of the area studied is forested (70% coniferous), the rest being used for agriculture.
  Calculated results from recharge models can be  ver- ified, assuming that the basin area is known  accurately, by comparing them with measured outflow  (spring dis- charge) from the basin. This would  normally  be  done for  a  hydrological  year  between  dry seasons, when the difference in the volume of stored groundwater between years is at a minimum. Sauter (1992) found discrepancies of up to T10%, and attributed this mainly to inaccuracies in   determining   the stored groundwater and/or the unknown quantity  stored within the epikarst and the unsaturated zone, although discharge measurements and aerial rainfall estimates were recognized as other possible sources of  error. Deriving a representative estimate of basin  rainfall is a well-known problem in hydrology, because the distribution of rain gauges is usually for- tuitous and seldom optimal for water-balance  purposes. So all things considered, an error of T10% is a reasonable result and T5% would be considered exceptional.
  
A largely unappreciated form of recharge in karstified mountains  is  provided  by  condensation  induced  by  air exchange through conduits in the massif. This is explained by Dublyansky and Dublyansky (2000), who calculated that annual condensation in the karsts of  the western Carpathians and western Caucasus Mountains can aver- age 54 mm (range 1–149 mm),  although it does not nor- mally exceed 9% of the annual precipitation in any given region. Since it occurs mainly in summer, it can provide a significant contribution to dry-season recharge particularly in arid zones.
  In addition to water-balance techniques of  estimating recharge, water quality techniques are also  available and are especially useful when estimating  recharge on islands. Jones and Banner (2000) review techniques in the context of Barbados and conclude  that comparison of
groundwater chloride concentrations and d18O values
with those in rainfall permits accurate estimation of recharge.  The  chloride  ion  is  conservative.  It  accumu- lates in the soil when evapotranspiration  occurs, later to be flushed down to groundwater  during recharge




Table   6.2    Input   parameters   for   recharge   calculation   for agricultural  and  forested  areas  (Reproduced  from  Sauter, M., Quantification and forecasting of regional  groundwater flow and transport in a karst aquifer.  Tu¨binger Geowissenschaftli- chen Abhandlungen, Reihe C, 13, p. 150, 1992)

Parameter         Description                            Value

P                       Precipitation                          Variable
p	Percentage throughfall	25% of precipitation
Pt	Percentage stemflow	1.6% of precipitation
Sc                     Canopy capacity                   4.7 mm
St                     Trunk water capacity            0.014 mm
FC                    Field capacity                        75 mm
Ep	Potential evaporation	Variable (grass)
Esok                 Potential evaporation            Variable



events. Thus the ratio of the concentrations of chloride in groundwater and rainfall gives a measure of the pro- portion of rainfall that is lost to evapotranspiration; the remainder providing recharge. In the case of d18O, comparison of d18O values of groundwater with seaso- nal fluctuations of rainwater d18O values shows that groundwaters  have  relatively  low  d18O,  similar  to  that of rainfall in the wet season (June to December).  The average groundwater d18O is equal to the weighted-average d18O values of rainfall when monthly P > 195 mm, which in Barbados is usually between  August and November. Jones and Banner concluded that the chloride and oxygen isotope methods of estimating  recharge (i) have fewer uncertainties than recharge  estimates based on direct measurement of hydrological  parameters, (ii) have the advantage of providing some  insight into the spatial and seasonal distribution of recharge to the aquifer, and
(iii) require fewer field measurements than alternative techniques.
6.3.2 Infiltration, percolation and the epikarst
Autogenic recharge infiltrates a surface that can have widely  differing  characteristics  from  bare  karrenfeld  to thick-soil-covered bedrock, although even in a karrenfeld there is usually some detrital debris and insoluble residue down the solutionally widened joints. We saw in section
4.4 when discussing the vertical distribution of karst

dissolution that most of the corrosional attack is near the surface close to the major source of biogenic  CO2, measurements showing that usually 50–90%   occurs within 10 m  of  the  carbonate  bedrock   surface. This imparts a very high secondary porosity,  permeability and storage capacity to the epikarst.
  The epikarst is at the top of the zone of  infiltration (section 5.5). The highly variable nature of  water flows (hydraulic behaviour) and karstic void distribution (struc- ture) within it distinguishes the epikarst from the rest of
the vadose zone, sometimes called the transmission
zone,  that  lies  beneath  it  (Bakalowicz  1995).  Although the characteristics of the epikarst illustrated  in Figures
5.28 and 6.4 convey as representative a model as any for what is normally conceptualized for the epikarst, it does in fact vary considerably from place to place. The reason for this is that every karst has its unique combination of lithology, structure, geomorphological history and cli- mate. A few examples will demonstrate the range of conditions that can be encountered.
  The karst surface of the Hortus plateau in Mediterra- nean France (the example in Figure 6.4) has low  relief and thin patchy soil, with outcrops of karren and a few closed depressions. The epikarst is 8–12 m deep.  This situation contrasts strongly, for example, with  areas of intense surface dissection such the ‘stone forest’ regions of Mount Api in Sarawak, Lunan in Yunnan, China, the giant grikelands of the Kimberly Ranges in the Northern Territory of Australia, the ‘tsingy’ of  Madagascar, the labyrinth karst of Nahanni, Canada,  or the areˆte and pinnacle karst of Mount Kaijende in Papua New Guinea (Figure 6.6a). These areas have wide open joints that can be 10–100 m or more deep and  several  metres  wide. Consequently,  the  epikarst  is  also  very  deep.  However, sometimes  (as  at  Lunan)  the epikarst terminates at the water table with no intervening vadose transmission zone (Figure 6.6b). In other places widened joints are deep, but are largely full  of weathered residue such porous dolo- mitic sand, as in parts of the Grands Causses of southern France (such   as at  Montpellier-le-Vieux).  Elsewhere some karsts  are thickly blanketed by combinations of weathering residue and allogenic deposits (e.g. alluvium, loess, tephra, etc.), as in the Sinkhole Plain of Kentucky. By  contrast, in many karsts in high latitudes, great Pleistocene glaciers have stripped the soil and truncated the epikarst, reducing it in places to only a few metres in thickness beneath a  glacio-karstic pavement  surface,  as in parts of Manitoba, Ontario, western Ireland and  the Pyrene´es (Figure 6.7). In alpine zones, faulting and deep joints opened by tension may so readily drain the vadose zone that the epikarst may not be a  particularly strong feature of the groundwater system,  although it will still store snow and ice.







Figure 6.6 (a) Areˆte-and-pinnacle landscape of Mount Kaijende, Papua New Guinea, at around 3000 m above sea level. Local relief on the pinnacle ridges is up to about 120 m. (b) In parts of the Stone Forest of Yunnan widened joints reach the zone of water-table fluctuation. Consequently there is direct communication between the epikarst and the epiphreatic zone. Horizontal banding on the rocks shows the range of water-table fluctuation at this site.

6.3.3 Transmission and storage in the epikarst
The variable characteristics described above strongly influence the capacity of the epikarst to absorb and store precipitation. Where the karst surface is largely bare, the uptake  of water  is  determined  by  the  characteristics  of

the rock (its vertical hydraulic conductivity); but where   it is covered, it is controlled by the nature of the soil (its infiltration capacity). The storativity of the epikarst is determined by three factors: (i) the thickness of the epikarst, (ii) its average porosity (these first two together determining the available storage space) and (iii) the






Figure 6.7   (Upper) Glacially stripped limestone pavements in the Pyrenees Mountains between France and Spain. (Lower) Eroded limestone surface in the Taurus Mountains, Turkey, exposed in a road cut.

relative rate of inflow and outflow of water. The epikarst is like a colander: the capacity of the vessel to hold water is determined by the balance between the rate at which water  comes  in  and  the  rate  at  which  it  drains. Whereas the average porosity is determined by the karst void space less the volume of granular fill, the drainage

rate is controlled by the vertical hydraulic conductivity  of the underlying vadose zone (Figure 5.15). This varies because of the uneven pattern of opened joints and faults and their variable permeability. Thus some epikarsts have a large storage potential but drain rapidly, others are frequently replenished by rain and are  usually at least




partially saturated, and some are low lying and  always partly flooded.
  Diffuse autogenic recharge leads to surges of per- colation through the vadose zone. The hydraulic pressure of recharge produces a pressure pulse that stimulates a transfer of water. This process is distinct from the transit of individual molecules of water through the sys- tem (Bakalowicz 1995). Recalling section 5.3, these effects lead to different pulse-through and flow-through  times following a recharge event, the latter being  significantly longer.
  Various investigations have been made of water move- ment through the epikarst and vadose zone by following natural and artificial water tracers and by making obser- vations in caves. We now recognize that flow follows a range of paths from extremely slow seepages down capillary-sized openings to variable and sometimes high-volume cascades down open shafts. Some of the earliest empirical classifications of vadose waters were by Gunn  (1978,  1981b),  Friederich  and  Smart  (1982)  and Smart and Friederich (1987). They came to complemen- tary conclusions by recognizing (i) a  spectrum of dis- charges from slow low-volume  seepages to variable, sometimes large, flows down  open shafts (Figure 6.8a), and (ii) a range of  discharge volumes and variabilities from almost  unvarying  low-volume  seepages  to  extre- mely  variable flows that responded rapidly to recharge (Figure  6.8b).  These  characteristics  have  since  become better defined with improved instrumentation.  Thus, for example, we now also know that high  variability can occur at low discharge and that  percolation from spe- leothems can be sensitive to air-pressure changes (Genty and Defladre 1998).   Nevertheless, the interpretations made by Smart and Friederich (1987) in their outstanding study of water movement and storage in the epikarst of the Mendip  Hills in England remain valid (Figure 6.9), and their  recognition of flow switching when recharge exceeds  certain values and non-linearity of percolation response has been confirmed by other workers (e.g. Baker  et  al.  2000,  Baker  and  Brunsdon  2003,  Sondag et al. 2003).
  The time it takes for a molecule of water to pass through the system is its flow-through time, which  can be measured by dye tracing. Friederich and Smart (1981) placed fluorescent dyes at several sites at the base of the soil above GB Cave in the Mendip Hills. It first appeared in the cave close to the injection site, but spread rapidly until most sites sampled in the cave were   positive (Figure 6.10). This indicated that lateral  diffusion of dye occurred. Since some positive sample  sites were 80 m from the injection point and at a shallow depth, it was also evident that this diffusion took place within the

top  10 m  of  the  epikarst.  The  majority  of  the  injected tracer was discharged as a high concentration  pulse via shaft flow adjacent to the injection site, but part was still detectable elsewhere 13 months later. Under conditions of slow recharge, seepage inlets had the  highest concen- trations, but following increased  recharge  after  rain,  a sharp  high-concentration  response was obtained again from shaft flow, thus  indicating flushing from storage. At any particular  time, concentrations varied signifi- cantly between adjacent inlets, indicating that they were not fed from a homogeneous store but from one that was imperfectly mixed.
  Similar dye-tracing experiments were conducted by Bottrell and Atkinson (1992) in the Pennine karst in England. Four different fluorescent dyes were placed beneath  the  soil  above  White  Scar  Cave,  where 24 water inlets were monitored. Ten traces were per- formed from seven injection sites. Weather conditions ranged   from   extremely   wet   to   very   dry.   The   dyes traversed the 45–90-m-thick vadose zone and   were detected in  the  cave,  sometimes  within  24 h.   It was found that water did not necessarily flow to  the closest inlet below the input point, but could appear at inlets over 100 m away without also appearing at  others apparently below the intervening path. These   observations thus suggested that, in this karst, flow in  the unsaturated zone was through discrete systems of isolated fractures. However, what happened also depended on hydrological conditions, with greatly  increased spatial dispersion of dye occurring during flood events, indicating lateral flow switching. Dye concentration at inlet points showed expo- nential decay over time, as might be expected in a notional mixing tank. However, at some sites after a rainfall event, rather than  being more diluted the dye concentration increased  again, indicating a pulsed flushing effect from a dye store. This produced a ‘sawtooth’ pattern of gradual decay in dye concentration over several months. Bottrell and Atkinson (1992) deduced three components of flow:

1. rapid through-flow with a characteristic residence time of approximately 3 days;
2. a component with short-term storage and residence time of 30–70 days;
3. a long-residence stored component with a  character- istic time of 160 days or more.

Storage components 2 and 3 were considered  probably to be in water-filled voids. Those corresponding to type 2 are flushed slowly and constantly, whereas  those corre- sponding to type 3 are flushed only for  short periods during high states of flow when water  (and dye) is released into type 2 storage.


Figure 6.8 (Upper) Six flow components in the vadose zone of karst. Reproduced from Gunn, J., Hydrological processes in karst depressions. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, NF, 25(3), 313–31, Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie © 1981 E.  Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers. (Lower) Variability of flow components in the vadose zone. Reproduced from Smart, P.L. and Friederich, H. (1987) Water movement and storage in the unsaturated zone of a maturely karstified carbonate aquifer, Mendip Hills, England, Proceedings of Conference on Environmental Problems in Karst Terranes and their Solutions. National Water Well Association, Dublin, Ohio, 59–87. Since this work was done, we now know that high variability can also occur at low discharge (Genty and Deflandre 1998).





Figure 6.9 (a) Generalized nature of the unsaturated zone in the Mendip Hills. (b) Representational model of the unsaturated zone based on variable fissure frequency. Graphs K and SY represent permeability and storativity. (c) Functional model of the unsaturated zone based on an analogy with pipes and partitioned storage tanks. Reproduced from Smart, P.L. and Friederich, H., Water movement and storage in the unsaturated zone of a maturely karstified carbonate aquifer, Mendip Hills, England. Proceedings of Conference on Environmental Problems in Karst Terranes and their Solutions. National Water Well Association, Dublin, Ohio, 59–87, 1987.


  Similar conclusions were reached by Kogovsek (1997) following dye tracing in the epikarst of Slovenia. Three flow  components  were  recognized  in  the  vadose  zone:
(i) rapid flow-through with velocities from 0.5 to 2 cm s—1;
(ii) 
slower velocities of the order of 10—2 cm s—1; (iii) the slowest velocities of < 0.001 cm s—1.
  Sometimes naturally occurring tracers such as  envir- onmental isotopes are used to investigate processes in the






Figure 6.10 First-arrival times in days for fluorescent dyes injected at site A above GB Cave in the Mendip Hills, England. Reproduced from Smart, P.L. and Friederich, H., Water move- ment and storage in the unsaturated zone of a maturely karstified carbonate aquifer, Mendip Hills, England. Proceedings of Con- ference on Environmental Problems in Karst Terranes and their Solutions, 59–87. © 1987 National Water Well Association.
epikarst. Bakalowicz and Jusserand (1987) found from a comparison    of    d18O    values    in    precipitation    and percolation waters that about 18 weeks was  required for the transit of water through about 300 m of limestone above
Niaux Cave in southern France. Using stable isotopes and tritium, Chapman et al. (1992) deduced flow rates of between  7  and  15 m yr—1   ð4:8 × 10—5 cm s—1Þ  through 250–300 m of vadose zone at Carlsbad  Caverns in New
Mexico. In another semi-arid region, in Israel, Even et al. (1986) found isotopic homogenization to occur  quickly after infiltration, but then some waters percolated rapidly while others were detained for decades in the epikarst.
  Tooth and Fairchild (2003) investigated the chemistry of drip waters in a cave in western Ireland, presenting a series of plumbing diagrams from soil zone to bedrock to help explain the geochemical evolution of water  during percolation (Figure 6.11). Variations of the water chem- istry with discharge were used to deduce the  hydrogeo- chemical processes occurring in the  unsaturated zone, and to shed light on whether increases in drip rate are a

result of direct inflow of storm water from soil  macro- pores or due to piston flow from epikarst storage.  They concluded that karst water response to recharge  is dic- tated by the flow route taken through the soil  zone (in this case comprising glacial till), the contrast  between soil-matrix flow and well-connected macropore flow being particularly  important,  with  soil-matrix  flow being the dominant water source during dry periods.
  This raises another related issue: whether most of the water that sustains percolation should be attributed to moisture stored in the soil or to water stored in the epikarst. It is well known that thick soils can have a large soil-water capacity but in sites with only thin or  skeletal soils, the importance of epikarstic storage is  unambiguous when percolation is sustained throughout  a long dry season. This is the case, for example, in  the semi-arid Carlsbad Cavern region in New Mexico (Williams 1983, Chapman et al. 1992) and in a Brazilian site studied by Sondag et al. (2003). We also see percolation sustained in caves beneath alpine karrenfeld  essentially devoid of soil. However, in most karsts water is stored in both the soil and the epikarst, with the two stores interdigitating at the weathering front. Another  problem that confronts us when trying to understand  the operation of the epikarst (in all its vari- eties) is  whether it is best described as a well-mixed aquifer   or  a  system  of  neighbouring  but  essentially separate compartments. The evidence is contradictory. The distinctive geochemistry of percolation waters from different drip points in the same cave described by Tooth and Fairchild (2003) indicates that even if some mixing occurs it is incomplete, and the fact that separate  flow paths  can  exist  is  demonstrated  by  the  dye   tracing discussed above. Separate flow routes are  even some- times oblique rather than vertical through  the vadose zone. But we have also seen that an  introduced dye mass can spread during wet conditions  and appear at a wider range of percolation sites in a cave than during dry conditions. This implies that there  is limited horizontal dispersal and mixing in the  epikarst when the level of saturation  rises  during  a   wet  period,  probably  by a process of lateral  decanting (or flow switching) into adjacent  voids.   Yet  other  evidence  goes  very  much further and  suggests almost perfect mixing. This comes from  measurements of stable isotopes in percolation waters.  Goede et al. (1982), Yonge et al. (1985), Even et al. (1986) and Williams and Fowler (2002) have shown
that d18O values of cave drip waters, regardless of sample
site in the cave, are very close to the average annual d18O values of the regional rainfall. This indicates homogeni- zation of recharge waters in the stores and pathways that ultimately deliver water to underlying caves. An example from New Zealand illustrates the point (Figure 6.12):



open system
variable CO2

slow matrix flow	rapid macropore flow
a	b	c
(always active rainfall   (intermittent rainfall


rapid storm water input

response)

response)	d



relatively fast flow

e

relatively
slow flow	P
w
f	w	P


 open system


f [interconnectivity and aperture size]


storage reservoir piston flow


i	j

g   w w	h
w w


constant head

variable head


underflow


overflow





closed system




w
w	g    g



stable Mg/Ca

relatively low Mg/Ca

relatively high Mg/Ca



variable Mg/Ca

isolated air pockets

k	w w w w

constantly water-filled

l	m	n	o	p
w  w w
   in contact with ventilated gas phase


Figure 6.11 Model illustrating the potential soil and aquifer zone flow pathways and conditions which may control karst water evolution. Reproduced from Tooth, A.F. and Fairchild, I.J. Soil and karst aquifer hydrologic controls on the geochemical evolution of speleothem-forming drip waters, Crag Cave, southwest Ireland. Journal of Hydrology, 273; 51–68. © 2003 Elsevier.


Figure 6.12 Relationship between d18O values in rainfall and cave percolation waters at Waitomo, New Zealand. Note that rainfall d-values show considerable variation, whereas drip waters are almost invariant. Reproduced from Williams, P.W. and Fowler, A., Relationship between oxygen isotopes in rainfall, cave percolation waters and speleothem calcite at Waitomo, New Zealand. Journal of Hydrology 41(1), 53–70 © 2002 New Zealand Hydrological Society.




while the d18O of rainfall varied widely, the d18O of drips in the cave showed little variation over two years, being within analytical error of each other. In spite of that, their electrical conductivities were significantly different, indicating   separate   geochemical   evolution   within   the 40–60 m percolation zone. Their drip rates and  respon- siveness to recharge also varied considerably.
  This apparently conflicting evidence could be resolved if most of the homogenization of the stable isotope signal were to occur in the soil or in the upper, most porous part of the epikarst before the recharge is captured in percola- tion  cells  or  pathways  through  the  lower  epikarst,  and before most geochemical evolution of percolation water in contact with limestone occurs. Since isotopic  homo- genization  can occur  in epikarsts  with very  thin soils (Even et al. 1986), it seems that the upper  part of the epikarst can be the main homogenization  zone. Similar evidence from semi-arid karsts also indicates that storage time in the epikarst can be of the order of years or even decades, although in humid zones storage is usually much shorter, of the order of months  but sometimes more than a year. Storage volume in  the epikarst is not easy to calculate, although Smart  and Friederich (1987) sug- gested that vadose storage in the Mendip Hills could be as much as 49% of the total karst water stored, as compared with an earlier estimate  of 11%  for  the  same  region  by Atkinson (1977b) based on spring-flow separation. Sauter (1992) subdivided the subcutaneous zone of the Swabian Alb of southern Germany into fast and slow subsystems and  estimated storage within them. Fast subcutaneous storage (water that can be mobilized quickly within fractures and fissures) he estimated to vary between 0.3 and 2 mm with a possible maximum of 3 mm, the  sub- zone having a storage coefficient of approximately 0.1%, whereas in slow subcutaneous storage the  maximum stored quantities range between 20 and 30 mm and the storage coefficient is about 1%.
  The evolution of the epikarst and the transfer of water to the underlying phreatic zone have been modelled  by Clemens et al. (1999). They showed that the development of karst conduits in the saturated (phreatic) zone is partly dependent on the temporal evolution of the distribution of recharge from the epikarst. With the enlargement of paths of rapid percolation from the  epikarst, the amount of undersaturated water flowing into the underlying conduit system  increases,  and   hence   the   growth   of   phreatic conduits  is  accelerated. Modelling of flow networks is discussed further in section 6.11.
6.4 BOREHOLE ANALYSIS
The basic method for determining the properties of most types of aquifers is to drill one or a number of boreholes,

to be used for a variety of physical tests. Bedrock cores may or may not be taken during the drilling. Freeze and Cherry (1979) and Domenico and Schwartz (1998) pro- vide full explanations of conventional borehole analysis in hydrogeology, and Chapellier (1992) has described the purpose and nature of well-logging techniques. In-depth discussion of hydraulic and tracer testing of fractures in rocks is available in a volume by the Committee on Fracture Characterization and Fluid Flow (1996), which also   discussed   the   application   of   multiple   borehole- testing  techniques  to  determine  the  hydraulic  character- istics  of  a  rock  mass.  Readers  are recommended to consult these sources to obtain detailed and authoritative information on modern  practice. We therefore provide only a brief discussion pertinent to karst here.
  In karstified aquifers borehole data are usually difficult to relate to aquifer structure and behaviour (Bakalowicz et al. 1995). However, the distribution of porosity  and hydraulic conductivity from the surface to the  phreatic zone can be investigated by borehole analysis and, where the number of boreholes is large, borehole  tests can provide valuable information on aquifer behaviour, espe- cially in the more porous aquifers such as coral and chalk. Only rarely do boreholes intersect  major active karst drains, because the areal coverage  of cave passages is usually less than 1% of an aquifer and only exceptionally above 2.5% (Worthington 1999), but when they do their hydraulic behaviour may be compared to that of a spring. More often boreholes  intersect small voids with only indirect and inefficient  connection to a major drainage line, in which case hydraulic behaviour in the bore is very sluggish  compared with that in neighbouring conduits. Nevertheless, borehole analysis permits data to be obtained on (i) the location of relatively permeable zones within the karstified rock, (ii) the hydraulic  conductivity of a rela- tively small volume of rock near the measurement point and (iii) the specific storage of part of the aquifer. Despite not knowing how  representative any particular borehole may be of the entire groundwater system, drilling is often the only  source of hydrogeological information in many karst areas.
  Using the results from 146 borehole tests in the Dinaric karst, Milanovic´ (1981) substantiated previous less  for- mal evidence that karstification decreases  exponentially with depth (Figure 5.3). The borehole data can be inter- preted as indices of permeability (and  consequently of hydraulic conductivity). Thus he inferred that in general the  permeability  at  300 m  below the ground surface is only about one-tenth of that at 100 m and one-thirtieth of that at 10 m.
  Castany (1984b) summarized appropriate field tech- niques for the determination of hydraulic conductivity in karst. Since the permeability of a fissured rock is a




function of scale (Figure 5.2) and the geometry of  the fissure network, a detailed structural field study is essential prior to the evaluation of permeability results. Fissures are commonly oriented in one, two or three sets of directions. If the spatial distribution can be defined, the permeability K1, K2 and K3 associated with each set may be measured, and a weighted estimate of the hydraulic conductivity of the field area can be derived. Inclined boreholes may be used to intercept vertical joints.
  The average hydraulic conductivity K of a fissured rock  mass,  assuming  linear  laminar  flow  conditions,  is given by Castany (1984b) as
w
K ¼ n · ðKf þ KmÞ	ð6:5Þ
where w is the average width of opening of the fissure   set under consideration, n is the average spacing per unit distance of fissures in the same set, Kf is the fissure set   hydraulic   conductivity   and   Km    is   the   hydraulic conductivity of the intervening unfissured  rock (the rock matrix). In crystalline karstified limestones, Km is negligible compared to Kf. Hence a reasonable approx- imation is
w
K ¼ n · Kf	ð6:6Þ
Snow (1968) showed that for a parallel joint set with N fissures per unit distance and a fracture porosity nf ¼ Nw the  hydraulic  conductivity  of  the  set  can  be  evaluated from

called Lugeon tests). The appropriate technique depends upon the purpose and scale of the investigation (Castany 1984b). Slug tests involve measuring the recovery of head in a well after near-instantaneous change in head at
that well (Butler 1998). This is imposed by suddenly removing or adding a given volume (slug) of water; thus slug  tests  are  the  instantaneous  equivalent  of  pump  or recharge tests respectively (Barker and Black 1983). An instructive discussion of the slug technique when applied to karst is provided by Sauter (1992).  Recharge and pumping tests both distort the initial potentiometric sur- face into cones of recharge or abstraction, depending on the direction of induced water movement. The resulting flow pattern can be represented by an orthogonal network of equipotentials and streamlines (Figure 6.13). Hydraulic conductivity may also be determined from in-hole tracer dilution (see section 6.10).
6.4.1 Borehole recharge tests
Borehole recharge tests for permeability are of three types: pressure tests, constant head gravity tests and falling head gravity tests. Castany (1984b) noted that three kinds of pressure injection tests are in common

K	rg
f ¼ m  ·

Nw3
12	ð6:7Þ


provided that it is applied to a volume of rock of sufficient size that it acts as a Darcian continuum, other- wise it is invalid. Snow also concluded that a cubic system of similar fractures creates an isotropic net with porosity nf ¼ 3 Nw and permeability k that is double that of any one of its fissure sets. Thus in the cubic system
Nw3
k ¼   6	ð6:8Þ

whereas in an array of parallel joints comprising one set
Nw3

k ¼ 12	ð6:9Þ
  The basic procedure in hydraulic testing of boreholes is to inject or withdraw fluid from the hole (or a test inter- val within it) while measuring the hydraulic head. In the field, hydraulic conductivity is usually determined by
borehole pumping tests or recharge tests (sometimes


Figure 6.13 Equipotentials and flowlines in a borehole under- going a recharge test. Reproduced from Castany, G., Determi- nation of aquifer characteristics. In P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson  and  B.  A.  Memon  (eds.),  Guide  to  the  Hydrology  of Carbonate Rock’, P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson & B.  A. Memon (eds.). Studies and Reports in Hydrology No 41, Paris: UNESCO, 210–237, 1984.





Figure 6.14 Definitions required to interpret the results of a standard borehole recharge test. Reproduced from Castany, G., Determination of aquifer characteristics. In P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson and B. A. Memon (eds.), Guide to the Hydrology of Carbonate Rock’, P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson & B. A. Memon (eds). Studies and Reports in Hydrology No 41, Paris: UNESCO, 210–237, 1984.


use in karst terrains. They are performed in uncased boreholes.
1. The standard recharge (Lugeon) test, which yields an average   regional   horizontal   hydraulic   conductivity without taking into account the anisotropy of the rock formation (Figure 6.14).
2. The modified recharge test by which a directional hydraulic conductivity on the basis of relative orienta- tion of the test hole to the system of fissures is determined (Figure 6.15).
3. A triple hydraulic rig test, which gives directional
hydraulic conductivities directly.
  
The permeability of the rock is determined from  the pressures   and   measured   water   quantities   injected. It can be expressed as specific permeability,  defined as the quantity of water that can percolate  through the
karstified  rock  per  unit  length  of  borehole  under   a pressure of 1 m of water (0.1 atm) over a duration  of 1 min. Milanovic´ (1981) used seven categories of specific permeability  for  describing  permeability  in  the Dinaric karst (Table 6.3).
  The specific permeability q can be derived as follows
Q=L	R


In the standard recharge test, water is pumped into the

q ¼ 2pDh · ln r

ð6:10Þ

borehole to form a recharge cone. It is performed for  a selected zone of length L above the bottom of a borehole (Figure 6.14). Injection is organized in fixed  steps at prescribed time intervals. The water pressure in the bore is first increased gradually in steps such as 2, 4, 6, 8 and
10 bars  (1 bar ¼ 10.2 m  head  of  water),  and then  is allowed to decrease in a reverse series of similar  steps. Test lengths within a borehole are characteristically 5 m, but may be reduced to 1 m, using isolating  packers to identify highly permeable zones (Figure 6.16). An accep- table test for analysis is one that produces  a matching reverse cycle.

where r0 is the diameter of the borehole, Q/L is a volume rate of flow per unit test length and Dh is the difference between the head in the test hole h0 and that of the natural rest level of the water table hf beyond the radius of influence R of the test (Figure 6.14).
  Castany (1984b) suggested that since lnðR/r0Þ/2p is
roughly  constant  and  because  R/r0   varies  very  slightly and can be assumed close to 7, then for  numerical computations
Q=L
qm¼ 1:85 × 10—5		ð6:11Þ





Figure 6.15   Influence of the direction of fissures on flow during a recharge test: (a) fissures parallel to bore and (b)  fissures transverse to bore. Reproduced from Castany, G., Determination of aquifer characteristics. In P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson and
B. A. Memon (eds.), Guide to the Hydrology of Carbonate Rock’, P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson & B. A. Memon (eds.). Studies and Reports in Hydrology No 41, Paris: UNESCO, 210–237, 1984.

Here the quantity  qm is  in m s—1 and  thus has  the  same dimensions as hydraulic conductivity.
  Milanovic´ (1981) discussed the relationships between specific permeability and hydraulic conductivity. If a linear relationship between the two can be assumed then
K ¼ jq	ð6:12Þ
For three differing conditions (the unsaturated zone, the saturated zone and a combination of them), j was calcu- lated for a bore of radius 0.02 m and a test length of 5 m and  found  to  vary  from  1.2  to  2.3,  being  least  in  the saturated model and greatest in the mixed case. A reason- able approximation is
K ¼ 1:7 × 10—5q	ð6:13Þ
where  K  is  in  m s—1   and  q  is  in  L min—1 m—1   under
0.1 atm.
6.4.2 Borehole pumping tests
The boundary conditions of aquifers vary. Some can be assumed for practical purposes to have infinite areal extent. Others are limited horizontally, e.g. by imperme- able rocks, a fault, or by a marked reduction in  aquifer

thickness. A constant potential recharge boundary can be provided by rivers or lakes, whereas the ocean may provide a constant potential discharge boundary. Imper- vious confining beds in artesian aquifers preclude vertical recharge and discharge, but semi-permeable beds permit leakage. The simplest aquifer configuration for analysis is that which is:

● horizontal and of infinite extent
● confined between impermeable beds
● of constant thickness
● homogeneous and isotropic.

In such a case, where the well fully penetrates the aquifer and at a constant pumping rate, Q, there is no drawdown in hydraulic head at the infinite boundary.
  Pumping tests are the most common way of deter- mining water well yields and average hydraulic conductivity over large areas in granular aquifers, but the validity of the results is limited in anisotropic, heterogeneous karst aquifers. The removal of water from a well by pumping produces a cone-shaped zone of depression   in   the   water   table,   which   is   unique   in shape and  lateral extent, depending on the  hydraulic characteristics of the aquifer and the rate and duration of





Figure 6.16   The use of variable packer spacing to isolate highly permeable zones within a borehole. Reproduced from Milanovic´, P.T., Karst Hydrogeology, Water Resources Publication, Colorado, p. 434, 1981.

pumping (Figure 6.17). Two general types of  analyses are available for these tests:
Table 6.3 Classification of rocks according to their specific permeability (From Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology; after Milanovic´ 1981)
1. 
steady-state or equilibrium methods, which yield values of transmissivity T and storativity S;
2. transient    or    non-equilibrium    methods    (such    as slug tests) from which can also be derived  values of   storativity   and   information   on   boundary  con- ditions.

  The relationship of drawdown in the well to the aquifer properties was first elucidated by Theis (1935). Castany (1984b) expressed it as



Dh ¼

 0: 183 Q 
T	· log

 2: 25 Tt 
r2S	ð6:14Þ




permeability

where Dh is the drawdown (m) of the potentiometric surface  in  an  observation  well,  T  is  the  transmissivity (m2 s—1),  S   is   storativity   (dimensionless),  Q  is  the




Figure 6.17   Development of drawdown cone and streamlines in confined and unconfined aquifers. Reproduced from Freeze, R.A. and J.A. Cherry, Groundwater, © 1979 Prentice Hall, Inc.


constant rate of pumping (m3 s—1), t is the time elapsed
in seconds since the start of pumping and r is the distance from the pumped well to the observation  well.
  
The recovery to the original level of the potentiometric surface is given by
.	.

The formula is considered valid to within 5% when
t Ç 10 r2S=4T.

 0:183 Q 
Dh ¼	T	·

log

t þ t0
t0

ð6:15Þ




where t0  is the time elapsed in seconds since  pumping stopped.
  The drawdown values at certain times during the pump- ing test (or recovery test) are recorded as in Figure 6.18. A straight line drawn through the plotted points  after 1 to 2 h of pumping is regarded as representative of well behaviour. The slope of the line C is termed  Jacob’s logarithmic approximation

However, the generalized value of K may not be  very meaningful in karst given the characteristic variability of permeability mentioned earlier. We emphasize that all of the hydraulic tests for boreholes  discussed above were developed for porous media in which Darcian conditions hold. Experience shows that  the techniques can some- times produce acceptable  results in karst, provided the constraints of scale are  not overlooked (Figures 5.2
and 6.19).

 0: 183 Q 
C
T

ð6:16Þ



6.4.3 Borehole logging

It corresponds to the change of drawdown in one  loga- rithmic cycle on the time scale. Extrapolation of the fitted line to intersect the time axis yields t0, the time at zero drawdown.
  Simple rearrangement of equation (6.16) permits eva- luation of transmissivity and, if the thickness of the aquifer  b  is  known,  the  hydraulic  conductivity  K  may be calculated by rearrangement of equation  (5.16). In addition, storativity can be derived from
S	2:    25 Tt 0	6:17
¼	r2	ð	Þ

Further information can be derived on aquifer character- istics  by  various  measurement  techniques,  mainly  geo- physical, down boreholes. General details are  provided by US Department of the Interior (1981), Robinson and Oliver (1981) and Chapellier (1992); application to karst is discussed by Astier (1984) and Milanovic´ (2004).
  Borehole  logging  identifies  variations  in  physical  or chemical parameters with depth down a well and  pro- vides in situ measurements of their characteristics. Resis- tivity, spontaneous potential, nuclear, sonic,   calliper, geothermal, video and stereophoto techniques are avail- able for well logging and have been used  with varying




Figure 6.18  Semi-logarithmic plots of drawdown versus time for well pumping and recovering tests in confined aquifers  with various boundary conditions: A, infinite areal extent; B, neighbouring lateral barrier; C, neighbouring constant potential recharge boundary; D, leaky confining beds with time lag in recharge transfer; E, recovery straight line plot. C, C1 or C2 defines the slope of the curves. Pumping is at a constant rate. Reproduced from Castany, G., Determination of aquifer characteristics. In P. E. LaMoreaux,
B. M. Wilson and B. A. Memon (eds), Guide to the Hydrology of Carbonate Rock’, P. E. LaMoreaux, B. M. Wilson & B. A. Memon (eds.). Studies and Reports in Hydrology No 41, Paris: UNESCO, 210–237. 1984.





Figure 6.19   Relationship between hydraulic conductivity and scale of investigation in the karst of the Swabian Alb,  southern Germany. Reproduced from Sauter, M., Quantification and forecasting of regional groundwater flow and transport in a karst aquifer. Tu¨binger Geowissenschaftlichen Abhandlungen, Reihe C, 13, 150p, 1992.


success. Well logging is most productive when different methods are used in appropriate combination with  each other, as illustrated by Maclay and Small’s (1983) study of the Edwards Limestone aquifer in Texas (Figure 6.20). Electrical logging is of two sorts: spontaneous poten- tial (or self potential) and resistivity. An  electrode is lowered  down  a  borehole  and  in  the   first  case  the naturally occurring potential difference at various depths between a surface electrode and the borehole electrode is measured. In the second case, a  source of current is connected and the potential  difference is measured at different depths for a given current strength. This leads to a log of apparent resistivity versus depth. Both properties are measured in uncased wells, and can be interpreted to distinguish rock-unit  thickness and the stratigraphical
sequence, i.e. formation characteristics.
  Temperature logs are often run in association with electrical logs. They use a sonde with a thermocouple and record temperature variations with depth. This is  useful because of the known relationship between  temperature and electrical conductivity and also because temperature variations often indicate discrete   groundwater bodies sometimes related to water  movement from different source areas (e.g. Jeannin et al. 1997).
  Calliper logging in uncased boreholes measures the variation of well diameter with depth, which helps to identify and correlate solution openings, bedding planes

and zones that may need grouting. However, Milanovic´ (1981) warned that the use of a calliper will not produce meaningful results if caverns of >10 m3 are encountered – as commonly found in the Dinaric Karst – and that ‘experience shows that lowering probes into uncased boreholes should be avoided’ because rock fragments
may be detached and jam the instrument. Despite  such risks  to  lowered  instruments,  we  have  found  that the video camera is a most useful tool for boreholes in karst rocks.  Modern  specialized  instruments   operate  both above and below the water table and  can be rotated through 360○ to peer into, for example, a partly opened bedding plane that the bore has intercepted. A good deal can be learned about the condition of the rock and nature and location of preferential flow routes through it from a good moving picture.
  Recording natural radioactivity (gamma logging) uses
gamma  radiation,  with  a  penetration  distance  of  about 30 cm. The radiation flux is measured by a  scintillation counter; flux variations detect rock-unit   boundaries because clays and shales are commonly  several times
more radioactive than sandstones, limestones and dolos- tones. Gamma–gamma and neutron–gamma logging techniques require artificial radiation sources and detec- tors, and hence are used less frequently. Gamma–gamma
logging  has  successfully  measured  (Milanovic´   1981, Maclay and Small 1983) rock-density variations  down





Figure 6.20 Hydrostratigraphical subdivision of the Edwards aquifer, Texas, using borehole logging techniques. Reproduced from Maclay, R.W. and T.A. Small, Hydrostratigraphic subdivisions and fault barriers of the Edwards aquifer, south central Texas, U.S.A. Journal of Hydrology 61, 127–146 © 1983 Elsevier.


boreholes (Figure 6.20). Neutron–gamma logging is a standard technique for soil moisture measurement, but is less frequently used in boreholes. It provides a measure of the hydrogen abundance per unit volume of rock, and so is related to the abundance of water and to porosity.
6.4.4 Borehole hydrograph analysis
Following intense rainfall, the level of standing water in boreholes usually rises. Rapid rises in water level are expected in well-karstified aquifers with high secondary porosity, but only slow responses in porous aquifers with Darcian characteristics. By the same token, drainage and fall of water levels in wells will be quicker in karstified aquifers than in porous media. Provided there is no further recharge, the recession limb of the well  hydro- graph will show an exponential decrease until  the pre- storm water level has been attained. However, just as the storm hydrographs of surface streams show  quick flow and delayed flow segments in their   recession limbs (Hewlett and Hibbert 1967), so the  recessions  of  well hydrographs  may  also  show  discrete line segments of different slope. Shevenell  (1996) analysed well hydro- graphs from a karst aquifer and found up to three straight- line segments (Figure 6.21). The steepest she ascribed to the dominant effect  of drainage from the larger karsti- fied conduits (although encompassing the effects of all

three), the intermediate segment to drainage from well- connected fissures, and the third segment with lowest slope to drainage from the matrix portion of the aquifer. Values for transmissivity and specific yield were calcu- lated from the data, and transmissivity was found to show reasonable agreement with values determined from stan- dard slug injection tests. However, the rate of recession of borehole water levels in an unconfined  karst aquifer is likely to be reduced by continuous  (though diminishing) recharge from epikarstic storage. This was overlooked in Shevenell’s study, and could be the explanation of some segments, because Smart and Friederich (1987) identified up to three components in  flow recessions of discharges from the subcutaneous  zone (the topic of hydrograph recession analysis is  dealt with more comprehensively in section 6.5).
6.4.5 Borehole tracer tests
Tracer dilution in boreholes is used to determine transport properties such as kinematic porosity and dispersivity, as well as to establish connectivity in the aquifer, including borehole-to-borehole and borehole-to-spring linkages. The estimation of hydraulic conductivity by tracer dilu- tion is well established in groundwater hydrology in granular aquifers. Fluorometric tracers are now preferred in karst and other rocks, having the advantages of  ease



dl ¼ Q/a (equation 5.4) and is variously termed  specific discharge, macroscopic velocity or filtration  velocity. The actual microscopic velocity um of the water through the pores of the aquifer is obtained by  dividing the macroscopic velocity by the effective porosity of the rock


u
um¼ 
e

Ki
¼ ne

ð6:19Þ






Figure 6.21 The natural logarithm of water level in a bore versus time. The bore is in Palaeozoic Maynardville Limestone in Oak Ridge, Tennessee. The water level culminations are responses to percolation after rainfall and the recessions  show the  subsequent  decline  in  water  level  after  the  recharge event.
The differing slopes of the segments 1, 2 and 3 were interpreted
  
Lewis  et  al.  (1966)  considered  derivation  of  u  from in-hole dye dilution. To achieve valid results there should be steady-state conditions with uniform groundwater flow and tracer distribution; diminution of tracer concentration over time should be due only to  dilution by horizontal groundwater flow. Results may be satisfactorily evaluated by plotting against time the logarithm of the ratio C0/C. The slope of the semi-logarithmic plot is then evaluated and a value for u is determined

 C0 

 ut 

as water released dominantly from storage in conduits, fissures
and matrix respectively. Reproduced from Shevenell, L., Analysis  of  well  hydrographs  in  a  karst  aquifer:  estimates  of specific yields and continuum transmissivities. Journal of  Hy- drology, 174, 331–55. © 1996 Elsevier.

and accuracy of application and low toxicity (see section 6.10). Salt dilution, radioisotope tracers and the monitoring

log C  ¼ 1:106 2r	ð6:20Þ
where C0 is the initial tracer concentration, C is its concentration  at  time  t  and  r  is  the  internal  radius  of the borehole. In bores with well screens, Drost and Klotz (1983) suggested velocity is best derived from

of isotope activity by scintillometry down the borehole have also been used (Brown et al. 1972, Moser 1998b)
Ward et al. (1997) and Atkinson et al. (2000)  provide
   
pr u ¼ 2at

ln C0 C

ð6:21Þ

details of fluorometric tracing borehole-to-borehole and borehole-to-spring connections in Cretaceous Chalk in Britain. Velocities up to 475 m day—1 were measured and connections established over several kilometres.
  Groundwater flow direction and velocity can be deter- mined  either  by  injection  of  a  tracer  up  the  hydraulic gradient from an observation well (or wells)  or from measuring the rate of dye dilution in a given bore. The relationships between tracer travel time t, well spacing R, effective rock porosity ne, hydraulic  conductivity K
and hydraulic gradient dh=dl ¼ i may be approximated
as follows:
t	Rne	6:18
Ki
  In karstic rocks an injection quantity of fluorescein dye of  2–10 g  10 m—1   of  flow  path  was  recommended  by Brown et al. (1972), who took travel time to be the time to peak concentration in the observation well, rather than the time to first arrival of the dye.
  We  saw  in  Chapter  5  that  under  Darcian  conditions groundwater movement can be described by u ¼ —K · dh/

The term a corrects for borehole disturbance of the flow
field. It usually lies in the range 0.5–4.0, and 2.0 is most often assumed.
  If Darcy’s Law can be assumed to apply, then the hydraulic conductivity can be calculated from
u
K ¼ i	ð6:22Þ
In comparing such a result with that obtained from a pumping test, it should be recognized that tracer dilution involves a much smaller rock volume. Estimation of K  by this method was considered by Lewis et al. (1966) to be  more  economical  from  the  standpoint  of  time,  cost and repeatability than conventional pumping tests,  but we consider it unlikely to be valid in  well-karstified aquifers.

6.4.6 Diagnostic tests for karstic conditions
A number of diagnostic tests using borehole data  have been identified by Ford and Worthington (1995)  and Worthington (2002) to determine if there are  conduits




(channels) close to the borehole, and therefore if the aquifer is likely to be karstified. These and other  tests include the following:

1. Bit drops during drilling – large voids can be identified by bit drops and loss of drilling fluid, but significant voids < 10 cm can be missed.
2. Voids identified by borehole logging –  geophysical and down-bore video logging identifies cavities > 2 cm.
3. Well-to-well (or spring) tracer tests – successful long-distance (> 100 m) traces over a short time (few days) provides evidence of conduit flow.
4. Scale effect in packer, slug and pump tests – if hydraulic conductivity increases with the scale of the test (there may be order of magnitude differ- ences), then the implication is that more permeable fissures and channels are encountered.
5. Segmented recession curve of well hydrograph – recession segments of different slope imply drainage of water from an aquifer with dual or triple porosity characteristics, including an epikarst.
6. Non-linear pumping-rate/drawdown response – if the drawdown in  an observation  well  is  proportional  to the pumping rate, then Darcy’s Law is valid within the cone of depression, but if the response is  non- linear then it is not and conduits may connect to the pumping well.
7. Irregular cone of depression – in a homogeneous porous medium the zone of depression around a pumping  well  is  symmetrical,  but  if  it  is  irregular then channelling may be present.
8. Rapid water quantity and quality response to recharge – prompt (hours) water-level and solute  concentration responses to charge are expected in bores that are well- connected to channel networks, whereas responses in poorly connected wells are sluggish.
9. Troughs in the water table – water table troughs correspond to flow in channels and they terminate in a downstream direction in springs. In such situations hydraulic gradients also decrease in a downflow direction along the water table trough.
10. Groundwater age distribution – in a porous medium there is an increase in water age with depth, but should channels provide rapid recharge to the  sub- surface, then younger water in conduits will underlie older water in overlying fractures and the matrix.

None of these tests alone is likely to prove the presence of karst conduits, but the more that apply in a carbonate aquifer, the more likely it is to be karstified. The further the aquifer deviates from the behaviour of an ideal porous or high-density-fracture medium, the less likely

a given borehole will intercept conditions appropriate for Darcian techniques of analysis. Hence to understand karst aquifers it is  often more appropriate and  produc-
tive to focus attention on springs rather than bores, because these must be integrating significant hydrolo- gical conditions.
6.5 SPRING HYDROGRAPH ANALYSIS
Karst-spring hydrograph analysis is important, first, because the form of the output discharge provides an insight into the characteristics of the aquifer from which it flows and, second, because prediction of spring flow is essential for careful water resources management. How- ever, although the different shapes of outflow hydro- graphs   reflect   the   variable   responses   of   aquifers   to recharge, Jeannin and Sauter (1998) expressed the  opi- nion that inferences about the structure of karst systems and classification of their aquifers is not   efficiently accomplished by hydrograph analysis  because hydro- graph form is too strongly related to  the frequency of rainfall events. If a long time-series  of such records is represented as a curve showing the  cumulative percen- tage of time occupied by flows of  different magnitude, then abrupt changes of slope are sometimes revealed in the curve, which have been interpreted by Iurkiewicz and Mangin (1993), in the  case of Romanian springs, as representing water  withdrawn from different parts of the karst system  under different states of flow. Similar information can  be obtained from the form and rate of recession of  individual hydrographs: they provide evi- dence of the storage and structural characteristics of the aquifer  system sustaining the spring. For these reasons, analysis of the recession limbs of spring hydrographs offers considerable potential insight into the nature  and operation of karst drainage systems (Bonacci  1993),  as well  as  providing  information  on  the  volume of water held in storage. The potential  information that can be
obtained is considerably extended if water quantity varia- tions (hydrographs) are analysed alongside corresponding water quality variations (chemographs). Important recent reviews of karst-spring hydrograph and chemograph ana- lyses are provided by Sauter (1992), Jeannin and  Sauter (1998) and Dewandel et al. (2003).
  The principal influence on the shape of the output hydrograph  of  karst  springs  is  precipitation.  Rain  of  a particular intensity and duration provides a unique  tem- plate of an input signal of a given strength and pattern that is transmitted in a form modified by the  aquifer to the spring. The frequency of rainstorms,  their  volume  and the  storage  in  the  system,  determines whether or not recharge waves have time  to pass completely through




the system or start to accumulate. Antecedent conditions of   storage   strongly   influence   the   proportion   of   the rainfall input that runs off and the lag between  the input event and the output response. The output pattern of spring hydrographs is, however, moderated  by the effect of basin characteristics such as size and  slope, style of recharge, drainage network density, geological variability, vegetation and soil. As a  consequence of

all the above, flood hydrograph form and recession characteristics  show  considerable  variety  (Figure  6.22). The flood hydrographs of vadose cave streams tend to be sharply  peaked  and  similar  to  surface  rivers.  But should cave streams flow into a phreatic zone  before later emerging at a spring, then the influence of their inflow hydrographs on the composite outflow hydrograph of a spring is similar to that of tributaries flowing into a lake:





Figure 6.22   Hydrograph forms encountered in karst springs and streams. (Data from Gavrilovic 1970, Mangin 1969b, Durozoy and Paloc 1973, Williams 1977, Gunn 1978, C. Smart 1983b, Siegenthaler et al. 1984.)




the overflow or output response is a delayed, muted reflection of the input. Some  outflow  hydrographs are  highly  peaked,  others  are  oscillatory  (Bonacci  and Bojanic´ 1991), and many are broad and relatively flat. Sometimes a flat-topped, apparently truncated  hydro- graph is an indication that it is an underflow spring in Smart’s (1983a,b) sense, the ‘missing’ peaked remainder of the hydrograph emerging at an intermittent high-water overflow spring draining the same aquifer  (Figure  6.23). Thus  in  interpreting  hydrograph  form,  it is important to know if the whole output is being dealt with or only part of it. The discussion that follows assumes that the entire output from a karst drainage  system is being monitored.
6.5.1 Hydrograph recessions
Given widespread recharge from a precipitation event over a karst basin, the output spring will show important discharge responses, characterized by:

1. a lag time before response occurs;
2. a rate of rise to peak output (the ‘rising limb’);
3. a rate of recession as spring discharge returns towards its pre-storm outflow (the ‘falling limb’);
4. small perturbations or ‘bumps’ on either limb although best seen on the recession.

When the hydrograph is at its peak, storage in the karst system  is  at  its  maximum,  and  after  a  long  period  of recession storage is at its minimum. The rate of  with- drawal of water from storage is indicated by the slope of the subsequent recession curve. The  characterization of the rate of recession and its prediction during drought are necessary for determining storage and reserves of water that might be exploited.
  Jeannin   and   Sauter   (1998)   pointed   out   that   karst hydrological systems are neither linear nor  stationary, especially when considering total  precipitation as input and discharge as output. They also supported the conclu- sion of Hobbs and Smart (1986)  that they cannot be considered as a single system  with two parallel subsys- tems (storage and drainage), but should be considered as a cascade of at least three subsystems each with their own storage  and  transmission characteristics (Figure 5.30). Therefore unlike Darcian porous media, the karst system cannot be characterized by one single transfer function.
  Quantitative analysis of hydrograph recession  derives from the work of Boussinesq (1903, 1904)  and Maillet (1905), who proposed that the discharge  of a spring is a function of the volume of water held in storage. Maillet analysed hydrographs of springs near Paris, and described their flow recession using the simple exponential relation

Qt  ¼ Q0 e—a t	ð6:23Þ




Figure 6.23 Static system model (no storage considered) for a three-component underflow–overflow spring system responding to an arbitrary input hydrograph: Q, discharge; R, conduit radius. Reproduced from Smart, C.C., Hydrology of a Glacierised Alpine Karst. Ph.D. thesis, McMaster University. p.343, 1983.




where  Qt  is  the  discharge  (m3 s—1)  at  time  t,  Q0  is the initial discharge at time zero, t is the time elapsed (usually expressed in days) between Qt   and Q0,  e is the base of the Napierian logarithms and a of dimension (T—1) is termed the recession coefficient. By contrast, Boussinesq expressed recession in quadratic form as

Q0

ability  and  storage  coefficient.  Nevertheless,  Dewandel et   al.   (2003)   found   that   aquifers   with   a very deep floor yield exponential recessions that  could be closely modelled by the Maillet formula,  even if parameter estimation remained poor. They   concluded  that   the form  of  the  spring  recession  curve  appears  to  be  closer to   exponential   when    flow   has   a   very   important vertical  component,   but  is closer  to  quadratic when
horizontal flow is dominant (as it often is in karst).

  Qt ¼
where
Q0  ¼

and

ð1 þ atÞ2

1:724 Kh2 l L

ð6:24Þ


ð6:25Þ

This is somewhat at variance with the emphatic position of Jeannin and Sauter (1998), who concluded that Mail- let’s formula is only adequate for describing karst  sys- tems during low flow or if they are poorly  karstified. Nevertheless, the expression has been used frequently in the analysis of karst hydrographs and so  merits further discussion.
  Maillet’s exponent implies that there is a linear relation between hydraulic head and flow rate (commonly found in karst at baseflow), and the curve can be represented as

1:115 Khm
a ¼	n L2	ð6:26Þ
in  which  K  is  aquifer  hydraulic  conductivity,  ne   is  its effective porosity and l is aquifer width perpendicular to its length L. Initial hydraulic head hm is at distance L, and Khm represents transmissivity.
  Dewandel et al. (2003) pointed out that Maillet’s exponential equation provides an approximate analytical

a straight line with slope —a if plotted as a semi- logarithmic graph. It  can be  represented in  logarithmic form as
log Qt  ¼ log Q0  — 0:4343ta	ð6:27Þ

from which a may be evaluated as
 	Q 1  — log Q 2 

solution for the diffusion equation that describes flow in a porous medium, whereas the depiction of baseflow reces- sion by Boussinesq’s quadratic equation provides an

log
a ¼ 0:4343ðt  — t Þ	ð

6:28Þ

exact analytical solution capable of yielding quantitative data on aquifer characteristics. Both Boussinesq and Maillet assumed the aquifer to be porous, homogeneous, isotropic and unconfined.
  Their  two  equations  depict  the  variety  of  recessions found in nature with different efficiencies. In a case study from Oman, Dewandel et al. (2003) found the quadratic form to provide a correct fit from day 2 of  recession, whereas the fit of the Maillet method was valid only from
day 22. They also used numerical simulations of aquifer

Since e—at in equation (6.23) is a constant, it is sometimes replaced by a term b, the recession constant, and the equation is written

Qt  ¼ Q0bt	ð6:29Þ

The recession constant can be evaluated from
 log Qt — log Q0 

recessions,  focusing  on  porous  aquifers  and   fissured aquifers (which at large scale could be  considered as

log b ¼

t	ð6:30Þ

equivalent to porous aquifers). Simulations of shallow aquifers  with  an  impermeable  floor  at  the  level  of  the spring showed hydrograph recession curves to  have a quadratic form. Simulations of more realistic  aquifers
with an impermeable floor much deeper than the  outlet

A half-flow period t0:5 is defined as the time required for the baseflow to halve. Then by substitution into equation (6.29)
t0:5

also revealed the quadratic form of recession to be valid regardless of the thickness of the aquifer under the outlet, and therefore indicated the relative robustness of the
Boussinesq formula. It also provided good estimates  of
  
Qt0:5  ¼ 2 Qt0:5 b

hence

ð6:31Þ

the aquifer’s hydrodynamic parameters, such as  perme-

½ ¼ bt0:5	ð6:32Þ





Figure 6.24 Composite hydrograph recession of Ombla spring, Croatia. Note that the three recession coefficients are of different orders  of magnitude.  Reproduced from  Milanovic´, P.,  Water  regime in  deep karst.  Case study  of the  Ombla  spring drainage  area. In  V. Yevjevich  (ed.) Karst  Hydrology  and Water  Resources: vol.  1 Karst  Hydrology,  Water  Resources Publications, Colorado, 165–191, 1976.
and


t0:5  ¼

constant
log b	ð6:33Þ


The parameter t0:5 has the following properties:

1. it is independent of Q0 and Qt and of the time elapsed between them;
2. it is sensitive to change and can take values in  the range zero to infinity;
3. it can be easily evaluated from equation (6.33) and is simply related to b by means of that equation;
4. it is a direct measure of the rate of recession and therefore  can  be  used  as  a  means  of  characterizing exponential baseflow recessions.


6.5.2 Composite hydrograph recessions
Semi-logarithmic plots of karst spring recession data often reveal two or more segments, at least one of which is usually linear (Figures 6.24 and 6.25). In these cases the data can be described by using separate expressions  for the different segments. Jeannin and Sauter (1998) and Dewandel et al. (2003) explain the various models that have been used to try to conceptualize the structure  of the karst drainage system that has given rise to the hydrograph form observed and the means by which its recession might be analysed.
  If the karst system is represented as consisting of several    parallel    reservoirs    all    contributing    to    the discharge of the spring and each with its  individual






Figure 6.25 Master flow recession at Cheddar spring, England. Note the linear and non-linear segments. Reproduced from Atkinson, T.C., Diffuse flow and conduit flow in limestone terrain  in  the  Mendip  Hills,  Somerset  (Great  Britain).  Journal of Hydrology, 35, 93–110. © 1977 Elsevier.




hydraulic characteristics, then the complex recession  of two or more linear segments can be expressed by  a multiple exponential reservoir model:

each other, because under flood surcharge for  example conduit water is forced under pressure into fissures, only to be withdrawn as the pressure head falls. Thus although it may be possible to achieve good  statistical fits to

Qt ¼ Q0  e—a1t

þ Q02 e

—a2t

þ .. . þ Q0  e—ant

ð6:34Þ

segments of hydrographs, the attribution of the segments to different stores within the catchment and aquifer  is

This was used by Torbarov (1976) and Milanovic´ (1976)
in the analysis of flow from the Bileca and Ombla springs, respectively, in the Dinaric Karst. Milanovic´ interpreted the data for the Ombla regime (Figure 6.24)  in Croatia as indicating flow from three types of porosity, represented by the three recession coefficients of succes- sive orders of magnitude. He suggested that a1 is a reflection of rapid outflow from caves and channels, the large volume of water that filled these conduits emptying in about 7 days. Coefficient a2 was interpreted as  char- acterizing the outflow of a system of  well-integrated karstified fissures, the drainage of  which lasts about 13 days; and a3 was considered to  be a response to the drainage of water from pores and narrow fissures includ- ing that in rocks, the epikarst and soils above the water table, as well as from sand and  clay deposits in caves. However, the effect of emptying of poljes in the catch- ment was not taken into account, and we now know that the  Trebis´njica  River   is influent when crossing  the Ombla catchment and that three overflow springs operate at high flows  (Bonacci 1995). Thus it is doubtful if the attributions  of linear segments of the hydrograph are entirely  correct. Further, one must question whether it is  realistic to consider different reservoirs (e.g. conduit, fissured and matrix) to be hydraulically isolated from

fraught with uncertainty, especially when the basic cas- cading characteristics of karst systems (Figure 5.31) are considered. A discussion of various causes for changes in the value of recession coefficients is provided by Bonacci (1993).
  When the various subregimes yielding flow to a spring cannot be adequately represented by separate semi-loga- rithmic  segments,  other  approaches  must  be  used.  For example, in an analysis of the Cheddar spring, England, Atkinson (1977) constructed a master recession curve by superimposing recession segments of all the  winter and spring floods of the 1969–1970 water year (Figure 6.25). He found that this overall recession  could be described well by an equation of the form
Qt  ¼ Q0ð1 þ xtyÞ—1	ð6:35Þ
but after 25 days of runoff of the highest flows, the best fit for the remainder of the recession was provided by a simple exponential relation of the type discussed earlier. This experience reaffirmed the important conclusion reached by Mangin (1975), who found that the baseflow phase in all the cases he studied is accurately re- presented by Maillet’s expression (equation 6.23), although it does not adequately represent flood flow.




Figure 6.26   Karst spring recession curve analysis following Mangin’s (1975, 1998) approach. The shaded area represents baseflow runoff and the unshaded area flood water runoff.




Consequently, Mangin (1975, 1998) considered that a distinction should be made between two basic hydro- logical entities in the interior of a karst drainage system: the somewhat delayed flow from the saturated zone with a linear baseflow recession represented by the function  Ft; and the rapid flood flow from the unsaturated zone with a non-linear recession represented with the func- tion ct. Thus

the flood recession, the time required for the initial flow to diminish by 50% can be calculated from

t0:5  ¼ ðe þ 2 ZÞ—1	ð6:40Þ
Recalling from equation (6.36) that Qt ¼ Ft þ ct and with reference to Figure 6.26, the entire recession curve may be represented by the expression
.1 — Zt.

Qt ¼ Ft þ ct	ð6:36Þ
which  is  a  two-reservoir  cascade  model   (Dewandel

Qt  ¼ QR0 e—at  þ Q0

1 þ et

ð6:41Þ

et al. 2003). By comparison to the flood hydrographs of  surface  rivers,  ct   corresponds  to  the  quickflow  part of the recession and Ft to the baseflow segment (Padilla et al. 1994). In the case of karst, Ft   relates  to the saturated zone, whereas ct translates the effect  of sur- face recharge through the unsaturated zone to the spring: it is an infiltration function modulated by its  transfer through the phreatic zone. Function Ft can be described by Maillet’s formula (equation 6.23), whereas ct is an empirical function that Mangin  considered to be best expressed as

 1 — Zt 

In practice, the baseflow segment is first calculated using
equation (6.18) to determine the recession coefficient. Points Q1 and Q2 should be as distant from each other as possible, but on a straight line segment. Their choice is critical for the accuracy of a and the reliable estimation of QR0. The point of intersection of the linear and non-linear components  determines  ti,  when  the  flood  recession  is assumed essentially zero, i.e. ct ¼ 0.
  The volume of water in storage in the saturated  zone
above  the  level  of  the  outflow  spring  (Figure  5.12)  is termed the dynamic volume V. Under baseflow conditions this can be found by integrating equation (6.18). Hence
ð1

ct ¼ q0  ·
þ

et	ð6:37Þ

V ¼	QR0 e—at  ¼ c
0

 Q R 0 
a

ð6:42Þ

where Z characterizes the mean velocity of  infiltration (close to 1 when fast infiltration is  dominant) and q0


where c is a constant that takes the units used into
3  —1

corresponds to the difference between the total  outflow

account (when QR0   is in m s

and a in days then

Q0 at the spring at t ¼ 0 and a baseflow component termed   QR0     (Figure   6.26).   The   function   is   defined between t ¼ 0 and t ¼ 1=Z, which is the duration of the flood recession. The coefficient e characterizes the impor- tance of the concavity of the flood recession curve and is small (<0.01) when infiltration is very slow. A high value for the coefficient corresponds to a  recession that falls steeply at first but rapidly levels out. It can be evaluated from the expression

c ¼ 86 400). In a complex recession of the type  shown
in Figure 6.24, where there are several a values, the dynamic volume is the sum of the component volumes.
  The difference between baseflow reserves and the total volume  discharged  during  a  flood  recession  yields  the flood-water volume Vq. It can be obtained by subtracting the baseflow component from the total  runoff  volume. This  was  the  method  used  by  Atkinson (1977b) in the case illustrated in Figure  6.25. Mangin’s (1975) techni- que was to integrate equation (6.37), with further details
and applications provided in Padilla et al. (1994).

q0 — ct

Zq0

A valuable insight into establishing whether or not

ctt	—  ct

ð6:38Þ

hydrograph  recession  constants  have  been  correctly attributed is provided by Eisenlohr et al. (1997c),  who

Mangin noted that the form of the flood recession can be
described by the function

 1 — Zt 

achieved this indirectly through numerical simulation with  a  finite-element  model.  Their  results  showed  that the different exponential components do not necessarily
correspond to aquifer volumes with different hydraulic

y ¼
þ

et	ð6:39Þ

conductivities; non-exponential parts of the recession hydrograph do not always yield information about  the

which being independent of discharge permits  compar- ison of different karst systems. After commencement of

infiltration process; and the recession coefficient of base- flow depends not only on the hydraulic properties of the







Figure 6.27  (a) Planinsko Polje in the ‘classic’ karst of Slovenia, flooded in the wet season. (b) Popovo Polje in the Dinaric karst, with the Trebisnjica River incised into its planed rock floor. The residual hill in the background is beside the hamlet of Hum. (c) Polje in the cone karst of Guizhou, China.





Figure 6.28 Schematic inflow (Qi) and outflow (Qo) hydrographs and changes in storage volume (V) in a flooded karst  polje. Reproduced from Ristic, D.M., Water regime of flooded poljes. In V. Yevjevich (ed.) Karst Hydrology and Water Resources, Water Res. Pubs., Colorado, B787 301–318, 1976.


low hydraulic conductivity volume but also on the global configuration of the whole karst aquifer. Using the same modelling approach, Eisenlohr et al. (1997b) found similar problems with interpretation of aquifer   characteristics from the form of discharge–discharge  and precipitation– discharge correlograms, which also  yielded equivocal results. It is therefore abundantly  clear that we must guard against too simplistic an  interpretation of the characteristics of karst-spring hydrographs and borehole hydrographs. What is required to complement the infor- mation on recession  characteristics is corresponding information that  identifies the provenance of the water concerned. This is available from water-quality data and the nature of chemographs (section 6.7).
6.6 POLJE HYDROGRAPH ANALYSIS
Poljes are very large, flat-floored depressions with inter- ior drainage (Figure 6.27). They are usually the most extensive of the enclosed basins in a karst region and may measure many square kilometres in area. Their geomor- phology is discussed in detail in section 9.9. A very important hydrological feature common to most poljes is their  periodic  inundation.  In  the  context  of  their  water regime, Ristic (1976) classified them into four  simple types: wholly enclosed, open upstream, open downstream, and open both upstream and downstream; and their flooding characteristics range from periodic lakes at one extreme to inundated floodplains at the  other. Since this does not emphasize the essential  quality of poljes – that they are enclosed internally  drained basins – the hydrologically more restrictive but geomorphologically more acceptable classification of section 9.9 (Figure 9.34) is preferred here.
  
When the sum of the various inflows Qi into a  karst polje exceeds the outflow Q0, then the excess  volume þDV for a time interval Dt is stored in the  polje; but when Qi < Q0 water is withdrawn from  storage  and flooding  recedes.  The  process  is  described by a simple water-budget equation
Q	Q	DV	6:43
i —  0 ¼ T Dt	ð	Þ

Figure 6.28 illustrates the idealized flooding process in a polje and Figure 6.29 is an example of the more complex real situation.
  Inflows into a polje may come from surface  streams, springs and estavelles. However, measurement  of the output of flooded springs and estavelles is  particularly difficult. Estimation of the total swallow-hole capacity is also problematic, but Zibret and Simunic (1976) showed how an order of magnitude value may be obtained from the final dewatering phase of an inundation, provided that the reduced inflow Qi has attained a nearly constant low discharge; the sum of the inflow and the volume reduc- tion DV=Dt during the emptying phase then corresponds to the total stream-sink capacity Q0 for a given inundation stage in the polje (Figure 6.28). As the lake level reduces the hydraulic head diminishes and the swallow holes may absorb less water.
  Although the volume that can be absorbed by swallow holes varies with the depth of flooding, it also depends  on underground piezometric pressures. The deeper the water table is below the polje floor, the longer the stream-sink will be able to operate at full capacity. Hence antecedent rainfall conditions are influential in





Figure 6.29  Rainfall, hydrographs and flood levels during the inundation of Nevesinjsko polje, Dinaric karst. Reproduced from Zibret, Z. and Z. Simunic, A rapid method for determining water budget of enclosed and flooded karst plains. In V. Yevjevich (ed.) Karst Hydrology and Water Resources. Water Res. Pubs., Colorado, 319–339, 1976.

determining quickflow runoff and the magnitude of Qi, while seasonal effects influence subterranean storage and  the  height  of  the  water  table.  Antecedent  rainfall, through its influence on the generation of  quickflow runoff, is a particularly important variable in the flood- ing of piedmont and border poljes, whereas  seasonal phreatic zone storage is a critical factor in the  inunda- tion of baselevel poljes (Figure 9.34).
  The individuality of flooding behaviour in different poljes is well illustrated by a number of excellent  case studies: Popovo polje (Milanovic´ 1981), Cerknisko polje (Gospodaric and Habic 1978, Kranjc 1985), Planina polje (Gams 1980), Kocevsko polje (Kranjc and  Lovrencak 1981) and Zafarraya polje (Lo´pez-Chicano et al. 2002). The flooding and emptying of poljes has a strong influ- ence on the hydrographs of springs to which they drain, and may be manifest in abrupt changes in  recession characteristics. This is evident in the case of Buna spring, for example, which drains Nevesinjsko   polje  in  the Dinaric karst (Bonacci 1993).
  Poljes  are  best  seen  as  subsystems  within  a  broader karst drainage system, the storage and overflow from one polje often affecting the inundation behaviour of others in the series (Figure 6.30). Hydrological  interconnections between poljes can often be elucidated by water-tracing experiments (section 6.10).
6.7 
SPRING CHEMOGRAPH INTERPRETATION
Discharge variations at a spring are often  accompanied by changes in water quality. Drake and  Harmon (1973) and Bakalowicz (1979, 1984) applied rigorous statistical methods (stepwise linear discriminant analysis and prin- cipal components analysis,  respectively) to describe the quality of karst waters   emerging at springs and to discriminate objectively  between different types. Char- acteristics that may vary include ions in solution, electrical conductivity, environmental isotopes, pH, suspended sedi- ment and temperature. Although some of these are physi- cal rather than chemical attributes of water, it is convenient to  consider plots of any of these water-quality aspects against time as ‘chemographs’.
  Jakucs (1959) showed that the chemical quality of karst spring water may vary with time (as well as  with discharge), and appears to have been the first to recognize that the response of a spring to rainfall  depends  on  the nature  of  the  recharge,  whether  diffuse via karstified joints or concentrated via  stream-sinks (Figure 6.31). Thus the transfer function  of the system was perceived as conditioned by the type of recharge and, by implica- tion, by the kind of flow network, since well-developed cave systems are   particularly   associated   with   point recharge  of  sinking streams. This is supported by an




Figure 6.30 The hydrogeological system of poljes, springs and their traced interconnections in southern Dinaric karst. Reproduced from Herak, M. (1972) Karst of Yugoslavia, in Karst: Important Karst Regions of the Northern Hemisphere (eds M. Herak and V.T. Stringfield), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 25–83; and Zo¨tl, J. (1974) Karsthydrogeologie, Springer-Verlag, Vienna.


investigation by Worthington et al. (1992), who analysed hardness data from 39 springs in six different  countries and demonstrated that more than 75% of hardness varia- tion is explained by recharge type.
  An insight into the response to recharge of a conduit- fed spring was also provided by Jakucs (1959), who presented details of a dye-tracing experiment in which the introduction of the dye at a stream-sink was closely  fol-

lowed by a heavy rain storm. Analytical data for samples taken  at  the  resurgence  are  reproduced  in  Figure  6.32. They clearly show that the recharge pulse from the rain arrived at the spring well before the dye, despite the latter having been introduced first. These data were interpreted by Ashton (1966) in terms of pulses of  water from different input points passing through essentially discrete sections of the phreas. He explained the increase in Ca





Figure 6.31 Hydrographs and chemographs of karst springs following (a) diffuse autogenic recharge and (b) concentrated allogenic recharge. Reproduced from Jakucs, L., Neue Methoden der Hohlenforschung in Ungarn und ihre Ergebnisse.  Hohle 10(4), 88–98, 1959.


concentration at the start of the flood as due to the flushing out of water with a long residence time in  the deeper phreatic zone; recharge forces water out by a piston-like process. Thus spring chemographs have a pattern composed of sequential and sometimes superimposed pulses of water of different quality and quantity from different stores and tributary inputs. Hence, if water quality and quantity data are combined, it becomes possible to calculate the volume of stores flushed by the recharge. This enables the hydro- graph to be separated into different components.
  
The reality of ‘old’ water in storage being pushed out by new recharge water has been confirmed by numerous other   workers;   see   Bakalowicz   and   Mangin   (1980). Using 18O variations in three karst springs, they showed that a precipitation event can cause water in  different stores in a karst system to be flushed out  and mixed in
different proportions, thus giving rise to a fluctuating pattern of d18O at the spring that is different to the pattern of the storm event. This has been confirmed in Germany by Sauter (1997) and in the USA by Lakey and  Krothe





Figure 6.32 Hydrograph and chemograph of the Komlos spring, Hungary, during a water tracing experiment punctuated by rainfall. Note (a) that the discharge pulse arrived before the introduced chemical tracers, in spite of the rain occurring after their injection, (b) that the Ca concentration increased prior to its dilution by floodwaters, and (c) that the turbidity peak lagged the discharge peak. Reproduced from Jakucs, L., Neue Methoden der Hohlenforschung in Ungarn und ihre Ergebnisse. Hohle 10(4), 88–98, 1959.



(1996), whose case study of the Orangeville Rise in Indiana provided a particularly clear example of the  flushing effect (Figure 6.33). Isotopic hydrograph  separation of storm flow events revealed that over 4–6 days the max- imum rainwater contribution to  karst-spring discharge was 20–25% and arrived 18–24 h after peak flow, whereas pre-storm waters pushed out  from storage contributed 77–80%. In an investigation  of a karst groundwater system in Kentucky, Meiman  and Ryan (1999) found that 14 h elapsed after a storm event before storm water appeared at the Big Spring beside the Green River, during which time 17 million  litres of pre-storm water were displaced from the conduit network.
  The separation of karst-spring hydrograph and chemo- graph data is necessarily guided by the conceptual model of the karst system being used. Thus prior to the  mid- 1970s the epikarst was not recognized as a store and the variety and efficiencies of flow paths through it were not appreciated. Consequently storage in the vadose zone was overlooked and the volume ascribed to the phreatic zone was too large, whereas now we understand field  data better, can identify subcutaneous water and can  some- times distinguish between water displaced  rapidly from the subcutaneous zone (fast-event water)  as compared with that delayed (slow-event water) by resistance in the fissure  system  (Sauter  1997,  Pinault  et al. 2001). The model of stores and linkages in a  karst system adopted here is presented in Figure 5.31 and an idealized separa- tion of spring data is shown in Figure 6.34. However, we need to recognize that in  reality each component sepa- rated is a mixture in which the component is the domi- nant but not the only source of the water. Sauter’s (1992) study illustrates the kind of complexity that can result and so provides a  warning against adoption of too simple a piston-flow model.
  At any given instant, the mass-balance of constituents in spring water can be expressed as the sum of the discharge components and their respective concentrations

QrCr  ¼ QsCs  þ QeCe  þ QpCp	ð6:44Þ
where Qr is the discharge of the resurgence and Qs, Qe
and Qp  represent the contributions to it made by water

 	"
Figure 6.33   Rainfall, stable isotopic data and spring flow separa- tion for a 1991 storm event at Orangeville Rise, Indiana. Pre-storm spring water had isotopic values of 44% dD and 6.5% dO, whereas the rainwater averaged 16%dD and 3.3%dO.  Reproduced from Lakey, B. and Krothe N. C., Stable  isotopic variation of storm discharge from a perennial karst spring, Indiana. Water Resources Research, 32(3), 721–731 © 1996 American Geophysical Union.





Figure 6.34   Idealized interpretation of a karst spring hydrograph and chemograph. Reproduced from Williams, P.W, The role of the subcutaneous zone in karst hydrology. J. Hydrol. 61, 45–67 © 1983 Elsevier.


from sinking surface streams (allogenic), epikarstic  sto- rage and phreatic storage respectively. The concentration of a given water-quality characteristic at the resurgence is Cr, and Cs, Ce and Cp are the contributions made to it by the various components. In practice it is difficult to obtain all the component values for Q, although chemical con- centration data are  relatively easily acquired; hence a combined approach using graphical hydrograph separation and calculation is necessary to derive a realistic assessment of the  proportions involved. Thus in the case of the Orangeville Rise discussed previously (Figure 6.33), Lee and Krothe (2003) characterized the chemical signature of the various component waters and with a three-component mixing model calculated the ratios of rain (16.5%), vadose flow (58.5%) and phreatic diffuse flow (25.0%).
  A particular difficulty is encountered in the recognition of subcutaneous water as opposed to phreatic water, because in a simple autogenic system there will be little distinction in their chemical quality. However, in mixed autogenic–allogenic systems, phreatic conduit water will be influenced by allogenic stream inputs and hence will

normally have lower concentrations of Ca than water derived solely from the epikarst. In addition, evapotran- spiration losses from the soil in summer tends to elevate Cl concentrations in the soil-water store and hence in the immediately   underlying   subcutaneous   zone.   A   storm which breaks a summer drought will thus tend to displace the Cl peak. Under such circumstances, the  soil-water plus epikarstic component can be  recognized. Lee and
Krothe (2003) found SO4 concentration to be a convenient way of distinguishing component waters (rain 1.8 mg L—1, epikarst water 19 mg L—1  and phreatic water 210 mg L—1)
in Indiana. In an earlier attempt at a four-component mixing model, Lee and Krothe (2001) were less successful in separating epikarst and soil water using HCO3 and d13C signatures, because with a soil mantle  up to 10 m thick, water in the subcutaneous zone will be dominated by the quality of its soil-water recharge.
  Chemically complex springs that discharge water from a variety of aquifers, e.g. bicarbonate, sulphate, chloride, thermal, etc., require a modification of this approach. If we assume as an illustration that a spring has two main



Table 6.4   Flood dilution mixing calculations for four karst springs in Mexico (From Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology; after Fish 1977)



QB
1000

SO4  (mg L—1)





water-quality components, termed A and B, perhaps from limestone and gypsum respectively, then a  two-compo- nent mixing equation has the form

QrCr  ¼ QACA  þ QBCB	ð6:45Þ
Component B may have a deep, inaccessible source, and we may wish to estimate its proportional contribution to the discharge at the resurgence. Dividing through by Qr, the expression becomes

Cr  ¼ Q0  CA  þ Q0  CB	ð6:46Þ

the most appropriate depending on local hydrogeological conditions and available data bases: (i) water balance (section 6.2), (ii) multiple-borehole analysis (section 6.4),
(iii) spring flow recession (section 6.5) and (iv) residence- time–discharge calculation.
  Prestor and Veselic (1993) presented case studies from the alpine and Mediterranean zones of the Slovenian karst and concluded that, with appropriate statistical  analysis of time series, a high level of accuracy can be achieved in total discharge estimation from just two  hydrological years of observation of precipitation data,  with close to

A
where Q0  þ Q0

B
¼ 1. The value of CA  can be  assessed

70% accuracy in overall discharge and dynamic reserves
estimation, although to raise the level of accuracy com-

A	B	plementary information is required.

from measured values of monominerallic spring  waters
elsewhere in the region. Knowing the water balance  of these other springs, it may also be possible to  obtain a reasonable figure for QA. Model compositions for CB are estimated and then tested in high-stage and  low-stage conditions where CA, Cr and Qr are known, to arrive at an acceptable estimate of the true values of  CB  and QA. Table  6.4 and Figure  6.35 illustrate  results from an application of this method.
6.8 STORAGE VOLUMES AND FLOW ROUTING UNDER DIFFERENT STATES    OF THE HYDROGRAPH
We have emphasized that porosity is usually low in karst. As a consequence, the volume of water in storage  can vary  widely  at  different  stages  of  the  hydrological year and under different states of the  hydrograph. The huge range of possible variation may  be imagined when the piezometric surface in some  places in the Dinaric karst can vary by as much as  312 m in 183 days or 90 m in 24 h (Milanovic´  1993). Consequently we must consider methods that  are applicable to non-Darcian conditions. There are four principal approaches to estimating storage volumes and available water resources in karst aquifers,
  
Multiple-borehole testing is a traditional technique of aquifer evaluation that involves pumping from one well and observing drawdown in nearby observation wells (Figure 6.17). Multiple-borehole testing samples a larger volume of rock mass than single-borehole tests, and  so the calculation of storativity (equation 6.17) is subject to less uncertainty. This is acceptable if the rock mass can be treated as  a  porous medium  but, where  there is  well developed   secondary   porosity   and   heterogeneity, the more transmissive conduit porosity  of karst may not be sampled; so except in the most  well connected, porous carbonate aquifers this  technique is unlikely to yield representative estimates   of   available   water   resources from  karst.  Nevertheless, results of sustainable water yield from  individual boreholes are still valuable at a local level,  and patterns of well yields over large areas provide  useful regional pictures of variability of water supplies (e.g. karst in western Ireland in Figure 6.36).
  Where reserves are estimated from spring-flow reces- sion data, a master recession curve for a wide range  of flows is first constructed from numerous partial  reces- sions,  and  then  an  estimate  of  reserves  is  made by integrating the area under the master curve.  The result is usually interpreted as representing the dynamic volume (Figure 5.12). A particularly good   example  of  the





Figure 6.35 Two-source mixing model for the Choy spring, Mexico. Reproduced from Fish, J.E.. Karst hydrogeology and geomorphology of the Sierra de El Abra and the Valles San Luis Potosi Region, Mexico. Ph.D. thesis, 469 p, McMaster  Univ., Canada, 1977.


application   of   the   technique   in   an   unconfined   karst aquifer (Mendip Hills in England) was provided  by Atkinson (1977), who used a combination of an empirical (equation 6.35) and Maillet’s equation  (equation 6.23). The Mendip aquifer has a deep base below the spring.
  Where the impermeable aquifer floor is close to  the level of the outflow spring, Dewandel et al.  (2003) showed that the  Maillet  formula   underestimates the dynamic volume of the  aquifer,   and considered  the Boussinesq equation (equation  6.24) to provide good estimates of dynamic reserves regardless of the thickness of the aquifer under the outlet.
  
The fourth approach to reserves estimation is to mea- sure and calculate the average amount of water that passes through the aquifer in a year. This should  yield a figure that is similar to (but more accurate  than) the value estimated from the water-balance approach. Where springs are gauged, this requires a  calculation of the outflow over at least 1 yr; the  average over many years provides the most reliable long-term estimates and yields information on   interannual variability. However, the average  throughput in 1 year does not tell us the total capacity of the aquifer. This can be estimated from  the product of the mean discharge and the residence time of





Figure 6.36 Areal variation in borehole yields in unconfined karstified Carboniferous limestones in south Mayo, mid-Galway and north Clare counties, western Ireland. Reproduced from Drew, D.P. and Daly, D., Groundwater and Karstification in mid-Galway, South Mayo and North Clare, Report Series 93/3 (Groundwater),© 1993 Geological Survey of Ireland.


the water. As an illustration, the partly confined Takaka marble aquifer in New Zealand discharges from the Waikoropupu Springs an  average  flow  of  15 m3 s—1, which is equivalent to 0.47 km3 yr—1.  But  the  waters emerging  have  a  mixture  of  ages,  estimated  by tritium to be mainly in the range of 3–8 yr. Hence the volume of underground storage is in the order of   1.4–3.8 km3 (Williams 1992).
  Under different states of the hydrograph there is variation in the relative volumes stored in different parts  of  the  aquifer  (Figure  5.31),  as  well  as  variation in principal routes followed by water, with  some flow paths drying up, especially in the vadose  zone. Water resources become especially important as  supplies are depleted at the end of a long dry period, especially in the epikarst, but just because there may be plenty of water in a deep phreatic store does not mean that it is available. Abstraction of water by bores with  their intake below the level of the outflow can lead to cessation of spring flow  and  result  in  serious  ecological damage down- stream. Hence useable water  will depend on decisions regarding ecologically   acceptable minimum flows. ‘Quarrying’ of water  is   not an option in a world where sustainable use of  resources and simultaneous habitat protection are taken seriously. Sadly, it is widely practiced.
6.9 
INTERPRETING THE ORGANIZATION     OF A KARST AQUIFER
The  hydraulic  behaviour  of  karst  systems  is  dependent first of all on the origin of the karstification: whether it is derived from normal surface karst processes with meteo- ric water, from deep hydrothermal karst  flow without ready access to the surface, or influenced by freshwater – saltwater  mixing  and  seawater  intrusion near the coast. Here we focus our comment on the first (meteoric water) case, which is quantitatively predominant.
  Bakalowicz and Mangin (1980) showed that although a karst aquifer appears very heterogeneous, this is not the result of a random juxtaposition of different types of voids because it  stems from  the ordered  distribution  of voids around a drainage axis, according to a certain hierarchy. The principal drain receives water from  tributaries, the epikarst, and ancient flooded voids and  networks of fissures connected to the main drain. Thus the aquifer in a karst basin can be considered structured with reference to the drainage. This has certain consequences.
1. Water flows are increasingly organized as the structure develops. The point of departure for this evolution is a porous or fissured aquifer with a diffuse flow system, while the end-point is an aquifer with  flow limited




essentially to conduits. Karst aquifers can include  all possible combinations and stages of drainage evolution.
2. Because of the existence of a particular drainage structure, the scale appropriate to the resolution of any problem concerning the aquifer has to be precise. For example, at a scale of 1–100 m3 the existence of randomness can be recognized in the aquifer – a drill hole can go through a karst cavity or can miss it by a few metres, without being able to predict it one way or the other. On the other hand, at the scale of the karst
massif an organized drainage structure can be recog- nized. Thus at one scale the aquifer appears random, whereas at the other it is structured. Our interest  is usually in the regional scale, where the reference unit that encompasses the whole structure is the  karst system (i.e. the drainage basin).
  Bakalowicz and Mangin (1980) regarded the karst drainage system as being characterized by an impulse response function that transforms the input pulses  from

precipitation to hydrograph responses at springs, and contended that by analysis of this function it is possible  to identify particular features of the aquifer and its degree of organization (sections 6.5 and 6.7).
  In a subsequent analysis of rainfall and spring- discharge data using autocorrelation and spectral analysis, Mangin (1981a,b, 1984) added further depth to his inter- pretation of the Pyreneean karst aquifers. The contrasting reactions of three systems (Aliou, Baget and Fontestorbes) to recharge is illustrated in Figure 6.37, which shows that the speed of decline of the three correlogram is different. The memory effect was interpreted to be very great in the Fontestorbes system, but short in the case of Aliou. The spectral density curves translate the same phenomena. He suggested that karst aquifers may be classified according to these characteristics and later also applied this approach to the classification of karst aquifers in Romania (Iurkiewicz and Mangin 1993). As noted, Jeannin and Sauter  (1998) cautioned that these methods are not very  efficient in




Figure 6.37   Time-series analysis of the discharge of three karst springs. Reproduced from Mangin, A. Utilisation des  analysis correlatoire et spectrale dans l’approche des systemes hydrologiques. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 293, 401–404, 1981.





Figure 6.38 Frequency distribution of electrical conductivity of waters from different springs in France. Reproduced from Bakalowicz, M. and Mangin, A., aquifere karstique. Sa definition, ses characteristiques et son identification. Mem. L. sr. Soc. Geol. France 11, 71–79, 1980.


inferring the structure of karst systems or in  classifying them because they are too strongly related to the frequency of rainfall events. Recognizing that conventional statistical analyses are based on time-invariance and assumptions of stationarity, Labat et al. (2001) have commenced further exploration of the  rainfall–runoff relationships of the Pyreneean catchments by means of wavelet analysis and multifractal techniques.
  Chemical data reinforce and complement the informa- tion   derived   from   the   spring   hydrographs,   although Bakalowicz (1977) argued that the structure  of a karst aquifer cannot be defined from the coefficient of variation of chemical variables in spring water, as was suggested by Shuster and White (1971), because the distribution of the values is usually multimodal rather  than normal. Atkinson (1977b) also noted that the  very small range of CaCO3 in resurgences from the Mendip Hills, England, would suggest that they are diffuse flow springs according to Shuster and White’s criteria, yet they are known to be fed largely by conduit flow. This reinforces the conclu- sion of Jakucs (1959) and Worthington et al. (1992) that recharge type explains most of the variation in hardness of springs in carbonate aquifers.
  Bakalowicz and Mangin (1980) demonstrated from French examples that the frequency distribution curve of a hydrochemical variable such as conductivity provides a good description of the aquifer and suggested the follow- ing interpretation on the curves shown in Figure 6.38:

porous aquifers – unimodal, relatively high electrical conductivity

fissured aquifers – unimodal, relatively low electrical conductivity
karstified aquifers – multimodal, wide range of elec-
trical conductivities.

The development of a preferred conduit drainage axis through the saturated zone permits easy transfer of water and therefore transmits a not too distorted image of the recharge process. But if such a hydrological organization is not developed, then homogenization of infiltration waters occurs.
6.10 WATER-TRACING TECHNIQUES
Water tracing is now a powerful, well-developed tool of the karst hydrologist. It enables catchment boundaries to be delimited, groundwater flow velocities to be estimated, areas of recharge to be determined and sources of pollu- tion to be identified. Dyes and other substances have been used to trace underground water for more than 100 yr. The green dye fluorescein (C20H12O5) was discovered in 1871, and was first used as a karst water tracer at the stream- sinks of the upper Danube River in 1877. Its disodium salt under the trade name ‘uranine’ (C20H10O5Na2) was intro- duced a few years later. Early methods were sometimes heavy-handed. A spectacular  example was tracing the Doubs River to the Loue  Spring in the French Jura Mountains, a distance of  about 10 km (Ka¨ss 1998). In 1911 about 100 kg of  fluorescein was injected into the Doubs and resulted  in the Loue Spring and river being green for 3½ days over a distance of 60 km. This added




insult to injury, because just 10 year earlier in the same catchment, a fire in the Pernod distillery had cause a vat of absinthe to burst and drain into the Doubs, the resulting alcohol content of water from the Loue  indicating that about 1 million litres of absinthe had been lost.
  Gaspar (1987), Ka¨ss (1998) and contributors  review the history and full range of modern  techniques from naturally occurring labels to artificially introduced radio- isotopes; Dassargues (2000) and contributors give numer- ous examples of their  application; and US EPA (2002) provides a QTRACER2 program for tracer breakthrough analysis.  Each of the Proceedings of the International Symposium  on  Underground  Water  Tracing   (SUWT) from 1966 to  1997 enables  advances made  in water tracing to be tracked. The proceedings of 7th symposium (Kranjc 1997a) and the associated regional case study of karst hydrogeology in southwest Slovenia are particularly informative, with valuable commentary on methodologi- cal  aspects  of  their  experiments.  Other important case studies include Batsche et al.  (1970) for the Danube– Aach region in Germany and Quinlan and Ewers (1981) for the Sinkhole Plain–Mammoth Cave region in the USA.
Four classes of water tracing agents are available.

1. Artificial labels
(a) dyes
(b) salts
2. Particulates
(a) spores
(b) fluorescent microspheres
(c) bacteriophages
3. Natural labels
(a) microorganisms
4. 
unambiguously detectable in very small concentrations;
5. resistant   to   adsorptive   loss,   cation   exchange   and photochemical decay, and to quenching by  natural effects such as pH change and temperature variation;
6. susceptible to quantitative analysis;
7. quick to administer and technologically simple to detect;
8. inexpensive and readily obtainable.

Unfortunately, no artificial tracer satisfies all the  above criteria, but several do so to a significant  extent. Non- toxicity is the most important  characteristic. Details of warm-blooded and  cold-blooded toxicities of dyes used in hydrological  testing are provided by Leibundgut and Hadi (1997, tables 1 to 4) and Ka¨ss (1998, tables 6 and 7). Leibundgut and Hadi (1997) concluded that most of the fluorescent tracers can be considered harmless in the concentrations usually found in tracer experiments, espe- cially considering the rapid dilution that follows injection under field conditions. Although the usual maximum
tracer concentration of 10 mg m—3  for ground water is
below  toxic  level,  dye  concentrations  should  be  main- tained as far below that level as possible and  the mass used should be minimized so that the duration of expo- sure is limited. Many  different  formulae   have been suggested for calculating the quantity of  dye required for a tracer (Ka¨ss 1998). Worthington and Smart (2003) took data from 203 tracer tests and  found that two equations gave excellent fits to the data:

M ¼ 19ðLQCÞ0:95	ð6:47Þ
and

0:97

(b) ions in solution
(c) environmental isotopes

M ¼ 0:73ðTQCÞ

ð6:48Þ

4. Pulses
(a) natural pulses of discharge, solutes and sediment
(b) artificially generated pulses
6.10.1 Artificial labels
To be suitable for water tracing, an artificial tracer should be absent in the water to be traced and as far as possible be:

1. non-toxic to the handlers, to the karstic ecosystem and to potential consumers of the labelled water;
2. soluble in water, in the case of chemical substances, with the resulting solution having approximately  the same density as water;
3. neutral in buoyancy and in the case of particulate tracers, sufficiently fine to avoid significant losses by natural filtration;

where M is mass of tracer (g), L is distance between input and output  (m),  Q  is  spring  discharge (m3 s—1),  C  is concentration (g m—3) and T is time (s). These equations facilitate accurate estimation of the amount of dye needed for tracer tests in carbonate rocks under a wide range of conditions.
Dyes
Artificial dyes are the most successful water tracers at the present time, with many properties that are desirable for water tracing in karst systems (Field et al. 1995). Although it was known in 1904 that uranine could be adsorbed by charcoal and eluted later (Ka¨ss 1998),  this convenient property was forgotten, and so for  many years detection depended on visual observation. Dunn (1957) revived the method of fluoresein dye  adsorption onto charcoal with




subsequent elution using potassium hydroxide (5%) in ethanol. The field requirement is simply to suspend small mesh bags containing a few grams of granular  activated carbon in a moderate current in the  monitored springs. Rhodamine WT is also adsorbed and may be eluted with a warm  solution  of  10%  ammonium hydroxide in 50% aqueous 1-propanol  (Smart and Brown 1973). The great advantage of this  technique is that detector bags can be changed when  convenient and many sites may be easily monitored. There are no time constraints on when analysis must be undertaken, although air drying of detector bags is required  if  more  than  a  few  days  will  elapse  between collection and examination. Charcoal bag  detectors also work effectively in the sea should resurgences be submarine or intertidal. A recent evaluation of the use of charcoal for detection is available in Smart and Simpson (2001).
  The most significant recent development in dye-tracing techniques has been the advent of quantitative fluoro- metric  procedures.   This  followed   from   the  work   of Ka¨ss (1967) in Europe and Wilson (1968) in  North America. The present status  of  these   procedures is explained in publications by Ka¨ss  (1998), Dassargues (2000) and US EPA (2002).  Important points about the techniques used are that several dyes can be distinguished from each other when  mixed, thus permitting simulta- neous dye tracing in the same basin, detection is possible well below visible  levels, and quantitative analysis has become routine.  Fluorescent dyes can be detected with fluorometers  and spectrophotometers. Continuous flow- through fluorometers are available for installation in the field.
  Fluorescent substances emit light immediately upon irradiation   from   an   external   source.   The   emitted   or fluoresced energy usually has longer wavelengths  and lower frequencies than that absorbed during  irradiation. This property of dual spectra is utilized to make fluoro- metry an accurate and sensitive analytical  tool, because each fluorescent substance has a different combination of excitation and emission spectra. Since  some naturally occurring substances such as plant leachates, phytoplank- ton and some algae also fluoresce, it is important to know the background fluorescence of  the water being traced before any experiments are  conducted. Industrial and domestic wastes also  introduce background problems. Natural substances  tend to fluoresce in the green wave- band; thus the  use of dyes with an orange emission overcomes problems of possible misidentification.
  Numerous fluorescent dyes are commercially available and have been used in groundwater tracing. They are all organic substances and Ka¨ss (1998) provides details. Because different manufacturers often assign different product names to what in fact is the same dye, confusion

sometimes  occurs  in  comparing  results  of  traces   by different  people.  Hence publications reporting the  use of dyes should record the Colour Index generic  name and number, as well as the manufacturer’s name  for the dye (Table 6.5).
  Smart and Laidlaw (1977) assessed the relative merits of eight fluorescent dyes. They considered their sensitiv- ity,  minimum  detectability,  effects  of  water  chemistry, photochemical and biological decay rates,  adsorption losses, toxicity and cost. They concluded that the orange dyes are more useful than the others  because of lower background fluorescence, which permits higher sensitiv- ities to be obtained. Although  on toxicity grounds we recommend that, with the  possible exception of Rhoda- mine WT, the  use of  the rhodamine group should be limited and restricted  to exceptional cases. Smart and Laidlaw (1997) also  showed the fluorescence of some dyes, such as pyranine, to be strongly affected by pH of the water which precludes its quantitative use. However, another   dye used  with  spectacular  success  in  water tracing is Direct Yellow 96 (Table 6.6: Diphenyl Brilliant
Table 6.5 Fluorescent dyes used in water tracing, their Colour Index and Chemical Abstract Service (CAS)  number (Reproduced from US EPA, The QTRACER2  Program for Tracer-Breakthrough Curve Analysis for Tracer Tests in Karst Aquifers and Other Hydrologic Systems,  EPA/600/R-02/001,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2002)

Dye type and                           Colour index
common name                         generic name         CAS Number

Xanthenes:
sodium fluorescein	Acid Yellow 73	518-47-8
eosine	Acid red 87	17372-87-1
Rhodamines:
Rhodamine B	Basic Violet 10	81-88-9
Rhodamine WT	Acid Red 388	37299-86-8
Sulpho Rhodamine G	Acid Red 50	5873-16-5
Sulpho Rhodamine B	Acid Red 52	3520-42-1
Stilbenes:
Tinopal CBS-X	Fluorescent	54351-85-8
Brightner 351
Tinopal 5BM GX	Fluorescent	12224-01-0
Brightner 22
Phorwite BBH Pure	Fluorescent	4404-43-7
Brightner 28
Diphenyl Brilliant	Direct Yellow 96	61725-08-4
    Flavene 7GFF Functionalized polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons: Lissamine Flavine FF Pyranine
Amino G acid



Table 6.6 Data on some common fluorescent tracer dyes (Reproduced from US EPA, The QTRACER2 Program for Tracer-Breakthrough Curve Analysis for Tracer Tests in Karst Aquifers and Other  Hydrologic Systems, EPA/600/R-02/001, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2002)

Maximum
Dye name	excitation l (nm)
   Maximum emission* l (nm)
Fluoresence intensity (%)
  Detection limit{  (mg L—1)
Sorption tendency
Sodium fluorescein
492
513
100
0.002
Very low
Eosine
515
535
18
0.01
Low
Rhodamine B
555
582
60
0.006
Strong
Rhodamine WT
558
583
25
0.006
Moderate
Sulpho Rhodamine G
535
555
14
0.005
Moderate
Sulpho Rhodamine B
560
584
30
0.007
Moderate
Tinopal CBS-X
355
435
60
0.01
Moderate
Phorwite BBH Pure
349
439
2
?
?
Diphenyl Brilliant
415
489
?
?
?
Flavene 7GFF





Lissamine Flavine FF
422
512
1.6
?
?
Pyranine
460{
512
18
?
?

407§
512
6
?
?
Amino G acid
359
459
1.0
?
?
Sodium napthionate
325
420
18
0.07
Low
*Different instruments will yield slightly different results.
{Assumes clean water and spectrofluorometric instrumentation.
{pH Ç 10.
§pH Ç 4:5.

Flavine 7GFF). It was introduced by Quinlan (1976)  in the Sinkhole Plain–Mammoth Cave area of  Kentucky (Figure 6.39) where hundreds of dye traces have since been conducted (Quinlan et al. 1983). The results are available as 1:100 000 scale maps (Ray and Currens 1998a,b).
  More than one fluorescent dye may be injected simul- taneously into a karst drainage basin and yet be mutually distinguishable at the resurgence. Although the absor- bance and emission spectra of many dyes overlap, three groups of them have sufficiently minimal interference to permit ready separation: i.e. those that fluoresce in  the blue, green and orange wavelengths. The most  suitable dye from each group depends on other  characteristics, although Rhodamine WT (orange),  uranine/fluorescein (green) and amino G acid (blue)  are of proven value. Their spectral properties are  shown in Figure 6.40 and other details in Table 6.6.
  Ka¨ss (1998) provides detail on techniques of dye separation, but warns that if two dyes with fluorescence maxima within about 50 nm of each other are used simultaneously  in  a  tracing  experiment,  then  they  will interfere with each other if both are present in the same sample. The easiest method to recognize two or  more dyes in one solution is to produce a  synchroscan spec- trum, by running a synchronized  wavelength change of the excitation and fluorescence monochromators through the spectrum of interest with  a constant wavelength distance. This is determined by  the spectral position of

the excitation and fluorescence maxima (between 20 and 25 nm for most xanthene dyes). Other techniques can used for dye separation, including pH adjustment,  thin- layer chromatography and enrichment.
  The most useful quantitative water tracing at the time of writing is obtained by a combination of continuous fluoro- metry, i.e. passing water from a spring or other sampling point directly and continuously through a  portable field fluorometer, and tracer breakthrough  curve analysis. The shape of the dye breakthrough curve as it emerges at the spring can be analysed and accurately compared with other continuously monitored variables such as discharge, con- ductivity and temperature. The QTRACER2 program (US EPA 2002) provides a powerful method of analysing tracer breakthrough curves, and permits the calculation of many hydraulic   parameters, including tracer mass recovery, mean  residence time, mean flow velocity, longitudinal dispersion and characteristics of flow-channel  geometry and volume. However, Werner et al. (1997)  explain difficulties of interpreting tracer tests under  unsteady flow conditions. The origin of dispersion and retardation of tracers in karst conduits as revealed by breakthrough curves was explained by Hauns et al. (2001) after compar- ing breakthrough curves obtained  by various approaches (field experiments, laboratory experiments and numerical simulations). Dispersion is produced by small-scale turbu- lent eddies and  retardation is mainly the consequence of longitudinal changes in conduit geometry.





Figure 6.39 Groundwater basins, piezometric surface, subsurface flow routes and surface drainage in the Sinkhole Plain–Mammoth Cave region, Kentucky. Boxes A and B show the locations of Figures 7.11 and 9.67. Adapted from Quinlan, J.F. and Ewers, R.O., Hydrogeology of the Mammoth Cave Region, Kentucky, in Geological Society of America Cincinnati 1981 Field Trip Guidebooks, Vol. 3, (ed.T.G. Roberts), pp. 457–506, 1981.





Figure 6.40 Absorption and emission spectra of blue (amino G acid), green (lissamine FF) and orange (Rhodamine WT) fluorescent dyes. Reproduced from Smart, P.L. and Laidlaw, I.M.S, An evaluation of some fluorescent dyes for water tracing. Water Resources Res. 13, 15–23 © 1977, American Geophysical Union.


Salts
Inorganic compounds that dissociate in water into cations and ions have been used frequently to trace water.  For example, sodium chloride was one of the earliest artificial water tracers, three tons of it being used in 1899 to trace water sinking at Malham Tarn in Yorkshire,  England (Carter and Dwerryhouse 2004). It also featured amongst the 13 different substances used to trace the waters of the upper River Danube to the Aach spring in the catchment of the River Rhine in Germany. In that  case 50 t were

used   (Batsche   et   al.   1970).   Lithium   and   potassium chlorides have also been widely used in  water tracing, as have non-fluorescent dyes such as  Congo Red and Methylene Blue (Brown et al. 1972). Lithium, for exam- ple, is relatively  rare  in  nature   and so with  low background values present is a  useful tracer, although uncertainty exists regarding its  acceptability on toxicity grounds. An example of the results of karst water tracing with lithium chloride is provided in Kranjc (1997b). An informative review of the use of salts in water tracing is provided by Ka¨ss (1998).




6.10.2 Particulates
Spores
Spores  of  the  club  moss  Lycopodium  clavatum  have  a diameter of 30–35 mm and buoyancy only slightly greater than water. This permits them to drift through karstified conduits without excessive loss by filtration. They can be
dyed   different   colours,   thus   permitting   simultaneous traces from different injection sites. They are recovered at resurgences by 25 mm mesh conical  plankton nets
suspended in the current and are identified and  counted under a microscope.
  The  use  of  spores  to  trace  water  was  introduced  by Mayr (1953, 1954)  and  was  developed  by   Maurin and Zotl (1959). The method is  fully   described  by Drew and  Smith  (1966), Zotl  (1974)  and Ka¨ss (1998). Smart and Smith (1976) review tracing work in tropical waters using spores and fluorescent dyes, and summarize the relative merits of the methods. However, the techni- que is of little value for quantitative work and so has been largely superseded  since the early 1970s by superior fluorometric techniques.
Fluorescent microspheres
Plastic  microspheres  coloured  with  fluorescent  dye  are utilized widely in biological and medical applications and have been used in groundwater tracing since the  late
1980s. They are available in a variety of sizes from 0.05 to 90 mm diameter, in different colours and in suspension in deionized water. Their density is 1.055 g mL—1.  Ka¨ss (1998) reviewed techniques and other  applications and provided results of simultaneous  comparative tests with conventional fluorescent dyes.  Polystyrene microspheres have an electrically neutral   surface.  Their  transport
behaviour  is  similar  to  bacteria,  and  so  given  that  the size of most bacteria is around 1 mm, the optimal size of microspheres for a drift tracing test is about that diameter. One of the great advantages of fluorescent microspheres is
that many tests can be conducted simultaneously because of the range of colours available and they do not interfere with other tracers such as dyes; however, inadvertent cross-contamination is a serious problem. Ward et al. (1997a) gave an interesting example of their use in  an investigation  of  the  migration  of  pathogens  through an area of unconfined Chalk and discussed  sampling and detection techniques (epifluorescence   microscopy and fluorescence spectrophotometry). Injection took place on the Chalk surface beneath the topsoil and monitoring of arrival was by bore water sample drawn from the water table at a depth of 20 m below the surface. The site was
irrigated before the test and again lightly after the injection. Microspheres of 6 mm arrived at the water

table in 18.5 h, showing that particles of 6 mm or less can migrate rapidly through the unsaturated zone.
Bacteriophages
Bacterial  viruses  or  bacteriophages  (or  simply  phages) have recently been used as water tracers, as reviewed by Ka¨ss (1998). They are cultivated in the  laboratory, are environmentally harmless, being  non-pathogenic, non- toxic and invisible regardless of concentration. However, microbiological laboratories are required to conduct such tests,  and  considerable  work  is required both in the preparation stage and in the examination of the samples. Consequently, the use of phages in karst water tracing is uncommon.  Nevertheless, examples of their application can be  found in Bricelj (1997), Drew et al. (1997) and Formentin et al. (1997).
6.10.3 Natural labels
Microorganisms
Bacteriological and virological examination of karst spring waters can be undertaken to establish the hygenic quality of the water and, if contaminated, to help trace possible sources of pollution. Karst aquifers are  notoriously bad water filters; thus transmission of microorganisms is to be expected. There is an extensive literature on the movement of bacteria through porous  media, reviewed by Romero (1970), Gerba et al. (1975) and contributors to Gospodaricˇ and Habic (1976). Bacterial species used for groundwater tracing include  Serratia marcescens, Chromobacterium violaceum and  Bacillis subtilis. These and others are discussed by Ka¨ss (1998), who also provides information on the requirements for using bacteria as water tracers. He reviewed tests in karst, although these are rare.

Ions in solution
Naturally occurring chloride has long been used as a tracer to determine the interface of seawater with fresh water in coastal aquifers and to detect possible  intrusion of sea- water into bore water supplies. Variations in concentration of the calcium ion have also been used to determine flow- through times (Pitty  1968b) and flow-through routes (Gunn 1981b, 1983)   especially in the vadose zone. Hydrochemistry of  spring waters has also been used to characterize carbonate aquifers, as outlined in section 6.7 (Bakalowicz 1977, 2001, Andreo et al. 2002). The prove- nance of water emerging at springs can also be determined by  concentrations of different water-quality characteris- tics, as discussed by Swarzenski et al. (2001) in the case of Crescent Beach Spring in Florida, although environmental isotopes are particularly valuable in that regard.




Environmental Isotopes
The use of stable and radioactive isotopes in hydrology became well established in the second half of the twen-

attained a peak of 8000 TU in the Northern Hemisphere in 1963. The Southern Hemisphere experienced a lower peak a year or two later.
3

tieth century. The main applications of environmental

The amount  of

H in precipitation also shows some

isotopes to groundwater hydrology are:
1. to provide a signature of a particular groundwater type that can be related to its area of origin;
2. to identify mixing of waters of different provenance;
3. to provide information about throughflow  velocities and directions;
4. to provide data on the underground residence time (age or age spectrum) of the water.

In  order  to  be  able  to  use  natural  isotopes  effectively, the reasons for their distribution in natural  waters and processes governing it must be understood. These points are discussed in publications by Fritz and Fontes (1980), Clark and Fritz (1997), Kendall and  McDonnell (1998) and Moser (1998a).
  The term environmental isotopes refers to the natu-
rally occurring isotopes of elements that are abundant in our environment, although the production of some  may be increased by anthropogenic activity. These  include isotopes of H, C, N, O and S, which are  principal elements found in geological, hydrological and biological systems. Hydrogen possesses 1H, 2H (also called deuter- ium, D) and 3H (termed tritium, T), the last being radio- active. Oxygen isotopes include two of particular interest in hydrology: 16O and 18O, both being stable. These occur in the water molecule, so are the best conceivable tracers of water. They are found in various combinations, such as

important natural variations. For example there is a marked
latitude dependence, with values lower by a factor of five or so in the tropics (Gat 1980). Tritium values also slowly increase inland, doubling over a distance of 1000 km. Superimposed  upon  this  is  a  seasonal  variation  with  a maximum in late spring and summer that is 2.5–6 times higher than in winter. These seasonal variations are poten- tially important in karst water investigations, because they may provide a signature for the season of recharge.
Radioactive isotopes
Radioactive isotopes are unstable and undergo nuclear transformation,   emitting   radioactivity.   Their   decay   is spontaneous and unaffected by external influence. It occurs at a unique rate for each radioisotope, defined by its half- life T1/2, which is the time required for one  half of the radioactive atoms to decay following an exponential law
N  ¼ N0e—lt	ð6:49Þ
where N is the number of radioactive atoms present  at time t, N0 was the number present at the commencement of decay and l is the half-life or decay constant.
  The half-life for  3H is  12.43 yr,  39Ar is 269 year  and 14C is 5730 yr. Consequently, 3H can be used to  date waters up to about 50 year old, 39Ar is useful for dating
waters from 100 to 1000 year old and 14C has an upper limit of approximately 35 000 yr. Fontes (1983),  Moser (1998) and Solomon et al. (1998) explain how  ground-

1H2

1       18

2       16

3      16

16O,

H2    O,

H2    O  and

H2     O.  Other  important

waters can be dated and discuss environmental isotopes

environmental  isotopes  commonly  used  in  groundwater research are 12C, 13C and 14C. Less frequently used are isotopes of argon, chlorine, helium,  krypton, nitrogen, radium, radon, silicon, thorium and uranium (IAEA 1983, 1984, Moser 1998).
  Both 3H and 14C are produced naturally in the atmo- sphere, but the production of some isotopes is increased by  human  activity,  thus  for  example  3H  and  85Kr  are
emitted  from  nuclear  power  stations.  Very  large  emis- sions of 3H were associated with atmospheric  thermo- nuclear explosions during the 1950s and  1960s, but the subsequent moratorium on atmospheric  thermonuclear testing resulted in considerable diminution of this isotope in rainfall to the extent that 3H levels have returned close to natural background concentrations. Tritium concentra- tions are expressed in tritium units (TU), defined as one atom  of  3H  per  1018   atoms  of  1H. Natural background levels are 4–25 TU, whereas 3H concentration in rainfall

suitable for that purpose (the 14C production rate is now established back about 50 000 yr, so the range of the method is taken to extend to 45 000 year or so).
  Interpretation  of  data  on  the  abundance  of  radioiso- topes in spring water depends very much on the model of flow and mixing that is adopted (Yurtsever 1983, Moser 1998). Alternatives include the piston flow model at one extreme and the completely mixed  reservoir model (sometimes termed the exponential or  one-box model) at the other. The first is similar to  the conduit flow or
‘perfect pipe’ end-member commonly applied to karst (sections 6.7 and 6.9). Piston flow assumes that recharge occurs  as  a  point  injection  and  that  a  discrete  slug  of tracer moves through the groundwater system  without mixing. In nature this never occurs perfectly because of tributary mixing and dispersion effects but, nevertheless, the flow behaviour of well-developed  karsts is suffi- ciently similar to it (with pre-storm  water flushed out



Table 6.7   Interpretation of tritium data for the Waikoropupu Springs, New Zealand (From Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology; after Stewart and Downes 1982)


Tritium content (TU)


Flow times (yr)	Turnover times (yr)
Annual weighted
Local runoff

Date	mean rainfall
recharging aquifer
Main spring	Piston-flow model	One-box model
27 May 1966
34

14 T 0.9
3–4
7–8
29 July 1972
15
20.1 T 1.2
15.3 T 1.9
<1 or 8–10
10–12
4 May 1976
8
11.9 T 2.0
11.2 T 1.2
2–4 or 12–14
0–20


first) for such a model often to be taken as an acceptable first  approximation.  By  contrast,  the  completely  mixed reservoir  model  assumes  uniformity  at  all  times, each episode of recharge mixing almost  instantaneously. It also assumes stationary conditions with respect to reser- voir volume, discharge and infiltration rate.
  Actual tracer behaviour in most groundwater  systems lies between these two extreme cases. Dispersive models have been proposed to describe intermediate  situations, taking account of mixing and dispersion within the system,
but assuming that pulse variations in tracer output can be related back to concentration variations in recharge events. A cascade of mixing compartments connected  by linear channels has been used to approximate this  situation,
being termed a finite state mixing cell model. Individual
cells are assumed to behave like well-mixed reservoirs but may be of different volume and concentration.  Fontes (1983),  Yurtsever  (1983),  (Gaspar  1987)   and  Moser (1998) discuss applications and theoretical considerations. Stewart and Downes (1982) provide an  instructive illustration of the different interpretation  that emerges depending on the model chosen. They dealt with a karstic artesian aquifer in the Takaka valley, New Zealand, which drains to the Waikoropupu Springs (Williams 1977, Stew- art and Williams 1981, Williams 2004). Tritium measure-
ments were made  at  the  springs  (mean  discharge 15 m3 s—1, Table 5.10) in 1966, 1972 and 1976 and were compared with tritium values in local allogenic recharge and rainfall (Table 6.7). Tritium increased rapidly in local rainfall to about 40 TU in 1964–65. The result for  the Main Spring in 1966 showed the input of this  young tritium-enriched water, whereas the 1972 figures revealed
the presence of some low-tritium (older) water. Values in rainfall declined steadily after 1971, the 1976 results indicating that not much high-tritium water remained. Stewart and Downes (1982) thus concluded that the springs’  outflow  has  a  spread  of  ages,  but  that  young and old components predominate, the best  estimate of throughput time depending on the model adopted and the year of sampling (Table 6.7). Geological circumstances in an aquifer that is capped by  impermeable rocks at its

downstream end suggest that the intermediate dispersion model would be more realistic than either a piston-flow or a one-box model, but detailed stable isotope data demon- strate the aquifer to be very well mixed  (Stewart and Williams 1981). It is likely that the  mean age of the outflow increases during low discharge conditions.
  Our conclusion is that in many karst aquifers the water may have components of different residence times and so to assign one mean age may be misleading. This  point was well made by Siegenthaler et al. (1984) for a spring in the Swiss Jura. Strong evidence showed that in periods of baseflow relatively homogeneous old water  sustains the spring, whereas after a storm or meltwater event rapid runoff of new water is also important. ‘Consequently, it
would not make sense to talk of one mean age of the
spring water.’ The main interest is in the average  resi- dence time of the older reservoir water. Repeat sampling for 3H at a spring over several years permits definition of the bomb spike as it passes through the  aquifer and so gives a clear indication of mean residence time that can be compared to model interpretations.
  Tritium concentration has been largely thought of as a means of dating water, but in view of the currently decreasing 3H values in karst reservoirs it is  becoming less important for that purpose. As a   consequence, Rozanski    and    Florkowski    (1979)    and  Salvamoser (1984) suggested the use of 85Kr  (T1=2 ¼ 10:8 yr) for dating, but this requires very large samples sizes (Clark and Fritz 1997, Moser 1998).
  Manufactured radioactive and activable isotopes have also been used as tracers in hydrology. Behrens  (1998) pointed out that they are used with reservation because of expense in measurement and radiation    protection considerations. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA   1984)   has   given   guidance   on  the  choice  of artificial isotopes for water tracing.

1. The isotope should have a life comparable to the presumed duration of the observations. Unnecessarily long-lived isotopes will create pollution, a health hazard and interference if the experiment needs repeating.




2. The isotope should be resistant to adsorption by soils and rock.
3. For most problems, it is desirable to be able to measure the radioactivity in the field; thus g  emitters are pre-
  
Differences in the isotopic composition of water sam- ples reflect fractionation processes that occur in the hydrological cycle. The heavy isotope molecules (HDO,
H 18O) have slightly lower saturation vapour pressures
2
16

ferred in general, although b emitters are also suitable.

than the ordinary water molecule  (H2

O); hence when

4. The isotope must be readily available at  reasonable cost.

The public health disadvantages of using artificial radio- active isotopes may be overcome for some species by the post-sampling activation analysis technique, although this has  the  severe  drawback  of  requiring  specialized  facil- ities. Buchtela (1970), Schmotzer et al. (1973) and Burin et al. (1976) have applied the technique to  karst. The method involves injection of an initially non-radioactive
tracer  (e.g.  115In,  32S,  6Li)  that  is  later  sampled  and
irradiated with neutrons in a reactor. If the tracer is present in the sample it is detectable by its activity. Principles of the method are explained by Behrens (1998).
  Nevertheless, despite the numerous advances of the past  40 yr,  Burdon  and  Papakis’s  (1963)  recommenda- tion remains true, that before turning to  artificial radio- active tracers, which are costly,  hazardous and need skilled handling by personnel supported by atomic labora- tories, it is better to try to solve the problem with coloured or chemical tracers. Although tritiated (3H) water would seem a perfect  tracer, because it is part of the water molecule itself and is identifiable to 1:1015 or less, using the first  criterion above, 3H is immediately eliminated. In situ detection (criterion 3) is also not possible.
Stable isotopes
Stable isotopes undergo no radioactive decay. Deuterium,
18O  and  16O  occur  in  the  oceans  in  concentrations  of

changes of state occur during evaporation and condensa- tion, a slight fractionation takes place (discussed in detail by Clark and Fritz (1997) and Kendall and Caldwell (1998)). For example, when evaporation occurs from  an open water surface the vapour is depleted in heavy isotopes compared with the remaining unevaporated water; whereas when condensation occurs, the initial   precipitation is slightly enriched so that later precipitation becomes increas- ingly depleted with respect to VSMOW. Ingraham (1998) explained the processes  that cause isotopic variations in precipitation. From a  worldwide analysis of oxygen iso-
topes in precipitation, Bowen and Wilkinson (2002) defined a negative correlation between d18O values  and station latitude, which they considered to result from the cooling and distillation of water vapour during transport in a pole-
wards  direction.  Temperature  is  an  important  factor  in fractionation: the lower the temperature the greater  the depletion in heavy isotopes. This influence is reflected in both latitude and altitude differences in  heavy isotopic composition of precipitation.  Generalizing global data, a linear relationship (the  ‘meteoric water line’) emerges (Craig 1961, Fontes 1980, Rozanski et al. 1993):
dD ¼ 8:17ðT0:07Þd18O þ 11:27ðT0:65Þ%	ð6:51Þ
Regional variants can also be identified – for example a Mediterranean curve (Gat and Carmi 1987).
  It is evident that four general rules apply to stable isotope fractionation in precipitation:

1. precipitation becomes isotopically lighter with increas-

about    320 mg L—1      HDO,    2000 mg L—1      H2

O    and

ing latitude and altitude;

997 680 mg L—1   H2

O. Variations in these  proportions
2. 
D and 18O in precipitation show a good linear correla-

are measured by mass spectrometry and compared  with
the composition of a standard termed VSMOW (Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water). The ratios D/H and 18O/16O are expressed in delta units, which are parts per thousand (per mil) deviations of the isotopic ratio  from the standard
.Rsample  — Rstandard.

tion (equation 6.51);
3. in mid-latitudes precipitation is isotopically lighter in winter than in summer;
4. enrichment of D and 18O can occur in lakes and pools
because of evaporation.
The relationships which underlie these rules and result in the natural labelling of water in stable isotopes can  be

d% ¼

Rstandard

· 1000	ð6:50Þ

summarized as in Figure 6.41.
The relationships that exist in the natural distribution

where R is the isotopic ratio of interest. Thus a  sample with d 18O ¼ þ10 % is enriched in 18O by 10% (i.e. 1%) relative to VSMOW. Values for D usually  fall in the range —50 to —300% and for d18O in the range þ5% to
—50%. The accuracy of measurement is  approximately
T2% for dD and T0.2% for d18O.

of stable isotopes in water have been valuable in deter- mining the recharge areas and recharge seasons of ground- waters, especially where allogenic inputs are  involved (Figure 6.42). Autogenic recharge is usually  so well mixed in the epikarst that seasonal patterns and recharge events are difficult to identify (Yonge et al. 1985, Even





Figure 6.41  Oxygen-18 and deuterium relationships in natural waters. Reproduced from Fontes, J.,   Environmental isotopes in groundwater hydrology. In P. Fritz & J. Fontes (eds.). Handbook of Environmental Isotope Geochemistry Elsevier, Amsterdam; vol. 1, 75–140 © 1980 Elsevier.


et al. 1986, Williams and Fowler 2002). Mixing of groundwater bodies and leakage of water from lakes and reservoirs can also be discerned (Fontes 1980). Illustrations of the use of these methods in karst aquifers can be found in numerous publications, e.g. by  Dincer et al. (1972), Bakalowicz et al. (1974), Zo¨tl (1974), Moser et al. (1976), Stewart and Williams (1981), Celico et al. (1984), Stichler et al. (1997) and Williams (1992, 2004). However,  Margrita  et  al.  (1984) pointed out that the concepts of theoreticians  do not always appear to be well understood by the users of isotopic tracers, and they identified the kinds of  errors that may appear in inter- pretation of results. A significant limitation applying to the use of stable isotopes in hydrogeology is that they can give information on the general provenance of waters, but do not identify the exact source. Only point-to-point tracers such as dyes can do that.

6.10.4 Pulses as tracers
Natural pulses
A  pulse  is  a  significant  variation  in  water  quantity  or quality. A storm is the usual natural trigger  mechanism for its generation, although snow and  glacier melt also produce pulse waves (e.g. Meadows Creek in Figure 6.22). Pulses were being used as karst  tracers by the mid-19th century (e.g. Tate 1879),  although their potential to dis- criminate details of conduit network geometry was formally

developed by Ashton (1966). He showed how input pulses combine to produce complex output signals and explained how the network geometry might be  determined by their interpretation. In practice, it has not yet proved possible to interpret  spring   hydrographs   with confidence in the detail that Ashton’s theoretical  arguments suggest, but pulse-train analysis as a means  of water tracing has proved strikingly successful in a system too difficult for conventional dye tracing (Williams 1977). Further ela- boration of pulse-train   techniques   can   be   found   in papers  by  Brown  (1972, 1973), Christopher (1980), Smart and Hodge (1980) and Wilcock (1997).
  Given an input pulse, the related output pulse will vary according to the transfer function of the system, as shown in  sections  6.5  and  6.7.  Whereas  natural  and  artificial labels such as isotopes and dyes approximately measure the rate of flow of the water being traced, pulses almost always exceed it by a significant amount. A flood wave
(discharge pulse) will travel as a kinematic wave down
an open vadose passage, and as a pressure pulse through   a phreatic conduit. Large kinematic waves travel  faster than  smaller ones;  both travel  more quickly  than the water itself, especially through pools. Transmission of a pressure pulse through a flooded tube is almost instanta- neous(at the speed of sound). Therefore it is necessary to
distinguish between the pulse through time (i.e. hydrau-
lic response time) and the flow through time of the system. For example, the Komlos spring pulse  through





Figure 6.42   A schematic model of the Waikoropupu karst groundwater system, New Zealand, using mass balance of d18O  to estimate the proportion of recharge from different sectors of the basin. Reproduced from Williams, P.W., Karst  hydrology. In
M.P. Mosley (Ed.) Waters of New Zealand, Hydrological Society, 187–206, 1992.


time is about 6 h, whereas the flow through time of  a tracer dye is roughly 40 h (Figure 6.32).
  Brown’s (1972, 1973) work on the Maligne basin, Canada, is a particularly fine illustration of the application and development of these techniques.  Whereas Ashton (1966) used aperiodic and unique  pulses, Brown used time-series analysis on long-term  discharge data. The Maligne valley contains Medicine  Lake, an intermittent internally draining lake that in  winter reduces to small ponds, and overflows about  one year in two for a few weeks in summer. The lake is at 1500 m a.s.l. and drains to a line of springs 16 km distant and 410 m lower in altitude. Brown undertook a cross-covariance analysis of lake input and springs  output  data  and  identified  a  negative  cross- covariance peak at —20 h. He explained this as the output of daily snowmelt cycles occurring in the lower one-third of the basin (i.e. closer to the springs than the input from the lake upvalley). A subtle secondary  ‘peaking’ at þ70 to þ124 h was considered to be the response to known flow inputs from the lake, and was later confirmed by a dye trace that appeared þ80 to  þ130 h after injection, peaking at þ90 h. Since the travel time of the dye was of the same order as the pulse through time of the river, Brown was able to conclude  that open channel (vadose) conditions pre- vailed underground at the time of the experiments. Later work  by Kruse (1980) showed the system’s response to vary with discharge conditions.

Artificially generated pulses
Ashton (1966) discussed the use of artificial flood waves produced by collapsing small temporary dams at stream- sinks. Periodic water releases in the course of hydro- electric power generation yield much larger pulses  that have been traced for a considerable distance. In  the Takaka valley, Williams (1977) showed by cross-correlation analysis that kinematic waves  produced by releases from a hydroelectric dam take 5 h to travel about 15 km down an open natural channel to enter a marble aquifer
and then 9–11 h to travel a further 20.2 km to the Waikoropupu artesian spring (mean discharge 15 m3 s—1). The karst section consists of a recharge zone  where the river loses flow into its gravelly bed for about 10 km and then a confined zone where pressure pulse  transmission may be assumed. Whereas the tritium concentration of the spring water suggests a minimum  flow through time of
2–4 year (Table 6.7), the pulse through time is less  than half a day; and whereas the gradient in the  Maligne system analysed by Brown is about 26 m km—1, in the Takaka valley  it is a maximum of  2.7 m km—1. Thus pulse-train analysis is an effective means of demonstrating point-to-point connections over long  distances with low hydraulic gradients and through  large flooded zones (the Takaka marble aquifer  probably has a phreatic water volume of 1.5–3.8 km3).




  Pulse travel times in these investigations ranged from  3 km h—1 for kinematic waves travelling down the steep channel of the upper Takaka River to approximately 2 km h—1 through the marble aquifer  of the valley.  This compares with 0.2–1.45 km h—1 in the much   steeper Maligne system under vadose conditions.
  Tracer studies in karst aquifers such as we have  dis- cussed above have enabled some very detailed models to be  constructed  of  conduit  systems  leading  to springs. Smart’s (1983b) proportional geometric  model of the Castleguard II conduit system and  Crawford’s  (1994) model   of   the   Cave   Creek   system  are  outstanding examples of the use of combined water-tracing technology (several fluorescent dyes with repeated traces, continuous fluorometry, natural discharge pulse analysis, isotope and chemograph analysis) for elucidating inaccessible conduit systems in inhospitable terrains (Figure 6.43).
6.11 COMPUTER MODELLING OF KARST AQUIFERS
There  are  two  main  reasons  for  trying  to  model  karst aquifers:

1. to characterize and understand the system (usually as an aid to improving management of groundwater resources);
2. to try to reproduce the evolution of its characteristics.

We know that karst aquifers have features in  common: most water is stored within the primary  matrix and secondary fissure system (Table 5.2), yet  most water is transmitted through tertiary conduits (Table 5.7); and we know that karst systems have  attributes that distinguish them from non-carbonate porous and fissured aquifers:

1. a general lack of permanent surface streams;
2. the presence of swallow holes into which surface streams disappear;
3. the existence of underground channels (conduits) with fast flowing water;
4. the existence of large springs where groundwater reappears at the surface.

  We know also that the arrangement of  equipotentials and streamlines contrasts markedly in   well-karstified aquifers from that in typical porous media (Figure 6.44). Thus unlike standard non-carbonate  porous and fissured aquifers, karst aquifers cannot be  reduced to a simple elementary volume that ignores the whole drainage struc- ture. The karst system connects  the recharge area to the outflow spring (or springs),  and karst processes direct groundwater towards the  spring(s) along flow paths

that have a hierarchical order. The physical system is defined by its structure (organization of flow paths), hydraulic behaviour (response to recharge) and its evo- lution (stage of development), and the framework of the system is the rock mass in which it is developed. These aquifers  are  likely  to  have  turbulent  flow  components, which immediately presents a problem to the modeller, because most numerical groundwater models are based on Darcy’s Law, which assumes laminar flow. Although numerical codes for simulating aquifer evolution gener- ally incorporate turbulent flow, it is seldom included in codes used to simulate  groundwater flow in karst at a regional scale. An  illustration by Worthington (2004) using the case of the Mammoth Cave groundwater basin (Figure 6.39) highlights the difficult problem confronted by the  hydrogeologist trying to model a karst aquifer. Numerical simulation of the aquifer using a standard equivalent porous medium model (EPM) predicts the paths followed by tracer dyes from their various points of injection as shown in Figure 6.45a. But the inaccuracy of this simulation is revealed in Figure 6.45b by the actual paths   followed   by   the   dyes   (see   Ray   and   Currens (1998a,b) for more detail). Uncritical use of  the EPM for management purposes could clearly lead  to serious errors. Therefore we need to see what modelling tools are available that might better suit our needs.
  Kiraly (1998), Teutsch and Sauter (1998), Kova´cs (2003) and Worthington and Smart (2004) have reviewed attempts to model karst aquifers. From this we see that in the  main  two  different  and  complementary  approaches have been taken:

1. a global, ‘black box’ (or probabilistic) approach  that focuses on input event and output response  (such as rainfall recharge and resulting spring  outflow), but takes into account local field observations of flow and transport processes;
2. a deterministic (or parametric) approach that takes into account theoretical concepts of aquifer structure, the physics of each mechanism involved in the trans- fer and flow of water, and from that tries to simulate the hydraulic behaviour of the aquifer.

These are also known as numerical models.
  The earlier discussion in section 6.5 on spring  hydro- graph analysis provides examples of the   black-box approach.   These   models   subsume   the   flow processes within the aquifer into response  functions and are non- physical in nature, so often lack predictive power and are limited when spatially variable  output phenomena (e.g. well water levels) have to be modelled. Hence distributed parameter models, which  are deterministic models based on physical  relationships, represent a viable alternative.





Figure 6.43 (a) Proportional geometric model of Castleguard II conduit system, Canada. Reproduced from Smart, C.C. (1983b) The hydrology of the Castleguard Karst, Columbia Icefields, Alberta, Canada. Arctic and Alpine Research, 15(4), 471–86. (b) Cave Creek floodwater maze system, New Zealand. Reproduced from Crawford, S.J. (1994) Hydrology and geomorphology of the Paparoa Karst, north Westland, New Zealand. Auckland Univ. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, New Zealand, pp. 240.





Figure 6.44 (a) Equipotentials and flowlines in an ideal porous aquifer. (b) Equipotentials and flowlines in an ideal karst aquifer. Reproduced from Worthington, S.R.H. (2004) Hydraulic and geologic factors influencing conduit flow depth. Caves and  Karst Science, 31(3), 123–34.


However, when considering the adequacy of  alternative modelling approaches it is important to be clear about the objective: whether it is to model flow  (hydraulic heads, groundwater fluxes and spring  discharge) or to model transport (flow direction,   velocity and destination). One should also recognize  that transport models often are inadequate in karst  because of the strong control exerted by fracture and  conduit systems of unknown location. These problems  and others are confronted in Palmer et al. (1999).
  Building an appropriate conceptual model of the aqui- fer  is  the  most  important  part  of  the  whole  modelling process. Figure 6.46 shows an early conceptualization by Drogue (1980). However, the  amount of detail required depends on the scale of interest: flow in individual fissures as compared to flow in the entire aquifer. For aquifer-scale modelling, which  is our concern here, understanding the pathways and  stores involved in water movement to the spring and  how the geometry of the system influences flow is central to conceptual modelling. Digital model- ling requires us to come to grips with what is happening in the field, and every design step requires an intimate knowledge of the physical system and the processes operating within it.
  
An important part of a conceptual model is the defini- tion of its boundary conditions, which are along all edges of the domain being simulated. Domenico and Schwartz (1998) explain that there are two commonly used bound- ary  conditions:  (i)  specified  hydraulic  head  boundaries and (ii) specified flow boundaries. Sometimes these can be readily associated with natural  hydrogeological bound- aries, such as an underlying  aquiclude (impermeable basement), or a no-flow boundary such as a watershed or faulted margin. Inflow and outflow boundaries are also important. An input boundary could be specified as having constant hydraulic head conditions (e.g. an influent stream), although in practice rates of recharge (and discharge) vary over time and space, so are difficult to measure and define. A  transient model requires hydraulic head to vary as a function of time.
  There are four major conceptual approaches to model- ling karst groundwater flow:

1. the equivalent porous medium (EPM);
2. the discrete fracture network;
3. the double porosity continuum;
4. the triple porosity approach – matrix, fracture and conduit.




Figure 6.45 (a) Paths followed by tracers injected at 54 locations in the Mammoth Cave groundwater basin as simulated using an equivalent porous medium model. (b) Actual paths followed by tracer dyes determined by field investigation in the  Mammoth Cave groundwater basin. These cut across the simulated paths because they follow karst conduits to springs.  Reproduced from Worthington, S.R.H. (2004) Hydraulic and geologic factors influencing conduit flow depth. Caves and Karst Science, 31(3), 123–34.






Figure 6.46 Conceptual model of a karst aquifer showing: (a) a highly permeable upper zone (epikarst) with closely spaced fissures; (b) largely unweathered blocks with fissures that permit slow flow; (c) high-permeability karst conduits that permit rapid flow. Reproduced from Drogue, C., Absorption massive d’eau de mer par des aquiferes karstiques cotiers. In Gu¨nay, G., Johnson, A.I.,  and  Back,  W.  (eds).  Hydrogeological  Processes  in  Karst Terranes, IAHS Pub 207, 119–128. © 1990 International Asso- ciation of Hydrological Sciences.

We will briefly discuss each in turn, while recalling that the principal differences between single-, double- and triple-porosity aquifers are outlined in Table 5.11.
6.11.1 Equivalent continuum models
These are appropriate for well-connected porous media or fractured systems at a fairly large scale where  informa- tion is sought on average behaviour rather than on details of flow paths. They treat large areas as  having uniform structural and hydraulic properties and  so do not ade- quately represent the complex flow field in well-karstified heterogeneous and anisotropic conditions. Domenico and Schwartz (1998) provide a  description of groundwater flow simulation as applied  to standard porous media. They outline methods used to formulate a finite-difference equation for aquifer simulation and, in particular, explain the groundwater industry-standard MODFLOW family of codes, which are digital models designed to calculate head, flow patterns and contaminant transport within an aquifer (Harbaugh and McDonald 1996). The MODFLOW codes are based on a single-continuum porous medium concept and use a three-dimensional grid of columns, rows  and layers to identify cells for which hydraulic  conditions are simulated. In a karst context these models must be used with great  care (Figure 6.45), because  the assumptions associated with Darcy’s Law are  assumed to apply (iso- tropic, homogeneous medium with laminar flow), but we know that this is seldom applicable in karst (section 5.7).
6.11.2 
Discrete fracture (or conduit) network models
Discrete fracture models describe flow within individual fractures  or  conduits,  but  ignore  matrix  characteristics. Examples were provided in section 5.1 when discussing flow through pipes and fissures. For example, equations (5.7) and (5.12) describe laminar flow through pipes and fissures,   respectively,   and   equations (5.8), (5.9) and (5.11) describe turbulent  flow  through  conduits.  Such models  are  of  limited  use at the scale of the aquifer because of the computational power required to account for every   fracture or conduit, but  this  limitation  is disappearing as supercomputers open up the prospect of modelling whole networks of fissures.

6.11.3 Double porosity: matrix and fracture, matrix and conduit, or fracture and conduit
These multiple-continuum models apply to karst aquifers that  are  considered  as  being  adequately  represented  by dual matrix–fissure, matrix–conduit or   fissure–conduit groundwater systems. They are currently the most useful models for simulating observed aquifer conditions in karst (e.g. Kiraly 1998, 2002, Liedl and Sauter 1998, Adams and Parkin 2002, Kova´cs 2003). They treat the porous matrix and the fractured medium blocks (or the low-permeability fractured medium and  the high-permeability conduit network) as two separate overlapping continua, each with its own characteristic hydraulic and geometric parameters and flow equations (Figure 6.47). The coupling of the two media is handled with a source–link term in each equation, the exchange of flow being controlled by the local differ- ence in potentials. The epikarst can also be treated sepa- rately and be linked to the main aquifer (Figure 6.48).
  Such  models  are  appropriate  in  large  systems  where well-connected fractures provide the dominant flow paths and matrix porosities are high enough to  provide sig- nificant storage and exchange of water or when conduits provide the dominant flow paths but fracture porosity is high enough to provide significant storage and exchange of water and is well connected to pipe flow, intervening matrix permeability being  negligible (Liedl and Sauter 1998). Connectivity controls flow, but when both perme- abilities are  comparable flow can pass from fractures through the matrix (or from conduits through the fracture system)    and so  fracture  connectivity  (or  conduit connectivity) becomes unimportant. Sauter (1992) and Teutsch (1993) described the application of such models to  karst  in  the  Swabian  Alb  in  southern  Germany  and Kiraly (1998) and Kova´cs (2003) provide  examples from Switzerland using combined continuum and discrete channel approaches. Kova´cs (2003)  integrated epikarst and saturated zone models and  demonstrated that the subcutaneous layer can modify   the  global  hydraulic






Figure 6.47 Simple conceptual model of a karst aquifer. Characteristic hydraulic and geometric parameters are shown for the low-permeability matrix and intersecting conduit net- work. Tm and Sm are transmissivity and storativity respectively of the matrix. Kc and Sc represent conductivity and storage coeffi- cient of the karst conduits. The spatial extent of the aquifer  is A,  the  spacing  of  conduits  is  L  and  their  frequency  f.  The recession coefficient of the karst spring is a. Reproduced from Kova´cs, A. Geometry and hydraulic parameters of karst aquifers: a hydrodynamic modeling approach. Faculte´ des  Sciences, Universite´  de Neuchaˆtel Thesis, 2003.

response of the entire system by decreasing its recession coefficient. Adams and Parkin (2002) described construc- tion of a physically based model that (i) couples a pipe network to a variably saturated three-dimensional porous medium, (ii) couples surface features such as sinking streams and springs to the conduit system and (iii) includes a bypass flow mechanism to represent fast  flow vertical infiltration through the epikarst. This has similarities to the model used by Clemens et al. (1999).
6.11.4 Triple porosity: matrix, fracture and conduit
This concept is of particular significance to karst, because storage is often dominant in the rock matrix and fissure system (Table 5.2) whereas flow is achieved mainly through conduits  (Table  5.7).  In a  triple-porosity  model aquifer flow is assumed to be laminar in the matrix pores and fissure system, but commonly turbulent in  conduits (or macrofissures). The development of  realistic triple- porosity models for karst aquifers represents the frontier in karst hydrogeological modelling (e.g. Maloszewski et al. 2002). It is the ideal approach  for karst, but is currently barely practicable because the  data are often unavailable and the level of detail required may be beyond the current computing capability of most computers. An example for dissolutional conduit genesis is shown in Chapter 7.
  From this brief review of hydrogeological modelling as applied to karst aquifers, therefore, we can see that  for practical purposes we have to deal with less than perfect

modelling alternatives. A valuable discussion of the use of equivalent porous media models in karst has been provided by Scanlon et al. (2003). They evaluated  two different equivalent porous media approaches (lumped (or black box) and distributed parameter) in a well-karstified, partly confined groundwater basin  within  the  Edwards aquifer  in  Texas.  The  MODFLOW code  was  used  for  a distributed  parameter model, and five cells representing tributary subsystems were used in the lumped parameter model.  Transient simulations were conducted using both models for a 10-year period. They found that both  the distributed and lumped models simulated fairly accurately the temporal variability in spring discharge,  but neither model could simulate the local direction or rate of water flow. The distributed parameter model  generally repro- duced the potentiometric surface at  different times, but more detailed evaluation of the  effect of pumping on groundwater levels and spring  discharge required a dis- tributed parameter modelling approach. The lumped para- meter model has the advantage of simplicity, ease of use and low data  requirements, but the distributed parameter model is  required to simulate the potentiometric surface, which is necessary to represent regional groundwater flow direction. The distributed parameter model is much more complex, is difficult to parameterize, has large data require- ments, and needs longer times to run; however, the MOD- FLOW code on which it is based is widely used and tested. Key conclusions were that (i) both models could simulate spring flow satisfactorily, but the equivalent porous media models (ii) could not simulate  local direction or rate of groundwater flow, because  major conduits are not expli- citly represented and   because turbulent  flow  is  not included, and (iii)  could not accomplish objectives such as delineation of protection zones for wells and springs or simulation of point source contamination. The use of these models in karst should therefore be restricted to evaluation of regional groundwater flow issues. Scanlon et al. (2003) concluded, like many others, that it is questionable whether any modelling approach can predict direction and rate of groundwater flow from a point source, because many tracer tests demonstrate that directions and rates of flow can be quite variable.
  Palmer et al. (1999, p. 105) expressed the opinion that ‘the heterogeneity of karst aquifers is so severe that it is virtually impossible to acquire sufficient field information to construct a predictive digital model trustworthy enough to allow extrapolation of heads and flow condi- tions from known to unknown locations, let alone into the future’, but ‘on the other hand, digital models are  well suited to revealing the interactions among water  flow, chemistry, and geological setting under idealized condi- tions’.  The  purpose  of  the  model  is  therefore  a critical consideration.





Figure 6.48 (Upper) The coupling of the epikarst to the main aquifer in a finite-element model of a karstified syncline. (Lower) Variation of hydraulic head in a karstified syncline following recharge by concentrated infiltration through the epikarst. Reproduced from Kiraly, L., Karstification and groundwater flow. In Gabrovsˇek, F. (Ed.) Evolution of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation. Postojna- Ljubljana: Institut za raziskovanje krasa, ZRC SAZU, p. 155–90, 2002.


  We urgently need to improve our capacity to manage karst water resources sustainably. Thus the development of models that adequately represent karst aquifers is vital. Simply because MODFLOW is so widely circulated and  used  in  the  hydrogeology  world,  efforts  are  being made to adapt the code for karst conduits, trialling what are called ‘smeared’, ‘embedded’ and ‘dual’ approaches. The smeared case drops a high density grid into the basic MODFLOW  grid  of  nodes  to  provide  an accelerated flow-through path under Darcian conditions; the embedded conduit  is  built  of  short  links between adjoining mesh nodes that have a larger transfer capacity than other routes; and the dual conductivity case has a conduit cutting across the mesh, but with added nodes wherever it crosses that framework,   thus  permitting   easier  transfers.   We  look forward to seeing advances in this critical field  of karst research.

Despite the impressive nature of many digital models, we must not forget that they are only representations of reality. They are not susceptible to proof, although their fidelity can be verified by comparing model output with the observed characteristics of the system being mod- elled, e.g. spring hydrograph or chemograph  behaviour, variations in hydraulic head, direction of  groundwater flow, and so on. The discrepancy  between observed conditions and the ideal model can  be  a  great  help  in clarifying   field   conditions   (Palmer et al.  1999)  and provides guidance for  further study. Modern modelling techniques also  enable us to explore quantitatively the relationships    between hydrogeological environment and aquifer   properties, and thus enable concepts of conduit development and speleogenesis to be investigated and    validated. This is examined further in  the next chapter.


7

Speleogenesis: The Development   of Cave Systems


7.1 CLASSIFYING CAVE SYSTEMS
In Chapter 5 it was shown that patterns of interconnected conduits created by bedrock dissolution determine the characteristic behaviour of well-developed karst aquifers, differentiating  them  from  the  simpler  granular  (matrix) and fracture types of aquifers. These patterns are systems of  caves  and  proto-caves.  Their   development  is  the subject of this chapter.
  Dissolutional cave systems are among the most com- plex of all landforms. This is because they ramify in  a great variety of three-dimensional patterns in rock masses that exert many different influences upon their organiza- tion, extent and shape. They are further  affected by hydrochemical factors dependent upon petrological, tec- tonic, climatic, biotic and pedologic  conditions, and by external baselevel controls. They may survive in the rock as  active  or  relict  features  after these conditions have ceased to apply, and  perhaps be altered under radically different conditions.
  Being so varied, there are many different ways in which solution caves are described and interpreted.  No single theory of genesis has been able to encompass them all except at a trivial level of explanation and there is no one classification that accommodates all the  needs of geomorphologists, hydrogeologists, economic geologists, environmental scientists, etc.
7.1.1 Definitions of caves
The definition adopted by most dictionaries and by  the International Speleological Union is that a cave is  a natural underground opening in rock that is large enough

for   human   entry.   This   definition   has   merit   because investigators can obtain direct information  only from such caves, but it is not a genetic  definition. From Chapter 3, we define a karst cave as an opening enlarged by dissolution to a diameter sufficient for ‘breakthrough’ kinetic rates to apply if the  hydrodynamic setting will permit them. Normally, this means a conduit greater than 5–15 mm in diameter or  width, the effective minimum aperture required to cross the threshold from laminar to turbulent flow (section 5.3.2)
  Isolated caves are voids that are not and were not
connected to any water input or output points by conduits of these minimum dimensions. Such non-integrated caves range from vugs to, possibly, some of the large  rooms occasionally encountered in mining and drilling. Proto- caves extend from an input or an output point  and may connect them, but are not yet enlarged to  cave dimensions.
  Where a conduit of breakthrough diameter or  greater extends continuously between the input points and output points of a karst rock it constitutes an  integrated cave system. Most enterable caves are  portions of such sys- tems. In this chapter we are  concerned principally with the building of integrated  cave systems, but for brevity will refer to them simply as ‘caves’.
7.1.2 Caves and their classification
Tens of thousands of solution caves have been explored, in part at least, and many thousands of them are accurately mapped.  Table  7.1  lists  some  approaches  to classifying them. The longest and deepest mapped  caves (as at April 2005) are given in Table 7.2 and  Figure 7.1. The


Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd



Table 7.1   Some classifications of dissolution caves

By internal characteristics	In relation to external factors

By size: aggregate length or depth or volume	Modes of geological control: rock type (limestone, gypsum, By measure of vertical or horizontal dimensions		etc.); joint-guided, fault-guided, etc.; horizontal strata,
By plan form: entrance or niche (abri), chamber (room),	steeply dipping, folded, etc.
linear passage, branchwork, network, anastomosis,	By topographic setting: mountain caves, plateau caves, etc. spongework, ramiform; multiphase branchworks,	By relation to topography: underdrain valley or valley flank, rectilinear combinations	meander cut-off (short cut), connect poljes, foot cave, etc.
By passage cross-section form: circular or elliptical,	By role in fluvial system: allogenic river caves, holokarst drains, canyon, breakdown, compound		short-cut caves, combinations, sea cave, etc.
By relation to local or regional water table: vadose,	By aquifer type: ideal pipe cave ! continuum ! perfect water-table cave, phreatic, compound, relict		spongework cave
By categories of deposits: speleothem cave,	By role in geomorphological and hydrological cycles: gypsum (crystal) cave, sand cave,		active cave ! episodic ! relict cave (preserved,
ice cave, archaeological site, etc.	intercepted, truncated, destroyed)
By climatic setting: humid tropical, semi-arid, mediterranean, temperate, alpine, arctic, etc.



statistical distributions are highly skewed. This is primar- ily a function of exploration difficulties. A majority  of caves have been explored for less than 1 km and  pene- trated to less than 100 m in depth; the number of greater examples increases by dozens or hundreds every year, but the form of the distribution curves remains  largely the same.
  The Mammoth Cave system in Kentucky (see Figure 7.11) has maintained its position as the world’s longest  set  of  interconnected  passageways  for  most  of the years since the 1840s, when some 25 km were known. It is developed in a thickness of no more  than 100 m of limestones, but they are nearly flat  lying and the caves extend as multiphase branchworks  at  several levels  beneath  sandstone  ridges  that  preserve the older passages. Optimisticeskaya and  other great caves in Ukraine (see Figure 7.27) are rectilinear mazes in gypsum strata only 12–30 m thick, but again they are flat lying in low plateaus beneath protective cover strata. Jewel Cave and Wind Cave are  three-dimensional thermal water mazes in gently  domed  limestone  hills.  Ho¨lloch  is  a mountain  cave  in quite steeply dipping limestones, as are caves 8, 11, 12, 14, 15, 18, 19 and 25 in Table 7.2. Lechuguilla and  the nearby Carlsbad Caverns (31 km) are ramiform systems in ancient reef rocks overlooking a modern desert. In contrast, cave 9 and 24 in Table 7.2 are anastomosing river caves in flat, very young rocks, now drowned by the post-glacial rise of global sea level. Friar’s Hole lies beneath a deep valley in shales and sandstones  where  the  limestone  is  scarcely  exposed  at

all. These longest caves thus display a wide range of physical type and setting. They have in common the indefatigability of their explorers.
  There is less variety amongst the deepest caverns. It is infeasible to dive below ~300 m in water-filled caves at present;  therefore,  the  deepest  known  caverns  occur  in mountain massifs where the drained depth will be greatest. Most are in the alpine ranges of Europe and the Caucasus because these are the most intensively explored. Recently, exploration in the highlands of Mexico has  added some tropical contenders. All are alike in being systems of shafts and steeply descending stream  canyons that terminate at siphons or breakdown  barriers. Only the highly complex Siebenhengste–Hohgant  System,  Switzerland,  occurs  in both the longest and deepest lists.
  When actually underground most cave scientists cate- gorize caves by the passage shapes – vadose, phreatic or breakdown – that they see about them, or by their deposits. But extensive cave systems may display all of the differing forms and a wide variety of deposits, so that these   characteristics   are   not   well   suited   for   general classification.
  A majority of karst researchers are concerned with surface landforms or hydrological studies and so classify the unseen plumbing in terms of appropriate external factors, as in Chapter 5 and Table 7.1b. Some geological factors will be stressed later in this chapter. Relationships with topography and with the fluvial systems are of particular relevance to hydrogeologists. Some caves simply underdrain valleys, others abstract water across



Table 7.2   The longest and deepest caves, as at December 2006. (National Speleological Society of America list).


Number
Cave name
Country
Length (km)
Depth (m)
Longest
1
Mammoth Cave System
U.S.A.
590
116.0

2
Jewel Cave
U.S.A.
218
193.0

3
Optimisticeskaja (Optymistychna) (Gypsum)
Ukraine
215
15.0

4
Wind Cave
U.S.A.
196
202.0

5
Hoelloch
Switzerland
194
939.0

6
Lechuguilla Cave
U.S.A.
187
489.0

7
Fisher Ridge Cave System
U.S.A.
177
109.0

8
Siebenhengste-hohgant Hoehlensystem
Switzerland
149
1340.0

9
Sistema Ox Bel Ha (Under Water)
Mexico
144
34.0

10
Gua Air Jernih (Clearwater Cave-Black
Malaysia
129
355.0


11
  Rock-White Rock) Ozernaja (Gypsum)

Ukraine

124

8.0

12
Systeme de Ojo Guarena
Spain
110
193.0

13
Bullita Cave System (Burke’s Back Yard)
Australia
110
23.0

14
Reseau Felix Trombe / Henne-Morte
France
106
975.0

15
Toca da Boa Vista
Brazil
102
50.0

16
Shuanghedongqun
China
100
265.0

17
HirlatzHoehle
Austria
95
1070.0

18
Sistema Purificacion
Mexico
94
953.0

19
Zolushka (Gypsum)
Moldova/Ukraine
90
30.0

20
RaucherkarHoehle
Austria
84
758.0

21
Sistema Sac Actun (Under Water)
Mexico
80
25.0

22
Sistema del Alto del Tejuelo
Spain
78
605.0

23
Friars Hole Cave System
U.S.A.
73
191.0

24
Easegill System
United Kingdom
71
211.0

25
Sistema Nohoch Nah Chich (Under Water)
Mexico
68
72
Deepest
1
Krubera (Voronja) Cave
Abkhazia
10
2158.0

2
Lamprechtsofen Vogelschacht Weg Schacht
Austria
50
1632.0

3
Gouffre Mirolda / Lucien Bouclier
France
13
1626.0

4
Reseau Jean Bernard
France
20
1602.0

5
Torca del Cerro del Cuevon (T.33)-Torca de las Saxifragas
Spain
7
1589.0

6
Sarma
Abkhazia
6
1543.0

7
Shakta Vjacheslav Pantjukhina
Abkhazia
6
1508.0

8
Cehi 2
Slovenia
5
1502.0

9
Sistema Cheve (Cuicateco)
Mexico
26
1484.0

10
Sistema Huautla
Mexico
56
1475.0

11
Sistema del Trave
Spain
9
1441.0

12
Evren Gunay Dudeni (Sinkhole)
Turkey
0
1429.0

13
Boj-Bulok
Uzbekistan
14
1415.0

14
Sima de las Puertas de Illaminako Ateeneko
Spain
14
1408.0


15
  Leizea (BU.56) Kuzgun Cave

Turkey

0

1400.0

16
Sustav Lukina jama - Trojama (Manual II)
Croatia
1
1392.0

17
Sniezhnaja-Mezhonnogo (Snezhaya)
Abkhazia
19
1370.0

18
Sistema Aranonera (Sima S1-S2)(Tendenera connected)
Spain
43
1349.0

19
Gouffre de la Pierre Saint Martin
France / Spain
54
1342.0

20
Siebenhengste-hohgant Hoehlensystem
Switzerland
154
1340.0

21
Sima de la Cornisa
Spain
5
1330.0

22
Slovacka jama
Croatia
3
1320.0

23
Poljska jama - Mala Boka System
Slovenia
9
1319.0

24
Abisso Paolo Roversi
Italy
4
1300.0

25
Cosanostraloch-Berger-Platteneck    Hoehlesystem
Austria








Figure 7.1 Rank/size correlation plots  (Zipf  diagrams)  of the 100 longest and deepest known cave systems. This is a means of predicting size distributions. The log of rank (e.g. No. 1 (log ¼ 0) for Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, the longest known cave, is plotted against the log of its length in kilometres. According to this rank/size rule, Mammoth Cave should be
~250 km in length; it is currently 579 km and gravely distorts  the linear relationship, as seen. Lengths of other caves obey the rule quite closely. Cave depth distribution obeyed the rule closely until the summer of 2004, when the Voronja-Krubera system of Georgia was extended from —1710 m to —2160 m, a giant leap downwards.

topographic divides. A very common category is the subterranean piracy that forms a short cut across the neck of an incised river meander or through a spur  or bypassing a knickpoint (see Figure 7.6). Some of these are ‘ideal pipes’, being single straight conduits that neither gain nor lose significant quantities of water during comparatively short passes underground.
  Caves   are   most   frequent   in   the   wettest   climates. However, large caves do occur in the desert  Nullarbor Plain of Australia (section 10.2). There is little relation- ship between climate and most aspects of  cave form

although the largest river cave passages are created  by the largest rivers (e.g. Figure 7.2). These are  usually allogenic, as in the case of the magnificent Mulu Caves of Sarawak, but Nare Cave and other  discoveries in New Britain are largely autogenic.  Some very large passages, such as Carlsbad Caverns  (see Figure 7.33), display no relation to the modern  topography, fluvial channels or  groundwater  systems   at all. They are known because surface erosion has chanced to intercept them.
  Classifying  caves  by  these  external  factors  does  not explain the structures that the systems adopt or the form of their component parts. Table 7.3 presents a  simple classification  that  is  generically  based.  It  is  not well balanced. Three quarters or more of caves  that have been adequately described and mapped must  be placed in the first class. These are caves created  by meteoric waters circulating in karst rocks without  any unusual constraints such as confinement below  aquiclude strata. These we call ‘unconfined caves’.  Other classes cover those caves formed under unusual geological constraints or where unusual waters are present. They are discussed in the later sections of the chapter.
  Many caves display multiple phases of  development. One phase ends in a cave and another begins when: (i) a spring  position  is  shifted  upwards  or downwards suffi- ciently to compel the creation of extensive new passages; or (ii) there is an externally  caused change of water quality or  quantity  that   results in net  cave  infilling where net erosion prevailed before, or vice versa. Section
7.5 discusses effects of the shift of springs, i.e. local or regional baselevel change. Net erosion–deposition changes are considered in Chapter 8 because they  involve cave deposits.
7.1.3 System information
Cave systems are the functional equivalent of river net- works in fluvial geomorphology. During the past 60 year morphometric  analyses  of  channel  and  basin  properties have led to major advances in our understanding of them. There has been relatively little  of this in speleology because comprehensiveness is  lacking in cave-system information in almost every  case. Many passages are too small to enter; others are sealed by breakdown, sand, etc. Either it is not known where they originate or where they terminate. In a majority of the great systems much of the passage is water-filled. Cave diving is hazardous, so that only a  few active phreatic caves have been well mapped.  Most morphometric success so far has been obtained  with small features such as dissolutional scal- lops  and alluvial sediment samples, working in local





Figure 7.2   The river cave at Nanxu, Guangxi Province, China. (Photograph by Andy Eavis, with permission.)

sections of caves. These are summarized at the end  of this chapter and in the  next.  There  is  lacking   any substantial body of quantitative results that can  link these small-scale findings to the highly   generalized

system descriptions obtained from the dye-tracing and hydrograph analysis discussed in Chapter 6. That is one   of   the   major   challenges   for   future   students   of caves.



Table 7.3   Classification of karst solution caves

A Normal meteoric waters
Unconfined circulation in karst rocks (¼ hypergene caves)
1 Branchwork caves (80% of known caves?)

Confined circulation in karst rocks,
2 Maze caves and outlet

or partial circulation in non-karstic
basal injection caves

rocks; includes some hypogene caves
3 Combinations of types 1 and 2
B Deep enriched waters
Enriched by exhalative CO2 (normally,
4 Hydrothermal caves

  thermal waters); hypogene caves
Enriched in H2S, etc. (basin waters,
  (~10% of known caves?)
5 Carlsbad-type cavities and

connate waters)
gypsum replacement caves
C Brackish waters
Chiefly marine and fresh waters mixing
6 Coastal mixing zone cavities
D
Combinations of B or C with A,
7 Hybrid caves
developing in sequence




7.1.4 ‘Speleogenesis’ and other sources of information
A major volume entitled Speleogenesis: Evolution of Karst  Aquifers  (Klimchouk  et  al.  2000)  has  been  pro- duced by the International Union of Speleology and the National  Speleological  Society  of  America.  Dozens of authors from 17 different nations combined their efforts to offer a comprehensive review of cave genesis, in much greater detail and with many more  case studies than is possible within the confines of  this chapter. Where we describe particular cave  genetic features here without giving specific references, it is usually because they can be found in that volume.  Following it, Speleogenesis, a Virtual Scientific Journal was established by Klimchouk at   www.speleogenesis.net. It publishes new papers, abstracts of others, and reviews.
  Atlas of the Great Caves of the World (Courbon et al. 1989) presents maps, sections and summary overviews of the more prominent caves in 118 nations. In Europe most nations with  caves  have national  and/or  regional  mono- graphs that provide more details, especially of  the geo- logical settings. In the USA there are many  state-wide surveys, and the National Speleological  Society pub- lishes focused cave symposia from time to time. To our knowledge, Argentina, Australia, Brazil,  China, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa, Turkey and Venezuela have also published substantial national and regional reviews. For example, Finlayson and  Hamilton-Smith  (2003) have edited a book on the natural history of Australian caves.
  Speleogenesis (Klimchouk et al. 2000) took a very logical approach to the discussion of types of caves, beginning   with   those   that   develop   in   young,   newly emerged rocks at  the  coast,  proceeding   through the hypogene (deep) cavities that may be  formed when these rocks are buried and altered  beneath later strata, and concluding with hypergene   (unconfined) caves formed when the now  diagenetically mature rocks are exposed to meteoric groundwater circulation.
  Here we take the reverse approach, dealing with  the unconfined caves first, because these are central to under- standing much of karst hydrogeology and  surface geo- morphology. Hypogene and coastal caves are considered more briefly afterwards.
7.2 BUILDING THE PLAN PATTERNS   OF UNCONFINED CAVES
The common patterns are single passages that are com- paratively short (e.g. cutting off incised river meanders) or the varieties of lengthier branchworks shown in  the four left-hand, upper frames of Figure 5.23.  Angular

patterns  predominate  where  joints  or  steep  faults  offer the most penetrable routes for water, and sinuous patterns more like those of river channels where bedding planes are more important. Although some caves may  be grid networks or anastomoses in their entirety,  more fre- quently these particular patterns appear as  subsidiary components in larger branchworks.
7.2.1 Initial conditions
In section 5.2 we examined the controls on the develop- ment of karst aquifers, concluding that the orientation of the  maximum  hydraulic  gradient  will  reflect  a  balance between the direction in which resistance to flow is least (i.e. where hydraulic conductivity is maximized) and the direction in which the rate of energy loss is maximized (i.e. the shortest and steepest route). In  this section we examine the principles that govern the  propagation of
solution conduits through the fissures (a term encom-
passing bedding planes and joint and fault fractures) and down the gradient. Before dissolution begins, minimum apertures of connected voids in the fissures  are small,
~10 mm to 1 mm, and their aggregate volume is also
small. Available runoff thus is readily able to fill  them and the water table is consequently at or near the ground surface. Flow is to dammed springs (Fig. 5.17), the principal type. These are simplified  conditions that, because of diagenetic or tectonic  history as noted in Chapters 2 and 5, will not always  prevail, but they form an acceptable starting point for our discussion.
  Figure 7.3 presents a hypothetical situation to provide the hydrogeological framework for this section and  the next. It is drawn for the case of steep stratal dip  with regional flow in the direction of that dip, because this is easy to illustrate. With the mind’s eye, readers  may flatten the dip to the horizontal or even reverse it  away from  the  output  boundary.  Strata  may  be  folded, or the output flow boundary (potential spring  line) may be shifted to the strike on one or both  sides of the model. The analysis remains the same.
  The   model   and   analysis   are   for   bedding   planes, because these are areally the most continuous  entities permitting groundwater flow in the majority of settings, and normally display greater deviations about  the mean aperture than do joints (Figure 2.15). For conduit propa- gation in normal vertical joints, tip the model on edge.
  In this section of the chapter we are concerned  only with plan patterns, that is with propagation in the dimen- sions of length and breadth in one plane (plane A here). Connections with underlying planes such as B,  C,  D, etc.  introduce  the  depth  dimension  and  are  dealt with in the following section. The analysis is  based upon a





Figure 7.3   Conceptual model structure to explain the development of unconfined cave systems in penetrable bedding planes A to D and joint systems in between them.


systematic sequence of hardware model experiments conducted at McMaster University in 1972–5 by  Ewers (1982),  and  field  studies  by  Ford  (1965a,  1968, 1971b). Ewers investigated a variety of initial  situations using electrical and sand-model flowfield analogues, and direct dissolutional simulations with  Plaster of Paris  and salt (see Figure  7.5a). Since  1980, this approach has been replaced by intensive computer modeling, chiefly using finite elements or  two-dimensional grids with nodes, and more recently   the random aperture convention (Figure 2.15).  Dreybrodt (University of Bremen) and his students have been at the forefront of the work (see Bauer 2002, Dreybrodt and Gabrovsˇek 2002, Dreybrodt 2004,  Dreybrodt et al. 2005). With great computing capability  now  available  at  low  cost,  there  is  a  bright future for cave genetic modelling: thus far it has largely served to confirm Ewers’ hardware findings.
7.2.2 Conduit propagation with a single input
This is the most simple situation (Figures 7.4a and 7.5a and c). Length of the fissure between input and  output may be no more  than  1 m  (in  which  case   we are considering the karren or epikarst scale of aquifer devel- opment) or as great as 10 km. The pressure head ranges from the thickness of a single limestone bed to hundreds

of metres. The initial mode of flow is laminar within the plane and can be treated as Darcian.
  Distributary patterns of solutional capillary tubes (proto-caves) develop that extend preferentially in the direction  of  the  hydraulic  gradient.  Their  rates  of


Figure 7.4   (a) The competitive extension of a proto-cave from  a single input to an output boundary in plane A. Dashed lines are equipotentials; P, principal (or victor) tube; S, subsidiary tubes.
(b) Competitive extension where there are multiple inputs in one rank. Numbers and dashed lines indicate the predicted sequence of breakthrough connections that  will  occur  and  their  location. (Both figures based on hardware simulations by Ewers 1982.)





Figure 7.5   (a) A hardware simulation of proto-cave propagation through a bedding-plane type fissure, using Plaster of  Paris (gypsum) as the medium and with a constant head applied. Reproduced from Ewers, R.O. (1982) Cavern development  in the dimensions oflength and breadth. McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, 398 pp. (b) A computer simulation of the multiple inputs in one rank case. Reproduced from Dreybrodt, W. and Gabrovsˇek, F. (2002) Basic processes and mechanisms governing the evolution of karst, in Evolution of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation (ed. F. Gabrovsˇek), Institut za raziskovanje krasa, ZRC SAZU, Postojna-Ljubljana, pp. 115–54. (c) We believe that this is the most elaborate computer simulation of cave development yet attempted. It considers a single input into a Rajaram-type random aperture bedding plane at a depth of 2 m. Flow from the plane into the matrix and out again is incorporated in a three-dimensional mesh 500 m in length, 100 m wide and 3 m deep, that  incorporates >400 000 nodes. Two iterations to breakthrough are shown on the right. Using solubility data from Niagaran dolomites, a hydraulic gradient of 0.002 and reasonable PCO2 values, breakthrough is achieved in about 15 000 year. Reproduced from Annable,W.K. (2003) Numerical analysis of
conduit evolution in karstic aquifers. Univ. of Waterloo PhD thesis, 139 pp.


extension are determined by solvent penetration distance (section 3.10) and the factors that control it. Actual courses adopted, metre by metre, depend upon geological microfeatures of the plane.
  In electrical analogue terms, all tubes are connected in series  with  the  dissolutionally  unmodified  plane  down- stream of them. The latter maintains high resistance, so that flow everywhere is slow and small in amount. Varia- tions in cross-section and other properties of the tubes are insignificant while this high resistance element remains.
  In every experiment one tube chances to grow ahead of others.  It  deforms  the  equipotential  field,  reducing  the gradients at the solution fronts of its competitors  (‘sub- sidiaries’) and thus slowing their rates of advance. When this ‘principal’ or ‘victor’ tube attains the output bound- ary, three important effects can occur in succession, and rapidly when compared with the slow  advance of the proto-caves previously. First, kinetic   breakthrough  is

quickly achieved, accelerating the rate of enlargement of the tube (Chapter 3). Second, there is  hydrodynamic breakthrough if/when flow becomes turbulent, destroying Darcy flow conditions (Chapter  5). Third, when suffi- ciently large the tube (now a  regular karst conduit) can create a trough in the water table. The equipotential field is reoriented onto it, creating yet greater inhomogeneity. In past writing (e.g. Ford 1971b) these early tubes were termed ‘dip tubes’,  because in steeply dipping strata where they were  first studied they are usually oriented close to stratal  dip. In reality they are gradient tubes
because they are broadly oriented down the hydraulic gradient. Here we name them primary tubes because they are the first conduits to develop in the fissure.
  The greater the aperture of the fissure before dissolution begins, the straighter and less branched is  its pattern of proto-caves. If it is a bedding plane with joints terminating at it or passing through it,   distributary  proto-caves




preferentially extend along the intersections. However, these will become ‘victor’ tubes only if they are favour- ably oriented with respect to the hydraulic gradient.
  When primary tubes enlarge following dynamic break- through, much of the subsidiary branchwork may be swallowed up. However, provided that a pressure  head is maintained, surviving elements can continue to extend slowly and may play an important role where  later pas- sages develop to create a multiphase cave (section 7.5). In other instances the subsidiary net may be sealed by clay and rendered inert.
  Where the output flow boundary is a line or zone, rather than a single spring point, it is common for several downstream   distributaries   to   connect   to   it   and   then expand, forming a small distributary network.
  This model describes development of the most simple cave, a single passage following a single bedding plane, joint or fault. Many short-cut caves are of this type (e.g. Figure 7.6 left).
7.2.3 Multiple inputs in a single rank
Here we may imagine a number of streams at the input boundary of plane A (Figures 7.4b and 7.5b). This is the common situation in a contact karst, where allogenic

streams  arrive  at  the  edge  of  a  limestone  outcrop,
e.g. the Baradla–Domica System, which straddles the Hungary–Slovakia border. Typical competitive devel- opment is seen in the figures. Because resistance is not isotropic in the fissure, because input pressure heads will never be precisely equal, or because some inputs are initiated before others, one or more of the input streams extend preferentially. Their flow envelope spaces are increased and those of competitors are diminished.
  The closer that parallel inputs such as these are spaced, the greater must be the competition. The steeper the hydraulic gradient, the greater will be the number of inputs with principal tubes that are able to reach the output  boundary  and  so  establish  separate  caves.  Very close spacing models the initial conditions for what will become so-called diffuse flow in the  epikarst   zone described in Chapter 5.
  When one proto-cave breaks through, the flow envel- opes (or equipotential fields) of its near neighbours  are reoriented towards it. Unless already close to the output boundary, the near-neighbour proto-caves will  be cap- tured as tributaries. In Figure 7.4b, capture is  in the sequence 2 ! 3 ! 4. The principles are further amplified in Figure 7.7. This is drawn for the case of a single point outlet (one spring) that lies to the strike with respect to




Figure 7.6 (Left) A spectacular example of meander cut-off caves from Arcy-sur-Cure, France. Although now appearing to be an instance of multiple inputs in one rank, development probably has occurred chiefly as a sequence of single inputs, beginning with Grande Grotte, shifting upstream to Systeme Moulinot as a consequence of river entrenchment, and then to Riviere des Goulettes- Barbe-Bleue. Adapted with permission from Haid, A. (1996) Yonne. Spelunca, 62, 14. © Copyright 1996, la Fe´de´ration franc¸aise de spe´le´ologie.





Figure 7.7 Illustrating the principles governing lateral connections between multiple inputs in a rank, where drainage is to the strike. (Upper) (a–c) The sequence of development where resistance in the fissure is high. Single connections at random points  occur between adjacent input proto-caves, creating irregular strike subsequent passages. (d–f) The sequence of development  where resistance is low. Multiple connections are achieved, increasing the likelihood that a horizontal water-table passage will be created as the cave enlarges. Modified from Ewers, R.O (1978) A model for the development of broadscale networks of  groundwater flow insteeply dipping carbonate aquifers. Transactions of the British Cave Research Association, 5, 121–5.(Lower) The main system, Das Ho¨lloch (Hellhole), Switzerland, the fifth longest known cave. The system is largely contained in one major bedding plane dipping at 12–200. Drainage is to the strike. This is a multiphase system with 400 m of relief. It is seen that principal passages are connected up in the manner of the high-resistance model. Reproduced from Bo¨gli, A. (1970) Le Holloch et son Karst, Editions la Baconnie´re, Neuchatel.




the near-neighbour inputs. Two different conditions  are envisaged. In Figure 7.7a–c the host fissure is tight, with high resistance. The conduit links that are  established, first, between victor tube 1 and tube 2, then between tubes 2 and 3 (and so forth) are quite random in their position on the plane. Subsidiaries of adjoining tubes that happen to be nearest each other when the  equipotential field is reoriented by newly established  connections will be the most likely to link up. In Figure 7.7d–f the fissure offers low resistance. Many alternative linkages can occur at the proto-cave and early cave scales. Those which offer the most direct route to the spring will win, creating a rather straight, near-horizontal  cave. In both cases the link-up routes are those of least resistance.
  We are now in a position to understand the basic structure of the Ho¨lloch (Switzerland), the fourth longest limestone cave that is known (Figure 7.7 lower). It is a multiphase sequence of trunk conduits draining along the strike in a major, faulted bedding plane that dips at 12–25○. The sinuous, highly irregular patterns on the plan occur because the trunk conduits ascend or descend subsidiaries and angle across the plane between them in the  manner  of  Figure  7.7a–c.  Link  lengths   between subsidiaries of different tubes range from 50  to 250 m. Most of the illustrated passages are now relict, although lower ones may flood during spring thaws,  etc. and so may be considered epiphreatic. A similar trunk conveys the modern water through an unexplored phreatic cave at lower elevation in the bedding plane. We may presume that subsidiaries are extending slowly  below this active trunk, setting up the situation for a  new trunk when external erosion lowers the spring elevation once again. Strike passages like this are  common structural com-
ponents of caves, although rarely are they as predominant as in Holloch. They are termed irregular strike subse- quents when displaying the high resistance form of Figure 7.7a–c, and regular strike subsequents in the low  resistance  form.  They  develop  in  inclined  joint  or thrust-fault planes as well as in bedding planes. Figure 7.8 presents a spectacular ‘head-on’ view of an  irregular example that has developed in unloading  fractures in marble.
  Gabrovsˇek and Dreybrodt (2000) amplified the single rank situation by modelling some potential effects of mixing corrosion. For example, an input with water equilibrated with PCO2   of 0.05 atm is flanked by  inputs with PCO2     merely 0.03 atm. Predictably, the  0.05 atm input breaks through first. Mixing corrosion  then accel- erates dissolution where the 0.03 atm inputs link up with it, producing more complex patterns of passage connec-
tion, with greater enlargement than shown in the simple cases of Figures 7.4 and 7.7. There are no attested field



Figure 7.8 A ‘head-on’ view of the underground outlet of Lake Glomdal, Svartisen, Norway. This shows a complex of 500 m of irregular strike passages developed in steeply dipping marbles. The guiding fissures are low-angle pressure-release fractures, all bedding planes having been sealed during metamorphosis.  All except the highest passages remain water-filled today; they were explored and mapped by divers. (Drawing  by   Stein-Erik Lauritzen, reproduced with permission.)
examples  of  this  complication  as  yet,  but  it  should  be considered when studying cave-passage patterns.
7.2.4 Inputs in multiple ranks
This is the situation most frequently encountered in karst systems. As presented in the highly schematic form  of Figure 7.9, it will be best understood if the reader  now imagines that plane A is horizontal and that the succes- sive ranks of inputs descend parallel joints to  reach it. The analysis, therefore, is appropriate for clint and grike topography, which is small in scale. With somewhat more complex input patterns, it also applies to polygonal karst of intermediate or large scale and to  most unconfined caves developed beneath it.
  The new element that is introduced in this situation is readily understood. The initial flowfields of further input ranks (rank 2 in Figure 7.9) are obstructed by those closest  to  the  output  flow  boundary.  Proto-caves   of further ranks can scarcely connect via joints to plane A until some near inputs have broken through to the output, reducing their resistance and steepening the hydraulic gradient in their rear (Figure 7.9A–C). Lateral  connec- tions in near ranks and first connections (principal tubes) from further ranks then proceed simultaneously. High- or low-resistance rules apply as in the single rank situation discussed above. The cave  systems will link together headwards and laterally  until all of the available karst rock area is  incorporated or some minimum hydraulic gradient (for the remaining resistance of the systems) is attained. As   systems expand to enterable or greater dimensions  their resistance becomes very low so that, given sufficient time and water, most areas of adequately





Figure 7.9  The initiation of cave systems with multiple ranks of inputs, drawn for the case of two ranks with constant  head conditions. (Upper left) Flowfield configurations limit rear rank access to an output boundary. (Lower left) The cave  network is connected up in a headward sequence, with recession of the zone of steep hydraulic gradient.


pure karst rocks will become drained by such cave systems.
  Figure 7.10 shows some computer modelling approaches to the multiple input case. Kaufmann and Braun (2000) assume a limestone that is well fractured and also very porous: thus, it is best suited to young, newly emerged limestones or to chalks. Subparallel conduits are initia- ted very close to the output  boundary and extend pro- gressively into the massif.  Dreybrodt and Gabrovsˇek (2002) assume a more  normal, low-porosity limestone block 1000 m in length and with a hydraulic gradient of
0.05 (a 5 m head). With reasonable PCO2 and supplies of water, a rank of inputs 500 m from the output boundary breakthrough at it after ~2500 year. Only then does the rear rank (1000 m from the output) begin to extend

significantly. The first hydrodynamic breakthrough to the near rank is achieved at ~5000 year.
  Figures 7.9 and 7.10 depict models with uniform conditions (e.g. of pressure head at the inputs) that cannot be   expected   in   reality.   Geological,   topographic   and hydrological variations will always distort it. For exam- ple, a larger stream with a higher pressure head in a rear rank may break through first, collecting lesser near-rank streams as its tributaries. Nevertheless, a great many cave systems display patterns of systematic  headward and lateral connection such as drawn here. There are obvious similarities to the building of  Hortonian  stream-channel nets,  but  Horton’s  laws  have not been successful when tested on caves  because of geological distortions and incompleteness of information.





Figure 7.10 Some computer models of the multirank case. (a) For fracture patterns as shown in top left, and also with high primary porosity. Inputs close to the output boundary breakthrough quickly, initiating headward sequences of conduit growth shown in the succeeding frames. Reproduced with permission from Kaufmann, G. and Braun, J. (2000) Karst aquifer evolution in fractured, porous rocks. Water Resources Research, 36, 1381–91. (b) Two successive frames from a model with two near and three rear inputs on a fine fracture mesh. Length is 1000 m and hydraulic gradient is 0.05. Breakthrough from the near rank occurs at 2500 years after initiation. This permits the rear rank to grow; it breaks through to the near rank at 5000 years. Reproduced with permission from Dreybrodt, W., and Gabrovsˇek, F, Basic processes and mechanisms governing the evolution of karst. In Gabrovsek, F. (ed). Evolution of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation. Postojna-Lubljana, Carsologica. 115–154, 2002.

  Figure 7.11 shows examples of multirank cave patterns below the limestone sink-hole plains and plateaus of the American mid-west. Blue Spring Cave, Indiana (7.11a) is developed in well-jointed rock, whereas Blue Spring Cave, Tennessee (7.11b) is chiefly controlled by bedding planes. Figure 7.11c shows a small part of the  Central Kentucky Karst. Spring points have shifted  downwards and laterally many times in response to entrenchment by the Green River, and also back up  due to its periodic aggradation. As a consequence, the pattern of cave pas- sages is very complicated because much of it belongs to earlier phases and is now relict. However, it is possible to discern incomplete patterns of near and far ranks connect- ing to the springs. A particularly strong feature is a recent amalgamation along the strike of a far rank (Procter and Roppel Caves) that beheads Mammoth Cave drainage.
7.2.5 The restricted input case
This case completes the range of significantly  different karst input–output configurations that can  occur. Inputs

are restricted to a line or narrow zone where the  karst rock is exposed, most often a valley floor. The  spring point is usually at the lower end of the zone. Flow-field geometry constrains the far inputs (Fig. 7.12b), and so the initial cave in plane A is built in a  sequence of steps working headward up the valley.
  This is a common type of cave. The example in Figure 7.12c is complicated because, once again, the network displays more than a single phase of development and it is incompletely explored.  Entrenchment in the Cumberland River has exposed new, lower output points so that, in the latest phase, a new input A in the headward part of the cave has abandoned the subvalley course and propagated beneath the divide toward spring C. These new galleries are not yet enterable in size. Friar’s Hole, West Virginia (see Figure 7. 24) is another, lengthier example.
7.2.6 Cave systems and General Systems Theory
In terms of General Systems Theory applied to geomor- phology (Chorley and Kennedy 1971), unconfined caves





Figure 7.11 The plan patterns of some large multirank cave systems. (Left) (a) Blue Springs, Indiana, a cave dominated by joint control. (b) Blue Springs Cave, Tennesseee, a bedding plane cave. (Right) Mammoth Cave and nearby systems in the Kentucky karst. This is the longest mapped cave system. Only major passages are shown. Although it is a multiphase complex with  additional invasion passages the basic structure is of a multirank system draining downdip to the Green River.


are a type of cascading system. There is a cascading event each time that a proto-cave connects to a spring or to a pre-existing cave system. In each event, the  local flow field and hydraulic gradient are reoriented.
7.3 UNCONFINED CAVE DEVELOPMENT IN LENGTH AND DEPTH
This section completes the formal analysis of the  con- struction of unconfined cave systems by  investigating their  third  dimension,  depth,  coupled  with the length dimension considered above. We are  now considering the constraints upon conduits  propagating  in  all  planes of  the  general  model  (Figure 7.3), or equivalent multi- fissure sequences in  other possible geometric structural arrangements.   Sequences of passages may display a predominant  vadose or phreatic morphology or appear to have developed along a water table.
7.3.1 The water table controversy
In the first half of the 20th century, the relationship  of unconfined cave development to the water table received far more attention than did the genesis of  plan patterns

as outlined above. Three conflicting schools of  thought can be recognized, as illustrated in the left  panel of Figure 7.13. The earliest, associated with Martel (1921) and other European workers, supposed that the locus of most development must be above an already established water table (Figure7.13a). The importance of the soil CO2 boost  was  not  yet  recognized  and,  because the vadose zone is the first encountered by  sinking waters, it was supposed that it would adsorb most of the feeble solvent capacity of sinking streams.  It also has the steepest physical  gradients,  so   allowing mechanical  corrasion with bedload to take over the enlargement once dissolu- tion had created small openings.
In  1930  the  leading  American  geomorphologist,
W.M. Davis, used empirical evidence from cave  maps, sections and reports, to argue that many cave  passages were developed by ascending groundwater flow. In dia- metric opposition to the vadose model, he thus proposed that  caves  developed  slowly  at  random  depth beneath regional water tables in the Mature and Old Age stages of his well known Geographical Cycle  of Erosion (Davis 1899). Development essentially followed the streamlines of a Darcy groundwater flow  net (Figure 7.13b). Bretz (1942) amended the model to include a closing phase of





Figure 7.12 The restricted input case of cave system initiation. The example shown is Cave Creek, Kentucky. Cover strata are thick shales. Known caves are a headward sequence that underlie the valley floor and drain to springs at B. A is a late capture that passes   beneath  the   shale   interfluve  to   lower   springs  at   C. Reproduced with permission from Ewers, R.O., Cavern  devel- opment in the dimensions of length and breadth. McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, 1982.

clay infilling of cave passages beneath the Old Age peneplains  because  of  sluggish  circulation  due  to  their very gentle hydraulic gradients.
  Swinnerton (1932) was amongst the first to understand the significance of soil CO2, which weakened one of the principal arguments of the vadose and deep phreatic models. Like them, however, he assumed a stable water table at depth before any cave development. He proposed an opportunistic model in which the likeliest path will be along that water table, generated from the head  down- stream (Figure 7.13c). Rhoades and Sinacori   (1941) recognized that the creation of large dissolutional caves in the rock must affect the water table, lowering it or its gradient in most instances. They proposed an  elegant model of development that progressed  headwards from



the output spring into the rock, lowering the water table into the conduit as it enlarges. For further discussion of these conflicting ideas see Ford (1998) and Lowe (2000).
7.3.2 Differentiating phreatic and water table types of caves – the Four State Model
The conflict can be resolved by a Four State Model,  as shown to the right in Figure 7.13 (Ford 1971b, Ford and Ewers 1978). This is based on the fact that the frequency of connecting initial fissures that are penetrable by water varies from very few in some karst strata to a great many in others. The real variation is as a  continuum, but its effect is to permit four distinct  phreatic or water table cave geometries to develop, as shown.
  At the proto-cave stage the water table is assumed to be close   to   the   surface   in   the   model   because   there is insufficient effective porosity for it to be  lower. As the proto-caves breakthrough, link up and enlarge into caves, the water table is lowered to the stable positions shown, at least under low-stage conditions. Figure 7.14 illustrates the chance nature of the upwards linking process between penetrated bedding planes or other fissures. Location of the link is by chance, where a joint or other fracture gives
a short interconnection. This creates a phreatic loop,
down one bedding plane or low-angle fracture, then up a joint or fault to a higher bedding plane, etc. where  the pressure head is lower.
  A bathyphreatic cave (State 1) makes just a single pass
beneath the water table because the frequency of available fissures is too low for any alternative. It has the highest hydraulic resistance. The pass drawn in the figure happens to be quite complex with several looping sections. Suc- cessive tubes propagated in planes A, B, C, etc. and then connected as in the multirank input case already discussed. Before any of the others had expanded more than a few centimetres, the  tube  in  plane C (having the headward advantage) captured most available runoff, with the con- sequence that it alone expanded to enterable size.
  Some examples of active and relict bathyphreatic caves are given in Figure 7.15. Note that system information is particularly incomplete. Active (filled) bathyphreatic caves  are  difficult  or  impossible  to  explore.  If  drained and abandoned, they are most frequently  obstructed by detritus towards the base of loops. We do not know the maximum depth attained by bathyphreatic caves but it is certainly greater than 300 m at Vaucluse, or in the Sierra de  El  Abra,  Mexico,  where  drained  higher relicts are particularly well preserved (Ford  2000a). Exploration drilling in  many  areas  has   tapped  caves  filled  with young flowing water at depths as great as 3000 m. Some may be bathyphreatic as shown here, but it is likely that





Figure 7.13 (Left) The conflicting theories for the evolution of caves, as they were interpreted in the 1950s. (Right) The Four State Model’ showing that vadose, deep phreatic and water-table caves are all possible in unconfined circulation systems. The  ‘state’ depends on the density, penetrability and linkage of fractures and bedding planes, and the orientation of hydraulic gradients. Modified with permission from Ford, D.C. Perspectives in karst hydrogeology and cavern genesis. Bulletin d’Hydrogeologie, 16, 9–29 1998, Universite´ de Neuchaˆtel Centre d’Hydroge´ ologie, Rue Emile-Argand 11, CH-2007 Neuchaˆtel .


many deep interceptions are of shallower types of caves that have been dropped downwards by tectonic activity.
  Multiple-loop  phreatic  caves  (State  2)  are   created where there is significantly higher fissure  frequency. It must be understood that it is the elevation of the tops of higher loops that defines the stable position of the water table and not vice versa. Until the system is quite enla- rged, the water table is higher but, as the tubes expand in volume, it falls until arrested locally at the tops of loops. Ho¨lloch is an excellent example where the  phreatic loops are built of irregular strike subsequents (Figure 7.15). The  vertical  amplitude  of  its  looping   is  ~100 m, rising to 180 m during the greatest  recorded floods. In Siebenhengste, Switzerland, amplitude of similar strike loops can exceed 300 m. Other caves loop down the dip and up joints, being  built of primary conduits, as in the model of Figure 7.14. Many examples are known where amplitudes  range 50–200 m or so (e.g. Czarna Cave,

Poland (Gradzin´ski and Kicinska 2002). In the very gently dipping limestones of the Kentucky Sinkhole  Plain the amplitude does not appear to be greater than ~40 m.
  Caves that are a mixture of shorter, shallower  loops and quasihorizontal canal (i.e. water table)   passages represent a third, higher state of fissure  frequency and diminishing resistance. The horizontal  segments exploit major joints or propagate along the  strike in bedding planes as shown in Figure 7.7. Swildon’s–Wookey Hole system in the Mendip Hills,  England, is an outstanding example. Diving exploration from the upstream end has passed 11 consecutive  shallow phreatic loops and is arrested at a twelfth,  deeper loop. At least eight loops have been overcome from Wookey Hole, the downstream end (Figure 7.15).  At Skalisty Potok, Slovakia, 20 con- secutive loops have been dived, to depths up to 25 m, and
there are similar examples in Romania (Racovit¸a˘ et  al.
2002).  Grottes  des  Fontanilles,  France,  has  six  loops  to







Figure 7.14 A sketch sequence to illustrate the stochastic nature of phreatic loop formation. In the upper frame three proto-caves are extending in each of bedding planes A and  B; A3 has just broken through to the output boundary. In the lower frame, B1 has connected to A3 via a lifting shaft where a joint extends between them; B1 has captured most of the  flow and enlarged to explorable size. Its downstream   extension will continue to extend slowly unless blocked by silt  and clay, and is a prime site for a future undercapture.
—77 m (Romani et al. 1999). Trapped in a short  canal section there by rising floods in 2001, cavers experienced air pressure of 2 atm, indicating that the rock above them was airtight, i.e. had no effective primary porosity even at State 3 fissure density.
  In State 4, fissure frequency is so high or resistance is so low that low-gradient, most direct, routes are readily constructed through successive ranks of inputs behind the spring points. When sufficiently enlarged these  can absorb all runoff; thus the piezometric surface is lowered into them. They become ‘ideal’ water-table caves.
  Ideal water-table caves that are wading or  swimming canal passages with low roofs are very  common. Hun- dreds of short examples pass through residual limestone towers  on  alluvial  plains  in  southern China, Vietnam, Malaysia, Cuba, etc. Large sectors of the Baradla–Domica system, in highly fractured limestones at the Hungarian–



Figure  7.15    Examples   of   phreatic   and   water   table   caves. Langtry Cave, Texas, is in horizontally bedded strata  After Kastning, E.H. (1983) Relict caves as evidence of  landscape and aquifer evolution in a deeply dissected  carbonate terrain: southwest Edwards Plateau, Texas, U.S.A. Journal of Hydrology, 61, 89–112. Vaucluse, France is a phreatic lifting passage where water ascends 315 m in a gallery 10–20 m in diameter. It is the outlet end of a deep bathyphreatic system. La Hoya de Zimapan, El Abra, Mexico, is another outlet with at least 300 m of lift but it is now relict. The base is infilled with clay. Upper galleries are 20–30 m in diameter and contain  massive speleothem. Das Holloch is an excellent example of  a multi-loop phreatic cave, with three relict ‘levels’. Reproduced from Bo¨gli, A. (1980) Karst Hydrology and Physical Speleology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 284 pp. Wookey  Hole, England, is a mixture of phreatic and water tableelements. Caves Branch, Belize, is a great water table cavedeveloped along a polje margin. Reproduced from  Miller,
T.E. (1982) Hydrochemistry, hydrology and morphology of the Caves Branch karst, Belize. Mcmaster Univ. PhD thesis, 280 pp.
Slovak border, are of this type, as is much of the Caves Branch system, Belize, that is developed in  thoroughly brecciated rock. Caves of the Nullarbor  Plain, Australia, are other excellent examples of this type, with Cocklebiddy Cave, for example, having been dived just under water table level for more than 6.5 km (Finlayson and Hamilton- Smith 2003).




  This Four State Model to differentiate phreatic and water table caves, as shown in Figure 7.13, is simplified and idealized. In reality there is a greater mixing of the types. Ideal water-table passages rarely extend for more than 1–2 km before being interrupted by shallow phreatic loops where local geological conditions change. A cave may be assigned to one category or another according to its predominant characteristics.
  Since Cvijic´ (1918), many speleologists have con- tended that caves develop preferentially in the epiphreatic zone that is inundated seasonally or in storms by  fast- flowing (and chemically aggressive) flood waters. As we have explained it here, such a zone is only of significance to cave genesis where fissure frequency is  State 3 or 4.

From careful studies of some major systems in the Alps and Pyrenees, Audra (1994) and Palmer and Audra (2003) proposed the patterns shown in Figure 7.16. Juvenile and perched caves (Figure 7.16 A and B) are  discussed as vadose types below. States 2, 3 and 4 cave systems are all assigned  to  the  epiphreatic  zone  (Figure  7.16  C  and  D), while  State  1  is  considered  to be an accident caused by aggradation or tectonic lowering (i.e. drowned State 2, 3 or 4). We do not  question that both epiphreatic dev- elopment and deep  aggradation can occur; Vaucluse (Figure 7.15) is  possibly attributable to aggradation following the  Messinian low sea level, for example. However, the El Abra deep systems (State 1) cannot be explained in this  manner. The particular examples of




Figure 7.16   The form of vadose, phreatic and epiphreatic caves, as proposed by Palmer and Audra (2004).




State 2 and 3 caves noted above all have large propor- tions of  their known  length below  the low-stage  water table, i.e. are permanently phreatic, not  epiphreatic. Castleguard Cave, a well-studied alpine   system in Canada,  cannot  be  reconciled  with   Audra’s   model, despite  the  fact  that  the  modern  flood amplitude there is as great as 370 m. However,  in multiphase caves (discussed below) floods may  greatly enlarge one or more upper levels after these  have been abandoned by the low-stage flow, i.e. cave  enlargement can proceed simultaneously at two different levels (e.g. Ogof Ffynon Ddu, Wales; Smart and Christopher, 1989).
  In contrast to Audra, Worthington (2001, 2004) noted that deeply circulating waters may be warmed by geothermal heat, creating lower viscosity that will permit longer solvent penetration before higher order dissolution kinetics begin to inhibit the proto-cave propagation.  He argues that deep, State 1 development may be favoured where flow-path lengths are greater than ~3 km and, from analysis of 19 well-mapped sample caves, proposed the empirical relationship presented in equation (5.19). This is a valid possibility but, in perhaps a majority of known cases where the flow path is > 3 km,  there  are  shorter loops  between  the  output  and  its most distant input points; these tend to  breakthrough first despite their possibly higher  viscosity because they are significantly shorter in length.
7.3.3 Some effects of geological structure
Structural effects are certainly important in determining the patterns of cave long-sections. Where strata dip quite steeply (2–5○ or more) the bedding planes tend to entrain groundwater to greater depths. Their gradients are steeper than  most  initial  hydraulic  gradients  and  so  there  is  a quasi-artesian trapping effect, as Glennie (1954)  noted. As a consequence, the deeper types of phreatic caves are favoured.
  Where strata are quasihorizontal, bedding planes (the most  continuous  form  of  fissuring)  may  extend  to  the perimeter of the karst, where they crop out to offer many potential spring points. It is only joints or faults that can guide  water  to  great  depth.  In  addition,  conditions are most favourable for perching groundwater streams upon aquitards such as dolomite beds, thick  shale bands, etc. States 3 and 4 caves are particularly  favoured as a consequence. However, deep phreatic   systems  can develop where there is strong jointing, e.g. in the York- shire Dales, England (Waltham 1970).
  In tightly folded rocks (where cave systems extend over several or many folds) fissure frequency is generally high because of the high stressing. Water-table caves are conse- quently common, as in the folded Appalachians, USA.
  
Frequency of penetrable fissures may increase  where strata are unloaded. This helps to explain why  many caves draining plateaus ramify into complex distributary networks where the overburden is reduced  close to the springs (Renault 1968), and why State 3 or 4 caves can be well developed in valley sides (Droppa 1966).
  Hydration effects in anhydrite inhibit deep phreatic loops; hence gypsum caves tend to be States 3 or 4 where the strata are not confined.
7.3.4 Measure of fissure frequency
There can be no simple assignment of fissure frequencies to the four states because of differing resistances within individual fissures. In a situation of low frequency of penetrable fissuring there may also be low resistance so that State 3 systems evolve, or even State 4 where caves are short, e.g. meander cut-offs. High frequency but high resistance may yield State 2, as in parts of  Vancouver Island, Canada (Mills, 1981). Fissure  frequency that is measured at the natural surface or exposed in quarries is a poor guide to the effective frequency below the epikarst zone.
  In the Mendip Hills, England, all four states of system geometry have developed where the effective porosity is
< 1%; hence this measure is not sufficiently discriminat- ing for our purposes.
7.3.5 Increase of fissure frequency with time
At the onset of karstification, initial frequency of  pene- trable fissures varies within and between  formations. With passage of time (and solvent waters)  after that it tends to be increased, as pointed out in Chapter 5. As a consequence, later caves in a  multiphase complex may display a higher state. For example, in the Mendip Hills over Pliocene–Pleistocene  time, system geometry chan- ged from initial State 2 phreatic systems composed of few loops with great vertical amplitude to systems with many loops of lesser amplitude when lowering of spring eleva- tions created  second-generation caves underneath them. Repetition  yielded systems where gradational processes (outlined  in the next section) could produce a State 3 system. In one example the amplitude of early loops was
> 50 m, diminishing to ~15 m in a second phase and to
< 10 m in a third phase.
  This pattern of development can be recognized in the cave fragments that are preserved in many tower karsts. The massive bedding that is necessary to sustain the verticality  of  the  tower  walls  also  favours  low  fissure frequency. Higher, ancient caves tend to display State 2 features; the modern caves of the floodplain  are often State 4. The great tropical river cave   systems  of




Selminum Tem, Papua New Guinea, and Mulu, Sarawak, have similar histories (Waltham and Brook 1980). How- ever, many alpine systems such as Holloch conserve their high-amplitude, State 2 form through three or more successive phases, so this generalization does not always apply.
7.3.6 Differentiating vadose caves
Primary vadose caves (Bo¨gli 1980) will be the first type to develop where the water table is initially deep in the rock, thus permitting rain or meltwater to invade dry rock. As discussed in section 5.4, this may be because effective

porosity is very high, or resistance in fissures is low due to many  initial  apertures  being  > 1 mm,  or  the  climate is arid. Phreatic elements in the cave morphology are either very limited and rough (paraphreatic), or absent. Deep
and open fissuring like this can be expected in particular where there is rapid tectonic uplift accompanied by some deformation, i.e. in young mountain systems. The major- ity of the deepest caves of Table 7.2 thus are simple systems of vertical shafts down fractures, drained by short basal meanders leading to the next shaft. Short sections may exhibit water ponding (e.g. siphons) due  to local lithological perching effects. Figure 7.17a  shows the vertical profile of the Voronja–Krubera System, Arabika





Figure 7.17  (a) The vertical profiles of Krubera-Voronja Cave, Georgia, and Vrtiglavica Shaft (Slovenia) drawn at their  scale elevations above sea level (the entrances are at 2250 m and 1910 m a.s.l. respectively). Krubera is currently the deepest explored cave; Vrtiglavica (‘Vertigo’) is the deepest single explored shaft. Both appear to be largely of primary vadose origin. (From the Ukrainian Speleological Association (Krubera) and R. Stopar (Vrtiglavica), with permission.) (b) The development of the  drawdown and invasion types of vadose caves.




Massif, Caucasus, currently the deepest known example at —2160 m. Much of it appears to display primary vadose form. The aptly named Vrtiglavica (‘Vertigo’)  Shaft on Mount Canin in Slovenia is a straight drop of 643 m, lip to floor, the deepest individual pit yet  discovered. Many others are known that are > 300 m.
  Drawdown vadose caves develop where the water
table initially is close to the surface (Figure 7.17b). This is common in low plateaus and hilly regions or where the karst rock is progressively exposed by  strip- ping of insoluble cover strata. The caves are  guided by the early networks of phreatic primary  tubes. As these break through, connect and then  enlarge, the reservoir capacity of the rock increases. The water table then must be drawn down until it finally  stabilizes at some mini- mum gradient to the springs  (section 5.5). Although
> 90% of the cave volume may be created by later erosion under vadose conditions, the passage plan pattern and skeleton is largely phreatic. If preserved at all,  the phreatic morphology is usually in the roof where it may be difficult to inspect. Initial drawdown vadose  condi- tions have probably applied in the majority of the world’s karst regions. Lower portions of many of the deep shaft caves can exhibit this control.
  Invasion vadose caves develop where new streams
invade rock already drained during one or more previous phases  of  drawdown  speleogenesis  (Figure  7.17b).  The invasion is often a result of karstification of  surface streams as they are lowered from an eroding  caprock, or it follows from the clogging and sealing  of former sink-points, the most potent agency of such infilling being regional glaciation, as hinted in the figure. The effect of glaciation on karst is discussed further in section 10.3.
  Juvenile caves that feed free-draining springs (Figure 7.16A) may be of drawdown or invasion vadose type. They are comparatively rare because deeper circula- tion to and below the spring baselevel is the norm. However,  Muruk-Berenice  Cave,  New  Britain,  appears to be a good example of simple drawdown with one or two short perched siphons. It is ~11 km in  length and 1178 m deep. Vadose caves perched on an  aquiclude (Figure 7.16B) are very common indeed. The basal gallery usually has a drawdown vadose origin.  The overlying shafts may be of either type, or a mixture of both.
7.3.7 Extent and magnitude of vadose cave development
The extent of vadose caves (either type) is a function of the depth of the vadose zone and of the many lithological and other effects tending to divert groundwater from  a simple, vertical descent. Topographic relief above  the

springs is most important. The deepest vadose caves occur in mountain areas, as noted. Variations of  water- table gradient are also significant. Where  vadose caves drain to State 1 or 2 systems variation of resistance in the phreatic passages may cause local  variations of tens of metres in the depth of the vadose zone, i.e. in the water- table topography.
  In general hydrological modelling, water in the vadose zone is presumed to drain vertically downwards. In many karst regions this is true only in the sense that it does not flow upwards  in the  zone. Thousands  of kilometres  of lateral vadose passages are known. The magnitude  of vadose caves is a product of the size of their streams and the duration of erosion. The largest occur where  large allogenic  streams  have  flowed  underground  for  a long while. Often, simple enlargement plus the gradation pro- cesses described below (section 7.4) have converted State 3 or 4 systems into true river caves that rarely or never flood to the roof. In contrast, in many autogenic systems individual streams are tiny because recharge is relatively diffuse and doline frequency is high. Underground, all of the vadose zone (and perhaps more) may be required to effect the amalgamation of  streams that is necessary to generate caves of enterable dimensions. Such areas, there- fore, may give the impression of lacking vadose caves, but that is only because they cannot be entered.

7.3.8 Review
The   following   conclusions   may   be   drawn   from   the models developed above.
1. In the first phase of development an unconfined cave system may be composed entirely of one type between its  inputs  and  its  outputs,  e.g.  bathyphreatic,  draw- down vadose, etc.
2. More frequently, in the first phase it will display  a combination of one or both vadose types  supplying water to one of the four phreatic or water table types (Figure 7.15).
3. In multiphase caves, two or more of the phreatic/ water-table  types  may  be  present  in  addition  to  the vadose types, the later caves often tending to  be of higher state.
4. Many systems display some admixture of these types that has developed within a single phase.

7.3.9 Generalizing the Four State Model
In terms of speleogenesis it follows that six states may be distinguished in karst rocks. State 0 is that where fissure frequency or effective porosity is too low for unconfined cave systems to propagate in the available geological




time. This is true of some marble formations in  which karst, therefore, is restricted to the pit and gutter types of karren that do not require cavernous drainage. States 1 to 4 are as specified. State 5 occurs where fissure frequency is too high; the solutional attack is dispersed in innumer- able proto-caves or tiny cave channels. Amalgamation to create cave systems of enterable  dimensions does not occur. This is true of many thin-bedded formations, some chalks, some corallian and aeolian limestones and some dolomites. It is the ideal diffuse-flow end of this spectrum of karst hydrological states.
7.3.10 Caves in quartzites and siliceous sandstones
Caves also develop in quartzites and siliceous sandstones in situations where the silica cement can be removed  by dissolution, and the less soluble residual grains are  then efficiently swept away by flowing waters. The  grains (usually sand-sized but up to small boulders in  some conglomerates) contribute to cave enlargement by mechan- ical corrasion.  It should be noted that  without a high hydraulic gradient and low fissure resistance, the mechan- ical removal of the less soluble  particles may not be possible and thus no cave development can ensue. Conse- quently, caves in  siliceous rocks are usually polygenetic rather than strictly karstic in origin, i.e. they cannot develop by dissolution alone. This mode of development actually is much like that envisaged in the early vadose theory  of limestone cave genesis (Figure 7.13a). The  hydrological settings and cave gross morphology are largely restricted to the simple juvenile and perched types of Figure 7.16.
  Caves are quite common in calcareous sandstones, but there are relatively few examples where the cement   is silica. Day (2001) describes short and small joint maze  and  bedding  plane  caves  in  sandstone  beneath  a dolomite aquifer in Wisconsin, i.e. they have developed in the converse of the diffuse-recharge-through-sandstone setting given in Figure 5.23.
  Spectacular  caves  can  develop  in  strong   quartzites because, despite the low solubility of these  rocks, they are also very resistant to mechanical weathering. Examples are found chiefly above escarpments in wet or seasonally wet climates, where high hydraulic gradients and abundant recharge operate in combination, e.g. the ‘Saxon Alps’ of Germany and Poland, the High Veldt of South Africa, or Monserrat, Spain. The most celebrated are caves are in the Roraima  Formation, a massive Precambrian unit at the Brazil–Guyana–Venezuela  border,  and  in  similar  strata further south in Brazil (Urbani 1994, Correa Neto 2000). Extensive plateaus there are bounded by  vertical cliffs 100–300 m high (section 9.14). Major  joints are long, widely spaced,  and typically 50–200 m deep before

terminating at a bedding plane. The caves develop as primary vadose shafts down the joints, then drain via smaller floodwater galleries perched on the basal  plane. Figure 7.18a shows a typical example. Sistema  Roraima Sur, Venezuela, is the largest, having a trunk gallery often
~50 m wide (Sˇmida et al. 2005), i.e. it is on a scale with
the great limestone river caves. Many shafts later enlarge along the joints, forming corridor karst (giant grikes or bogaz)  open  to  the  sky.  A  few  caves  are  more  simple juvenile features without shafts, initiated in  dipping bedding planes and later entrenched below  them, e.g.
Lapao  Cave,  Brazil.  Cueva  Ojos  de  Cristal,  Venezuela (Sˇmida et al. 2003) is unusual in   displaying   four separate  inlet  streams  that  converge  in a spectacular
anastomosis on two or more bedding planes. The longest mapped quartzite caves have 4000–11,000 m of pas- sages. The deepest are 300–500 m.
7.3.11 Caves in glacier ice
Caves that are morphologically identical to sequences of shafts and meandering basal drains in limestone can develop   where   meltwater   streams   sink   into   glaciers. However, these are also not strictly karst features because they are formed by melting rather than dissolution. The
shafts (moulins or glacier mills) are often located on old
crevasses annealed by flow of the ice. Caves in shallow glaciers may terminate in river cave passages at the glacier  bed,  creating  systems  directly  analogous  to  the perched karst caves of Figure 7.16B. In deeper glaciers, the passages tend to pinch out in the zone of plastic flow below 50–100 m in temperate ice. Badino  and Romeo (2005) reports on unusually shallow galleries (at 5–20 m depth) that could be followed for a  distance  of  1150 m downstream  of  the  entrance  moulin in a Patagonian glacier, a record. Glacier  caves are also enlarged by sublimation by air currents  caused by the cascading water;  spectacular  patterns   of sublimation scalloping (section 7.9) are seen on  many walls and ceilings. In polar ice masses glacier snouts may freeze to the bed in winters, impounding late meltwaters which then back up and drown the lower shafts (Schroeder 1999).
  Glacier caves develop and close again very quickly if the ice is flowing. Figure 7.18b shows the progress of an example  on  the  Gornergletscher,  Switzerland,  that  was only 6 m deep when first explored on 15 July  1999. It was 60 m deep 3 months later (Piccini et al.  1999). Some snout caves in ice at the pressure  melting  point (temperate  ice)  can  survive  for  a  decade or more and attain diameters of 10 m or more. Caves in stagnant ice or
in firn (densified snow) can be maintained for several
decades if allogenic streams flow into them, e.g. the





Figure 7.18 (a) Long section of Aonda Cave, Bolivar, Venezuela, a typical example of the profiles of quartzite escarpment caves. Reproduced from Mecchia, M. and Piccini, L. (1999) Hydrogeology and SiO2 geochemistry of the Aonda Cave System, Auyan- Tepui, Bolivar, Venezuela. Bollettino Sociedad Venezolana Espeleologia, 33, 1–18. (b) The growth of vadose shafts and drains in ice of the Gornergletscher, Switzerland, between 15 July and 27 November 1999. reproduced from Piccini, L., Romeo, A. and Badino, G. (1999) Moulins and marginal contact caves in the Gornergletscher, Switzerland. Nimbus, 23/24, 94–9.


Paradise Ice Caves on Mount Rainier, Washington, USA (Halliday and Anderson 1970).
7.4 SYSTEM MODIFICATIONS OCCURRING WITHIN A SINGLE PHASE
Here we are concerned with two sets of effects that can significantly change the cave patterns described  above

within the phase that saw their creation. The more drastic pattern changes brought about by multiple phases are discussed in the following section.
7.4.1 Gradational features in phreatic systems
The three different effects are shown in Figure 7.19. All serve to reduce the irregular looping profiles of State  2






Figure 7.19   Gradational features common in phreatic caves:
(a) isolated vadose entrenchment of the upward apex of a phreatic loop; (b) development of a bypass tube above a  loop clogged with detritus; (c) development of a paragenetic gallery upwards to the water table.

and 3 caves. Isolated vadose trenches develop when, as      a result of water table drawdown, apices of upward loops become aerated. They contrast with the continuous trenches that extend downstream of a sink point, or upstream from a spring. Isolated entrenchments 50 m deep and hundreds of metres long are known, e.g.  the great river passage  of  Skocjanske  Cave,   Slovenia,
appears to be at least partly of this origin.
  Bypass passages or tubes en raccord (Ford 1965, Renault 1968) develop where sharp downward loops below a water table become obstructed by alluvial detri- tus. Normally this will be in upstream parts of a system. When rapid flooding occurs a large head of water  may build above the obstruction, greatly  steepening   the hydraulic gradient across the loop. Local fissures  that are impenetrable  under  normal  gradients  are   then exploited to open one or a series of subparallel bypasses over the loop. The latter becomes fully silted and inert; new clastic load is then carried through the bypass to clog the next loop. The process propagates downstream and is also transitional to the floodwater maze (below).
  
As originally used by Renault (1968), a paragenetic passage is any phreatic or water-table passage where the erosional cross-section is partly attributable to effects of accumulations of fluvial detritus. As applied by Ford (1971b)  and  other  English-speaking  authors,  it  has
meant only the type of passage that has a steadily rising solutional ceiling (Figure 7.19c); this is the extreme  or ‘ideal’ type of paragenesis. Pasini (1975) perhaps showed more flair in naming it ‘erosione antigravitativa’!
  Paragenetic passages originate as enlarged principal and subsequent tubes. With enlargement, groundwater velocity may be reduced, permitting permanent  deposition of a portion of any insoluble suspended or  bed load. This protects the bed and lower walls so that dissolution pro- ceeds upwards on a thickening column of fill. The vertical amplitude of such paragenesis can exceed 50 m. Remark- ably flat roofs can be bevelled  across dipping strata. In many instances there will be some dissolutional develop- ment of half tubes at the buried contacts between fill and wall, as well. The process terminates at the water table.
  Paragenetic  enlargement  that  is  succeeded  by  partial wash out of the fill in later phases explains much of the complicated plan forms, wall and ceiling shapes, seen in many caves close to geological contacts with sandstones or shales that can supply abundant detritus, e.g. Endless Caverns, in the Ridge and Valley  Province of Virginia, USA. Osborne (1999) stresses its role in Jenolan Caves, NSW, Australia, which are in a  narrow band of steeply dipping, recessive limestones flanked by sandstones and conglomerates that supply  clastic debris. They have a long and complex history  of palaeokarst, infilling and hydrothermal speleogenesis succeeded by major parage- netic re-excavation and enlargement.
7.4.2 Floodwater maze passages
Floodwater mazes are evaluated in detail by Palmer (1975). They  develop  in  State  3 or  4  systems  or  low- gradient  vadose  caves,  where  fissure  frequency  is high. Maze development occurs where allogenic flash flooding invades karst and/or where a trunk passage  with large carrying capacity becomes obstructed by   clastic   or organic  debris.  Flood  heads  of  many  metres can be applied quickly, generating very steep hydraulic gradients, as in bypass passages. Interlinked  fissures around the obstruction may be penetrated  rapidly to relieve the pressure. This creates a maze that is hydraulically ineffi- cient compared with the trunk, but which may function for the remainder of the active life of the cave.
  Floodwater   maze   development   is   most   significant where caves drain large and rugged allogenic catchments (i.e. where large floods are applied rapidly to one point in the karst) and is most prominent at the  upstream end






Figure 7.20   Sof Omar Cave, Ethiopia, a spectacular example of a floodwater maze developed as three successive levels in hor- izontally bedded limestones beneath a basalt caprock. It is a mea- nder cut-off system that floods frequently during the rainy season. (From cartography by Steve Worthington, with permission.)

of systems, e.g. Bullock Creek Caves, New Zealand (Williams 1992). It may extend throughout the length of comparatively short systems such as meander cut-off caves:   the   spectacular   example   of   Sof   Omar   Cave, Ethiopia, is shown in Figure 7.20.
7.5 MULTIPHASE CAVE SYSTEMS
Most   extensive   unconfined   caves   display   multiphase features due to the negative shift of springs (Figure 5.17). Positive shifts flood or fill them with  sediment, making them less likely to be explored: at the extreme, the cave system may be decoupled from hydrological throughput to become an inert, buried  palaeokarst system. Oil-well drilling penetrates  examples down to depths of 3 km or more, e.g. in Romania.
  Because of net continental erosion, negative shifts predominate in most karst areas and generally create lower series of passages. Most authors describe the two  or  more  series  as  cave  ‘levels’.  This  raises  difficulties because the actual passages are frequently  not level (horizontal) at all, e.g. State 2 caves. ‘Storey’ has similar connotations, and ‘stage’ has both discharge  and evolu- tionary implications that create misunderstandings. Here
we use phase and level interchangeably, but readers
should bear in mind that actual cave passages of a phase need not be level sensu stricto.

7.5.1 Types of network reconstruction
The type and scale of reconstruction that follows the lowering of a spring is varied. At its most simple, the spring shifts downwards only, relocating at a lower point on the same vertical fissure. If it follows this fissure, the cave may

display simple vadose entrenchment to the new level, e.g. Grotte  St  Anne  de  Tilff  (Ek  1961;  see  Figure  7.39D). Normally, the entrenchment is retrogressive, i.e. a knick- point. There is little or no change of the plan pattern of the cave. This type of reconstruction occurs particularly where the initial cave is one of the vadose types but has a gentle gradient. However, it is comparatively rare.
  In  many  more  instances  new  series  of  passages  are constructed. They propagate headwards through the sys- tem and are similar to the connections of further ranks in a first phase. This is because many primary tube systems of previous phases have survived cave enlargement and, although carrying an insignificant proportion of the dis- charge, have slowly extended and can be exploited when hydraulic  gradients  are  steepened by downward shift of the spring. They serve as ‘diversion’ or ‘tap-off ’ channels (terms of Ford (1971b) and Mylroie (1984 respectively)
but  are  better  described  as  undercaptures,  a  direct
translation of the French soutirages (see Ha¨uselmann et al. 2003). In addition, in a majority of cases the spring is displaced laterally as well as vertically, which compels the development of at least some distinct new passages. At Ho¨lloch, the lateral shift was of the most simple kind, i.e. by small increments down the edge of a single, inclined plane. Nevertheless, this created several new series of State 2 subsequent passages across that  plane (Figures 7.7 and 7.15). At Mammoth Cave,  because


Figure 7.21 The central galleries of Swildon’s Hole, Mendip Hills, England. Shown in white solid are north and south passages of a second genetic phase. In black are passages  of the third (modern) phase. Numbered dashed lines are the head- ward sequence of undercapture diversion passages by which the modern route was built beneath that of the second phase.





Figure 7.22 Examples of multiphase cave systems, emphasizing the variety that occurs. Re´seau Ne´be´le´ displays vadose  inlet passages, dip tubes, two phases of State 3 loops and water-table passages, plus undercaptures. Cheddar Caves, England, display four levels of outlet passages that successively drained a State 2 looping system with an initial amplitude of Ç 150 m; the lower three levels are shown here. Cueva del Agua, Spain, after Smart, P.L. (1986) Origin and development of glacio-karst closed depressions in the Picos de Europa, Spain. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, NF, 30(4), 423–43; Cueva del Cobre Cave, Spain, after Rossi, C., Munoz, A. and Cortel, A. (1997) Cave development along the water table in the Cobre System (Sierra de Penalabra, Cantabrian Mountains, Spain, Proceedings of the 12th International Congress of Speleology, Vol. 1, pp. 179–85; Re´seau Ne´be´le´, France, reproduced from Vanara, N. (2000) Le fonctionnement actuel du re´seau Ne´be´le´. Spelunca, 77, 35–8.


stratal dip is very gentle, each time the Green River (on the downdip, output boundary) entrenched its channel a few metres it might create a favourable new outlet posi- tion more than 1 km from previous springs.
  An excellent example of the passage complexity  that can be created by multiphase undercapture  reconstruc- tions is given in Figure 7.21. Swildon’s Hole displays just three major erosion phases. The Phase 2  passages were

irregular strike subsequents of State 2 type. The  stable Phase 3 passage is a river passage 25–30 m  lower. The 1000 m of its course that is shown was  built piecemeal from at least eight, consecutive and  headward, under- captures from the northern Phase 2 tributary, plus two or more from the independent,  southern Phase 2 tributary. The earlier undercaptures  were wholly phreatic; later ones were vadose at their  upper ends, signifying the






Figure 7.23 The Siebenhengste–Hohgant–St Beatus–Bare- nschacht multiphase complex cave system nears Lake Thun, Switzerland. The upper frame is a map showing the older phases preserved in the Siebenhengste–Hohgant sector. The lower frame is a long section showing the younger phases in the St Beatus and Ba¨renschacht caves.

lowering of the water table that resulted from  creation and expansion of this new cave. Parts of  each under- capture were incorporated into the final  Phase 3 river passage. Other parts were abandoned  entirely and, in some cases, remain too small to enter
  Figure  7.22  displays  some  other  multiphase  systems chosen to emphasize the wide variety that occurs. Cueva del Agua, Spain, is shown in the outstanding  morpho- logical reconstruction by Smart (1986). It is  a State 2 multiphase complex containing steep-to-vertical phreatic lifting segments that climb 120 m or more. There are many isolated vadose entrenchments that are taken to represent downcutting to  eight different levels within a range of 200 m. Cobre  Cave, Spain (Rossi et al. 1997) is an instance of two phases of State 2 looping and subsequent vadose entrenchment that, unusually, is against the trend of the stratal dip. Re˙seau Ne˙be˙le˙, France (Vanara 2000) displays vadose inlet passages, dip tubes, two phases of State  3  loops  and  water-table  passages,  plus  undercap- tures. The famous Cheddar Caves, England, display four levels of outlet passages that successively drained a State 2 looping system with an initial amplitude of Ç 150 m; the lower three levels are shown in Figure 7.22.
  
North of Lake Thun, Switzerland, the Siebenhengste– Hohgant–St Beatus–Barenschacht caves are a multiphase complex containing ~260 km of explored passages beneath ~40 km2 of dissected escarpments dipping south- east at 15–30○ (Figure 7.23). The caves are developed in 150–200 m    of    well-bedded    Cretaceous    limestones, capped by sandstones and resting on  impervious marls. They have a total relief > 1500 m.  Faults have acted as barriers rather than preferred  routes for flow, so that explorers have not yet been able to physically interconnect all  portions  of  the  caves.  The multiphase development can be attributed to  Alpine uplift coupled with cover stripping and glacial  and fluvial episodes of entrench-
ment. No fewer than 12 distinct phases are currently recognized (Jeannin et al. 2000, Ha¨uselmann et al. 2003). In the earlier four there was State 2 irregular strike subsequent  development  with  drainage  to  the  northeast (Figure 7.23, phases at 1950–1505 m a.s.l.),  creating a comparatively simple pattern similar to that  of Ho¨lloch; the amplitude of deeper phreatic loops was at least 220 m. The direction of flow was then reversed southwest, to the St Beatus and Barenschacht caves that  drain into Lake Thun. They display eight successive  phases of system reconstruction, descending from   initial springs at 1440 m a.s.l. down to a modern low-stage level at 558 m asl. Phreatic looping with amplitudes up to 250 m is well established by exploration, and early looping to 400 m is hypothesized. The younger loops have lesser amplitudes, but epiphreatic flooding can reactivate five relict loops in a downstream succession with an amplitude of many tens of metres (Ha¨uselmann et al. 2003, figure 7).
  Friars Hole System, West Virginia (Figure 7.24) offers one final contrast. It is an instance of the restricted case of cave  development.  Limestone  crops  out  in  only  a  few narrow strips in the floor of a steep valley of shale and sandstone, yet 68 km of passages are mapped. Stratal dip is  ~3○   westerly  and  the  springs  lie  along  strike  to the south. The system displays at least six distinct  State 4 channels that follow faults or selected bedding planes to the strike. The highest channel is only 125 m above the modern springs.  Later  ones  shifted   downdip as at Ho¨lloch. The plan pattern is extremely complex because stream-sinks have been randomly blocked and sealed for long time-spans by copious debris from the surrounding slopes. New sinks were created both upstream and down- stream of old ones and many  underground diversions have appeared. At present  three separate rivers flow through different parts of the explored system, at differ- ing elevations and in  different  stratigraphical  positions. They  join  somewhere before reaching the springs. The lowest explored river enters a siphon that is 13 km distant from the spring yet only 24 m higher.





Figure 7.24 The multiphase pattern of Friars Hole System, West Virginia, USA. Numbers indicate the phase of different passages. Reproduced from Worthington, S.R.H., The paleodrainage of an Appalachian Fluviokarst: Friars Hole, West Virginia. M.Sc. Thesis, McMaster University, p. 218, 1984.


7.6 METEORIC WATER CAVES DEVELOPED WHERE THERE IS CONFINED CIRCULATION      OR BASAL INJECTION OF WATER
7.6.1 Two-dimensional and three-dimensional maze caves
These caves are encountered quite frequently (Table 7.3, type A2), either as separate entities or as anomalous parts of normal, unconfined caves. Their form is every- where similar. They are reticulate mazes of compa- ratively small passages that follow joints confined to one or a few rock beds. Passages are phreatic in form. Parallel passages (i.e. in one joint set) tend to be of similar dimensions, indicating that initial joint aper- tures were similar (Clemens et al. 1997). Character- istically, the morphology is that created by slowly flowing waters. They lack the high-velocity erosional scalloping and sharp cuspate morphology of typical

floodwater mazes, although transitional examples do occur.
  In essence such mazes develop where strata possessing a high fissure frequency are geologically confined.  The trapping may be artesian, e.g. in a syncline  beneath a shale aquiclude, or it may be a local ‘sandwich’ situation where one or a few densely  jointed limestone beds are trapped between massive  limestones with few joints. Artesian maze caves are widespread. Where small areas of reticulate maze occur within normal branchwork caves it is most frequently because a ‘sandwich’ situation exists. The highest density of passage per square kilometre is found in confined maze caves. Klimchouk (2003) cites a
range of 50–400 km km—2 for a global selection, which
contrasts with 12–24 km km—2 in such well-known unconfined   systems   as   Mammoth   Cave   and   Friar’s Hole, USA. The porosity of the sample maze  caves amounts to 1–10% of the rock volume.




7.6.2 Maze formation by diffusion through an overlying sandstone aquifer
Palmer (1975) investigated a sample of maze caves in the USA and found that 86% of them had developed directly beneath permeable sandstones (Figure 7.25a and b). Often, passage roofs were in the sandstone. An equidimensional maze is created because water is introduced to the soluble rock by way of an insoluble  but homogeneous diffusing medium, i.e. sandstone with well-developed primary per- meability. In Stage 1 the  hydraulic conductivity of the sandstone is greater than that of the unkarstified limestone beneath, but the  situation is reversed by Stage 2. Cross- roads Cave, Virginia (Figure 7.25c) is an example.
  More exotic is the case of Cserszegtomaj Well Cave, Hungary   (Figure   7.25d).   Clint-and-grike   dissolutional topography (see section 9.2)  developed   on exposed dolomites, which were then buried by sands that became consolidated,  creating  a  buried   palaeokarst (Bolner- Takacs 1999). Groundwater has  selectively removed the limestone clint blocks, leaving  walls and ceilings of sandstone resting on a dolomite  grus floor. It is uncertain whether the groundwater  descended through the sandstone or ascended from below.

7.6.3 Outlet caves created by basal injection of meteoric waters into karst rocks
This category includes simple, single shaft caves, broadly dendritic   (branchwork)   systems,   and   reticulate   maze caves. They ascend through soluble strata to  outlets at the surface or into overlying aquifers. Maze caves are the most frequent and important, the other types apparently being quite rare.
  Brod (1964) described a series of small solutional  pit and fissure features scattered for 60 km along the crest of a denuded anticline in eastern Missouri, USA. These extend downwards through 30 m of limestone with  basal shale, and then through 30 m of dolomite where  the form may change from shaft to maze. At the base of the dolomite the underlying sandstone is exposed in  some cave floors, including detached sandstone blocks  partly rounded in situ. The sandstone is 40 m thick  and very porous. In Brod’s interpretation, its  groundwaters were discharged upwards and out  through the impure carbonate aquitard where this was  fractured at the anticline (Figure 7.26A). Localization  of the fracturing allowed sufficient concen- tration of waters to dissolve caves of enterable size.
  Botovskaya Cave, Russia (Filippov 2000) is an excel- lent example of a two-dimensional maze cave. It is  in 6–12 m of limestones  confined  between   argillaceous sandstones; enlargement is attributed to  mixing of cool artesian waters. Frumkin (personal communication 1999)

describes similar artesian waters rising to the crests  of anticlines in the Judean Mountains of  Israel–Palestine, where reticulate mazes developed  beneath (curiously) chalks functioning as aquitards.   The caves drained along the strike to local breaches of the aquitard. There are many similar instances recorded elsewhere.
  Grotte de Rouffignac, France, is a highly unusual  cave (Figure 7.26B). It is developed in rather soft chalks beneath clays. The chalk has prominent layers of flint nodules, but bedding planes and joints are poorly developed. These strata functioned as an aquitard that confined a productive aquifer below. In our interpretation, diffuse source waters from the aquifer were able to enlarge small inlet passages that con- verged  within the chalk to form a dendritic array that discharged along the flint-rich horizons into an  adjoining river valley. The inlet passages are paragenetic, rising on thick residual clays. The modern cave has three levels and displays subtle ceiling bevels and corrosion  notching. It is a very famous site of cave-bear habitation and of palaeolithic art.
7.6.4 The gypsum maze caves of western Ukraine
The Ukrainian gypsum caves are amongst the best known reticulate  mazes  (Figure 7.27).  They  are  created   by meteoric waters flowing upwards through them and thus are hypogene (per ascensum) in origin. They have been studied intensively (Klimchouk 2000b, 2003):  this res- earch provides the basis of much of our understanding of hypogene mazes everywhere,  including such hydrother- mal giants as Jewel Cave and Wind Cave, South Dakota. The caves occur in the flanks and spurs of the Dniester and Prut valleys and their  tributaries, and across gentle interfluves. They are developed in Tertiary gypsums only 10–30 m in thickness that are underlain and overlain by thin limestones, sands  and marls that are efficient aqui- fers. This sequence is confined beneath upper aquiclude clays. As Figure 7.28  emphasizes, the comparatively massive, homogeneous  gypsum functions initially as an aquitard. The  aquifers are recharged where streams at higher elevations breach the aquiclude, and then drained by  breaches at lower elevation. The caves develop pre-
ferentially towards and under the breaches.
  Although the gypsum formations are comparatively thin, they display different joint patterns or densities  in successive beds, or there may be thin clay layers separat- ing some units. Some of the caves are mazes contained within only one joint set at one level, but  the majority of them have two to four distinct levels  created by the change of joint patterns or by the clays, etc. As these levels lie almost directly above one  another (like the successive storeys in a building) and developed at essen-
tially  the  same  time,  they  may  be  termed  storeys  (Ford





Figure 7.25 (a and b) Development of a two-dimensional maze cave in limestone as a result of diffusion of groundwater through an overlying sandstone aquifer. Reproduced from Palmer, A.N. (1975) The origin of maze caves. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 37(3), 56–76. (c) Crossroads Cave, Virginia, USA, an example of this mode of development. (d) Cserszegtomaji Well Cave, Hungary, a highly unusual two-dimensional maze developed from buried palaeokarst.



Figure 7.26 (Left) Model for the development of meteoric water caves discharging the St Peter sandstone aquifer in the eastern Missouri Ozark Hills. Reproduced with permission from Brod, L.G., Artesian origin of fissure caves in Missouri. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 26(3), 83–112 © 1964 National Speleological Society. (Right) Grotte de Rouffignac, France, displays a pattern of basal inputs from a diffuse flow aquifer that converge into a dendritic network and ascend gently through chalky strata; about 10 km of passages are known.





Figure 7.27 The four lengthiest multistorey maze caves currently known. Optimists’ and Ozernaya, Ukraine, are gypsum caves with basal inflow of meteoric water. Jewel Cave and Wind Cave, South Dakota, USA, are limestone caves with a complex history of early palaeokarst, and infilling, followed by enlargement (with partial exhumation) by basal inflow of thermal waters.

1991) to differentiate them from the ‘levels’ of multiphase caves that may be separated by many  metres and are of different  ages.  Typically,  the   higher storeys are less extensive and are offset  towards the discharge points (breaches in the aquiclude).
  Figure 7.28b shows details of the construction of storeys   and   their   varying   passage   morphology.   The groundwater circulation is very slow compared  with that in most unconfined situations. This permits  small
thermal or solute density gradients to become significant (natural convection flow in Figure 7.28b); cooler or

solute-laden water sinks, setting up local convection cells that carry less saturated water to upper parts of passages, preferentially widening them. Distinct cupolas may develop at more soluble places in the ceilings
(sections  7.7  and  7.10).  Forced  convection flow is
introduced to a given area of the maze if the  overlying aquiclude is breached close to  it.  Flow   rates then accelerate a little, which reduces the  differential scul- pting effects of natural convection.   Recently,  these processes have been carefully  modelled (Birk et al. 2000).





Figure 7.28   (Left) The initial stage of per ascensum multistorey maze cave development in the Ukraine gypsum caves. Note that three potentially separate storeys of maze passages may develop in different gypsum members because of differing joint patterns anddensities. (Right) The general mode of per ascensum dissolution by convective flow; see text for details. Reproduced  from Klimchouk, A.B. (2000b) Speleogenesis of the Great Gypsum Mazes in the Western Ukraine, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 261–73.


  Where   the   gypsum   is   exceptionally   massive   and impermeable, large and irregular galleries or   rooms may be dissolved in it by the underflow.  Where the caves are progressively drained by river  entrenchment, prominent dissolution notches (section 7.10) can form at the waterlines.
  Most of the known caves are now drained and relict. Zolushka (Cinderella) Cave is exceptional because it has been  progressively  drained  by  nearby  quarrying  opera- tions during the past 50 year. It has been a  remarkable natural laboratory in which to observe  dewatering pro- cesses and effects within the span of a human lifetime.
7.7 HYPOGENE CAVES: HYDROTHERMAL CAVES ASSOCIATED CHIEFLY WITH CO2
This section considers solutional caves created by deeper waters that are usually heated, perhaps enriched in a wide range of dissolved gases and minerals, and flow out to the surface in most instances. By definition, thermal waters are those which, at their springs, have a mean annual  tem- perature > 4○C higher than that of the region  (Schoeller 1962). Temperatures at hot springs in karst rocks are most frequently in the range 20–80○C (T.D. Ford 1995). Much higher temperatures can occur at depth. Standard geother- mal gradients are ~30○C km—1, increasing to 100○C km—1 around active volcanic areas. In the Transdanubian Moun- tains of Hungary the  gradient is only  ~16○C km—1   in limestones but  rises  to 40–60○C km—1  in  shales above them, which   emphasizes the role of  karst  waters  in removing heat. In origin, the waters may be juvenile (i.e. volcanic) or connate (trapped depositional waters that are being expelled from sedimentary basins), deeply circulat-

ing meteoric waters (e.g. beneath a syncline), or mixtures of these types in any proportions. Shallow meteoric waters (normal karst waters) may then mix with them  as they approach the surface. The gases most commonly reported are CO2 and H2S. One or both may be important in a given water. Here we simplify by supposing that  one class of cavities (the more abundant) is created predominantly by CO2 processes, whereas in the second class (section 7.8) the role of H2S is more significant.
  When hot, carbonated water rises and cools in carbo-
nate rocks (with and without mixing with shallow meteo- ric water), there may be net dissolution, incongruent dissolution or net deposition. A cave may straddle several of the different process zones (e.g. dissolving at its base, receiving subaqueous precipitates at the top) or be entirely within one (section 3.10, equation 3.78). The zones may migrate through it once (erosion ! deposition) or oscil- late across it several times. Many suspected hydrother- mal caves experience only dissolution by the hot waters. In others the bedrock walls can scarcely be seen at all, being covered by later hydrothermal precipitates.
  Andre   and   Rajaram   (2005)   model   thermal   waters initially penetrating limestone. For an example  of 60○C water penetrating a horizontal fracture 500 m  in length with an aperture of 50 mm and PCO2 of 0.03 atm, break- through occurs in about 6600 year. This suggests that the timescales for thermal cave evolution are similar to those in meteoric waters.
7.7.1 Criteria for hydrothermal origin or part origin
The most certain criterion is hot water flowing from the cave! However, some meteoric caves have been invaded




by hot waters because these will migrate to pre-existing conduits if possible. They offer the easiest exits.  Most explorable hydrothermal caves are drained and  relict. Presence  of  hot  springs  in  their  vicinity  offers  a strong hint concerning their origin, but cannot be conclusive.
  Certain erosional features are highly suggestive  but, once again, no one of them may be conclusive.  Strong index features are deep, rounded and often multicuspate, solution pockets (cupolas) that are attributed to convec- tional dissolution (see section  7.10). In a few instances there are highly corroded patches or rills on walls where steam has condensed above hot pools. Dolomitization of limestone walls has also been reported. In some Russian caves, cherts in the  limestone are strongly corroded, which is good  evidence of hot alkaline waters. Perhaps as significant is the lack of evidence for moderate to fast flowing water that is found in most meteoric caves. Better indices are provided by the exotic deposits. Most impor- tant are uncommon forms and abundances of calcite and aragonite, but a wide range of rarer minerals may also be present, especially barite, fluorite, quartz and the sulphide minerals. Crusts of scalenohedral (‘dogtooth’) or  rhom- bohedral (‘nailhead’ or Iceland) spar calcite are common, with thicknesses up to 2 m. These may cover all surfaces (floors, walls and ceilings), indicating  subaqueous pre- cipitation. Individual crystals are  large, indicating slow deposition under uniform  conditions. Quite frequently, fine-grained breccia with  or without barite or silica is reported beneath the spars. Large quartz crystals are some- times found that suggest cooling from a hot environment.
  Palaeowaterlines tend to be marked by thick botryoidal or coralloid growths or by fin-like accretions of calcite. There may be abundant debris from the most fragile of all speleothems,  rafts  of  calcite  that  precipitate  about  dust grains on the pool surfaces. Calcite geyser  stalagmites may signify late, feeble effusions of the  hot waters through drained cavern floors. In some  instances  there is   further   precipitation   overhead   from the expelled vapour. Some hollow stalagmites  may be subaqueous
(white smokers!). Gypsum as large crystals or extruded
flowers and whiskers is common in freshly drained hydrothermal cavities.
  All of these calcite, aragonite and gypsum forms can  be found in meteoric water caves. What is distinctive in the hot-water caves is their unusual abundance and their association together (Dubljansky and Dubljansky 1997, Hill and Forti 1997). Strong supporting evidence of precipitation from past thermal waters is obtained from oxygen isotope ratios in the calcites, which will usually  be  more  depleted  in  18O  than  in  any  meteoric precipitates nearby (section 8.6). Deep-seated  hydro- thermal calcites luminesce with a brief but   strong

orange-red glow that is absent in cool-water precipitates (Shopov 1997).
7.7.2 The form of hydrothermal caves
The form of the majority of known hydrothermal caves is similar to that of the confined and basal injection meteo- ric water types of caves already discussed, because  the hydrogeological settings are identical in broad terms, i.e. they are rising water shafts as in Figure 7.26, or  single storey or multistorey mazes as in Figure 7.28.
  One further  type  of  cave  should  be considered  first, however, because of its comparative simplicity. This is a roughly  spherical  or  cupola-form  void  created,   it is believed, by convection currents within the very slowly flowing water. Individual voids may be no  more than football-sized or range up to chambers of several hundred metres in diameter. Clusters of small ones create sponge- works, as in Figure 5.23. Large  examples may be com- plex, with multiple cupolas branching from one another. In thinner strata or where  overenlarged, these grade to deep solution breccias  (Figure 7.29a) that, in S-rich waters, may host  precipitates of calcite and dolomite with sulphide minerals such as pyrite, galena and spha- lerite. Very large, more irregular, cavities full of thermal water are sometimes encountered by exploratory drilling. The largest recorded is the Madan Chamber, in Archaean and  Proterozoic marbles in a tin–zinc ore zone in the
Rhodope Mountains, Bulgaria (Dubljansky 2000a).  The cavity has a volume estimated at 240 106 m3 (more than ten times greater than the largest mapped cave chamber) and at one point apparently measures > 1340 m from roof to floor. Water temperatures range 90–130○C in the chamber; pressure increases from 37  to 170 atm, roof to floor.
  Simple rising water shafts following major joints, faults or steeply dipping bedding planes are perhaps the most widespread type of thermal cave. The deepest known examples of shaft caves active today are  Pozzo de Merro, Italy (—392 m) and El Zacaton,   Mexico (> 329 m). Both are close to volcanic centres. El Zacaton (Figure 7.29c) and nearby shafts have thick  travertine deposits and rich biomats. Water  temperatures are only 5–10○C above regional means,  suggesting mixing of thermal and meteoric water. A  robot underwater sonar mapper and biosampler, DEPTHX, is being developed to explore this site (Gary  et al. 2002). In contrast to such mixing, 150 km southwest of El Zacaton in the Sierra de El Abra, two  great meteoric springs (Coy and Choy) discharge  waters at 25–27○C from depths > 200 m but, between them and from the same strata, Taninul Springs discharge distinct, H2S-rich water at 40○C.





Figure 7.29 (a) Typical features of a deep cave chamber that has collapsed to form a solution breccia. Sagging, slightly displaced strata are crackle breccia. The clast-supported central pile is pack breccia. Basal fragments dispersed in insoluble residues accumulated before collapse are float breccia. Reproduced with permission from Dz˙ulynski , S. and Sass-Gutkiewicz, M. (1989) Pb- Zn ores, in Paleokarst – a Systematic and Regional Review (eds P. Bosz´k, D.C. Ford, J. Glazek and I. Hora´cˇek), Academia Praha/ Elsevier, Prague/Amsterdam, pp. 377–97. (b) Csiki Shaft, a remarkable palaeothermal water shaft that was exposed in a quarry near Budapest, Hungary: 1, dolomite; 2, grus (dolomite pulverized by thermal water); 3, shaft walls are firmly cemented by precipitated silica. Reproduced from Jakucs, L. (1977) Morphogenetics of Karst Regions: Variants of Karst Evolution, Akademiai Kiado, Budapest, 284 pp. (c) El Zacaton and neighbouring thermal water shafts at Rancho La Azufrosa, Mexico. Adapted from Gary, M.O., Sharp, J.M., Havens, R.S. and Stone, W.C. (2002) Sistema Zacato´n: identifying the connection between volcanic activity  and hypogenic karst in a hydrothermal phreatic cave system. Geo2, 29(3–4), 1–14.

  Most known thermal shafts are now drained and relict. Historically,  many  were  explored  by  miners  exploiting their secondary mineral deposits. The celebrated Fersman Cave, Kirghizstan, was mined to —220 m. It contains an
exotic uranium mineral, tyuyamuyunite, that was pre-
cipitated  at  40–60○C,  and  succeeded  by  barites   and calcites at ~30○C (Dubljansky 2000). Stari Trg  Mine,

Croatia, is a complex of shafts with small mazes, single galleries and chambers, 600 m in depth, discovered during zinc–lead mining. Its lower 400 m was filled  with warm water until pumped out. The Csiki Shaft  (Figure 7.29b) illustrates some other  striking  effects   of thermal karstification. Dolomite is often pulverized (reduced to grus) in the thermal aureole. At Csiki, the walls of the




central shaft were then reinforced by silica cementation  at high temperature: preferential erosion of the surround- ing rock and grus has left the ancient shaft  protruding several metres like a hollowed tree trunk!
7.7.3 Ro´zsadomb, Hungary
Budapest was founded upon hotsprings along the  River Danube. Almost the full range of thermal cave types can be  found  there  under  Rozsadomb  (Rose  Hill, the diplo- matic quarter), including relict shafts,  linear passages, two- and three-dimensional mazes, and modern phreatic caves discharging thermal waters at   the river level. Cherty Triassic limestones with some  palaeokarst are overlain unconformably by 40–60 m of  Eocene lime- stones covered by marls that form a largely impermeable cap. There is a complex block-fault geological structure that may incorporate buried karst  towers (Figure 7.30). Uplift has progressively drained the older, higher caves, and left extensive deposits of spring travertines stranded up to 150 m above the modern river. Mean temperatures of meteoric waters invading   the caves  are  8–13○C. Different  thermal  springs   have mean temperatures between 20 and 60○C, indicating that differing amounts of mixing takes place.
  The Ma´tya´s–Pa´lvo¨lgy and Ferenc-hegy caves are multi- storey mazes following joint-guided alteration  zones in which the limestone is partly disintegrated and silicified, as in the Csiki shaft. Alteration is attributed to Miocene fore- Alp volcanism (Muller and Sarvary  1977). Calcite raft debris indicates many past water levels. Szemlo¨hegy Cave is a more simple outlet rift  on joints; it has abundant subaqueous calcite crusts.  Molna´r  Ja´nos  is  the  modern outlet;   its   warm   waters have been  dived  to  —70 m, discovering ~4 km of phreatic maze. Jo´szefhegy Cave is a shaft  descending to ramiform chambers with abundant secondary gypsum deposits. It is transitional to the  H2S class of hypogene caves (section 7.8), indicating how these two classes may mingle within a small geographical area.
7.7.4 Jewel Cave and Wind Cave, South Dakota
Jewel Cave and Wind Cave (Figure 7.27) are the greatest known multistorey thermal mazes. They developed in 90–140 m of well-bedded limestones and dolomites uplifted and fractured by Eocene intrusion. There are modern hot springs nearby, but at lower elevation.  The caves have a rich and complex history of  Mississipian palaeokarst genesis that was succeeded by infilling, deep burial   and   mineralization,   before   uplift and modern development with some exhumation began in the Tertiary (Palmer and Palmer 1989, 1995).
  
Jewel Cave is now entirely relict. It has no relation to the surface topography and is entered where intersected by canyons. Its great features are large passages (up to 20 m in height) mostly or entirely covered by nailhead spar. In the highest places the spar has been partly  removed by condensation corrosion. Elsewhere, it is generally 6–15 cm thick and often has a thin silica overgrowth.
  Wind Cave is lower in elevation and nearer to the hot springs. The morphology is similar to that at Jewel Cave but there is little spar encrustation. It, too, is a  hydro- logical relict but its lowest accessible parts are filled by semi-static waters fed from below. Calcite  rafts form upon them. They are  cooling  backwaters   of  mixed thermal–meteoric composition. They have been lowered at a mean rate of ~40 cm 1000 year  during the past 400 000 year as a consequence of  evolution at the hot- springs (Ford et al. 1993).
  Boxwork is uniquely well developed in these caves. It occurs  in  microfractured  dolomites  where  the  fractures are filled with calcite. Under incongruent  dissolution conditions (section 3.5) the dolomite was dissolved, but the calcite veins were preserved. Later,  further calcite precipitated onto the veins, which now protrude as much as 100 cm from roofs and walls.
7.8 HYPOGENE CAVES: CAVES FORMED    BY WATERS CONTAINING H2S
Formation of Hþ þ HS and of H2SO4  were summarized  in Chapter 3. Despite their potency, the quantitative significance in most karst regions is nearly negligible because   the   quantities   of   H2S   obtainable   are   small.
However, recent studies strongly suggest that Hþ ion
or sulphuric acid from basinal fluids or other sources (equations 3.70–3.75; Figure 3.11) are important in some very large caves, including the famous Carlsbad Caverns and Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico.
  The basic principles of simple, purely H2SO4, cave genesis are indicated in Figure 7.31 (left). The H2S rising from depth mixes with O2-rich meteoric waters, creating large cavities at and around the water table. The  most simple form is a cave with short, horizontal vadose outlet passages in limestone that taper in dimension  inwards, where  they  terminate  in  springs  rising   from narrow fissures. The waters are warm and rich in H2S, which is liberated   into   the   air.   Walls   and   roofs are deeply encrusted with gypsum. The H2S is oxidized to sulphate and hydrogen ion, which reacts to replace the limestone with gypsum (Figure 7.32; equations 3.56 and 3.57). The gypsum replacement  crusts fail because of their weight plus expansion forces, exposing fresh limestone to altera- tion. Fallen crust is dissolved by the vadose streams. The





Figure 7.30   (a) Geological section displaying the thermal water circulation at Budapest. Reproduced with permission from Muller,
P. and I. Sarvary, Some aspects of developments in Hungarian speleology theories during the last ten years, 53 59 © 1977 Karszt es Barlang. (b) Spring travertines and caves of Ro’zsadomb, Budapest: 1, Ma´tya´shegy-Pa´lvo¨lgy Cave; 2, Ferenchegy Cave;  3, Szemlo¨hegy Cave; 4, Jo¨szefhegy Cave; 5, Molna´r Ja´nos hotsprings and cave.





Figure 7.31 (Left) Model for the development of ramiform caves around the water table by oxidation of H2S. Reproduced from Palmer, A.N. (1995) Geochemical models for the origin of macroscopic solution porosity in carbonate rocks. in Unconformities and Porosity in Carbonate Strata (eds D.A. Budd, P.M. Harris and A. Saller), Memoir 63, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, pp. 77–101. (Right) Sa´torko¨puszta Cave, Hungary. Spheroidal dissoloution cupolas sprout from a basal source chamber where the limestone walls have been converted to gypsum. Reproduced from Muller, P. and I. Sarvary, Some aspects of developments in Hungarian speleology theories during the last ten years. Karszt es Barlang, 53–59, 1977.


caves   enlarge   headwards   from   original   valley   floor springs, into the rock. Egemeier (1981) described exam- ples in Big Horn Basin, Wyoming; the largest is 420 m in length and has an average diameter of 14 m.  Cueva de Villa Luz, Mexico, is an example in which both H2S and CO2 concentrations can attain lethal levels, partly gener- ated by chemoautotrophic bacteria (Hose 2004).
7.8.1 Sa´torko¨puszta Cave and Ba´tori Cave, Hungary
These remarkable limestone caves consist of basal cham- bers (that may be likened to magma chambers) formed at a palaeowater-table, from which a branching pattern  of rising passages have grown like the trunk and branches of a   tree.   The  chamber   walls   are   largely   converted to gypsum. The rising passages are  sequences of partly interlocked, semi-spherical   convectional   condensation cupolas.  Sa´torko¨puszta,  the larger cave, is shown in Figure 7.31; it extends for 100 m above the basal cham- ber. It is possible that these caves are monogenetic H2S systems; alternatively, they  are major enlargements by H2S processes of earlier  rising-water shafts of more conventional origin.
7.8.2 Ramiform caves of the Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico–Texas, and other regions
The southern Guadalupe Mountains are the type  region for very large H2S caves. The Mountains are  built of

massive   Permian   reef,   fore-reef   and   back-reef   strata forming an escarpment ~50 km in length (Figure 3.11). This  is  dissected  by  many  canyons,  which  have inter- cepted and exposed more than 30 major  caves, most of which occupy anticlinal trap positions.  The region is semi-arid, lacking the large volumes of water needed to develop caves of enormous size by conventional uncon- fined meteoric waters.
  The caves have maze and ramiform patterns, with great rooms linked to higher passages or shafts, and underlain by blind pits. The largest have three or more distinct levels many metres or tens of metres apart in elevation, like typical levels in unconfined meteoric caves.  Many contain blocks of layered gypsum, up to 7 m in thickness, resting on thinner residual clay deposits. The Big Room of  Carlsbad  is  representative.  It  is  up  to  80 m in height and contains enormous calcite stalagmites and columns. Rooms are interconnected by breakdown or spongework mazes. There are few  indicators of the palaeoflow. The caves are relict, without any relation to modern topogra- phy or surface hydrology.
  Sulphur in the gypsum is very depleted in the  heavy isotope 34S, indicating that it derived from H2S produced by biogenic reduction in the adjoining oil and gas fields. The H2S migrated updip  with expelled  basin fluids that were discharged at a sequence of  springs. As the reef complex was uplifted and exposed by differential erosion during the Tertiary, the spring points shifted eastwards to progressively lower elevations. The highest caves are at





Figure 7.32 Gypsum formation under phreatic conditions in a New Mexico cave. (a) Gypsum replaces limestone wall rock (1) to depths up to 30 cm. Layered gypsum with residual clay and pisolites accumulates on the floor (2). Possible late stage of slow deposition of large gypsum crystals on all exposed surfaces (3).
(b) The cave drains and dries. Gypsum replacement crusts and floor deposits are dessicated and shrink. An overgrowth evapori- tic crust of gypsum (4) forms on the dessicated deposits. (From observations by  M.  Buck.)  (c)  In contrast, at  Atlantida  Cave, Ukraine, standard atmospheric condensation water with  dis- solved CO2 is replacing massive gypsum wall rock with ~5 cm of calcite. (From observations by A. Klimchouk.)

~2200 m a.s.l. Dating of alunite by 40Ar/39Ar (section 8.6) places their oldest outlets at ~12 million years. Carlsbad Caverns and Lechuguilla Cave (Figure 7.33) have three or four principal levels between 1100 and 1370 m a.s.l., the higher being ~6 million years in age and the lower (Big Room–Lefthand Tunnel at 1100 m  in Carlsbad Caverns) ~3.5 million years. The lowest   explored points (950–1000 m a.s.l.), are at or a few tens of metres above the modern water table;  studies    around 1000 m a.s.l. in Carlsbad Cavern reveal  episodes of



protracted flooding there within the past two million years that are probably consequences of the Quaternary colder periods. Lechuguilla Cave, in particular, has an extremely complex morphology that appears to be related in part to exhumation of some much older palaeokarst. Du Chene and Hill (2000) present a comprehensive review.
  The Frasassi caves of Ancona, Italy, are a smaller two- level complex with similar morphology and origin. The prime role of H2S has been recognized there since 1978 (Galdenzi and Menichetti 1990). Auler and Smart (2003) proposed it for maze caves in Bahia Province, Brazil, and it is recognized in caves of the Grand Canyon, Arizona. At Baiyun Cave, Hebei Province, China, the Guadalupe geological structure is reproduced in miniature but, in this case, with basinal coal measures supplying the H2S; the oldest karst remnants are calcite flowstones preserved on the   highest   peaks   of   the   denuded   anticline.   Akhali Atoni Cave, Georgia, is another system of large chambers and galleries created by waters rising   through them (Tintilozov 1983). It is in the footslope of the Caucasus Mountains at the edge of the Black Sea.  A mixture of cool springs and warm springs with CO2  and H2S emerge a few hundred metres distant. When they are in flood the lower cave is also back-flooded. It appears to be essen- tially of the Carlsbad type, but with deep CO2 and warm– cold water mixing corrosion  processes perhaps playing more of a role than in the New Mexican examples.
7.9 SEA-COAST EOGENETIC CAVES
Here we are considering development of caves in young, newly emergent limestones that have not been buried and compacted beneath later sediments to a significant extent. The term ‘eogenetic’ refers to the sequence of dissolution and  cementation  events that occurs  during  the  subaerial diagenesis of young limestones such as calcareous dune sands (Vacher and Quinn 1997). These conditions occur chiefly in those tropical to  mid-latitude coastal regions where the rocks are later Tertiary or Quaternary in age. Effective porosity is high  so that, although penetrable fissures are less important  than in more mature rocks, water-table levels are determined primarily by sea level. If there is fresh  water, it is usually as a lens resting on saline water  underneath (section 5.8). All development, diagenetic and karstic, is complicated by the fact that sea levels  have been oscillating quite rapidly between þ10 and  —130 m or more due to the Quaternary glaciations. Open  cavities  on  coasts  are  also  subject  to  concurrent enlargement or destruction by mechanical wave action.
  Syngenetic  caves  are  formed  simultaneously  with
lithification (Jennings 1968) and are the most fundamen-





Figure 7.33   (Upper) The long section and map of Carlsbad Caverns. (Lower) The map of Lechuguilla Cave. Both caves are in the Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico.


tal class of eogenetic cavities. While carbonate sand dunes and beach ridges are accumulating, their surfaces may become cemented to depths of centimetres or tens of centimetres by dissolution and precipitation following rain,  spray  or  dew  fall.  This  can  form  calcrete  that  is strong enough to  support a cave roof. At their  most simple, syngenetic caves are produced by the mechanical washout   of   unconsolidated   sands   beneath  such  thin

calcrete  layers.  Washout  occurs  where  streams  flowing from hinterlands, tidal swamps or  small   shafts, or wave action, can breach the calcrete. Cave  chambers
> 10 m  in  diameter  are  known  (White  1994).   More often, localized washout is coupled with both dissolution and cementation at the water table and elsewhere in the dune to create shallow spongework  caves of greater extent (Figure 7.34).




Figure 7.34 A model for syngenetic cave and karst development in accumulating calcareous sand dunes. Reproduced with permission from Grimes, K.G., Mott, K. and White, S., The Gambier Karst Province. Proceedings of the 13th Australian Conference on Cave and Karst Management. 1–7, 1999.





Figure 7.35   (a) General model for zones of enhanced solubility in a young carbonate island. (Left) Development of caves at the water table and along the halocline is stressed. (Right) Model distribution of cavities in the Yates oilfield buried karst, Texas. Adapted from Craig, D.H. (1987) Caves and other features of Permian karst in San Andres dolomites, Yates field reservoir, West Texas, in Paleokarst (eds N.P. James and P.W. Choquette), Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 342–63.(b) Model for the development of flank margin caves. Reproduced from Mylroie, J.E. and Carew, J.L. (1990) The flank margin model for dissolution cave development in carbonate platforms. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 15, 413–24. (c) Map of Lirio Cave, Isla de Mona, Puerto Rico, an outstanding example of a flank margin cave. (By J.E. Mylroie, with permission.)

  Where the initial cementation is strong enough to prevent large amounts of washout, small primary vadose caves (rounded shafts, often termed pit caves or soil pipes) develop in the vadose zone. Conduit caves may be created along the water table where there are  allogenic streams or where the autogenic catchment is sufficiently extensive. For example, Mylroie and Carew (2000) note
that many conduits developed under the Bahamas when falls of only 10 m below modern sea level increased the dry land catchment area of the Bahamas Banks by  ten times or more; these caves are now drowned and inert.
  In principle,  caves may  develop  on limestone  coasts anywhere along the halocline as a consequence of mixing corrosion, although in practice the effects are much less obvious in ancient crystalline limestones  than in young porous limestones. As already noted (section 3.7), intense dissolution is common in many  large coastal caves, creating microspongeworks there.  But in such cases the caves themselves usually have a different origin, and the halocline entered them as a result of post-glacial sea-level rise. Gunn and Lowe (2000)  describe short, inclined caves in the Tongan Archipelago that may have evolved along the length of haloclines  beneath fringing reefs,

but  little  other  evidence  is  reported.  Rapid  Quaternary sea-level changes have tended to keep the elevation of the halocline in a state of flux, creating small cavities over a substantial vertical range rather than a few larger caves; this pattern is suggested by the empirical model given on the right-hand side of Figure 7.35a.
  Mylroie and Carew (1990) have shown  convincingly that caves can develop very quickly  around the coast where the water table in diagenetically young limestones meets the sea. In these  circumstances,  fresh-  and  salt- water  mixing  is  coupled with oxidation/reduction pro-
cesses there to create flank margin caves (Figure 7.35b).
A  mixing  dissolution  front  recedes  irregularly  into  the rock, leaving wide, low-roofed caves between pillars of more resistant rock in its rear. In the ideal case, the front itself is an abrupt (blind) termination of the cavity, with no suggestion of a proto-cave tube in it. Physically, this model is close to that envisaged by Rhoades and Sinacori (1941; section 7.2) for meteoric cave genesis. The origi- nal studies on San Salvador Island, Bahamas, focused on development in the margins of calcareous dunes, where it was shown that the caves were able to extend back into cemented dunes of the previous interglacial stage at mean




rates  up  to  0.5–1.0 m kyr—1.  It  applies  equally  well  to uplifted reef and platform strata. Figure 7.35c  shows Lirio Cave,  Isla de  Mona, Puerto  Rico  (Mylroie and Jenson 2002). This exceptional example  is an uplifted, relict marginal cave at a contact between platform lime- stones and dolomites underlying a  plateau. The cave extends as much as 250 m into the  rock. However, that was no more than 5% of the  width of the plateau; a freshwater lens could be sustained under the remainder of it, so maintaining an effective mixing front. The ratio of width to height in the many chambers between the pillars in this cave is always > 10:1
7.10 PASSAGE CROSS-SECTIONS AND SMALLER FEATURES OF EROSIONAL MORPHOLOGY
The erosional form of a cave passage may be attributable entirely to dissolution in phreatic (pressure flow) condi- tions  or  in  vadose  (free-flow)  conditions  or  alternating (floodwater) conditions. Many passages are  compound forms displaying, first, phreatic erosion and then vadose erosion. Dissolutional forms of every kind may be mod- ified or destroyed by collapse of walls  or roof. Break- down processes are reviewed in section 7.12.
  There is a great variety of smaller forms (speleogens)
eroded into cave ceilings, walls and floors, including standard and variant channels plus many types of karren,

most of which also occur above ground. Lauritzen  and Lundberg (2000) gave a comprehensive review in which passage cross-sections are classified as  mesoforms, and lesser speleogens within them as   microforms. Slabe (1995) illustrated the latter in detail, using many simula- tions with plaster-of-Paris. Bini  (1978) and Zhu (1988) also presented general classifications.
7.10.1 Phreatic passage cross-sections
When  first  connected,  phreatic  passages  (Fr.  conduites force´s) have a subcircular cross-section or (if resistance is very low) are elongated along the fissure  (Figure 7.36a and b).  Diameter  or  width  is  no   more  than  a  few centimetres. The dissolutional  attack is delivered to all parts of the perimeter.
  The form that develops as the passage enlarges further is a function of the interaction between passive  variables (lithological and structural) and active mass transfer vari- ables (fluid velocity, dissolution potential, type and abun- dance of clastic load). Figure 7.36c  illustrates the case where geological properties are  isotropic or the active variables are much more  significant (normally, flow is very fast). The minimum friction cross-section (a circular pipe) is maintained (Figure 7.37). Circular cross-sections are common, even  at great size, e.g. at La Hoya de Zimapan (Figure  7.15) the diameter is ~30 m, both where flow is vertically upwards and where it is horizontal.





Figure 7.36   The evolution of phreatic passage cross-sections. In the lower frame, effects of differing solubility in beds above and below the exploited bedding plane and along the joint are illustrated.





Figure 7.37   Cross-sections of some phreatic passages. (Top left and middle) Passages centred on bedding planes; residual flood clays mask the floors. (Top right) A passage centred on a small, inclined fault. (These views in Castleguard Cave, Canada). (Bottom right) A joint-centred passage, Grotte Valerie, Canada. (Bottom left) A bedding plane passage in Mammoth Cave,  Kentucky. (Photographs by Ford and (bottom left) A.N. Palmer.)


  Isotropic geology with slow mass transfer will  simi- larly permit the simple fissure to enlarge  uniformly to great size. More often, however, passive  variables  are anisotropic  normal  to  bedding  planes  (i.e. properties change significantly from bed to bed).  Irregular profiles must  then  evolve  (Figures  7.36d,  7.36 lower and 7.37). The extent of irregularity may be a function of size, and thus of the aggregate amount of erosion time.
  
The variety of phreatic cross-sections is enormous, but all are variations on these themes. Lange (1968) and Sˇustersˇic (1979) have attempted formal geometric analyses.
7.10.2 Anastomoses, pendants and half-tubes
Anastomoses may be independent forms or, with  pen- dants or half-tubes, can constitute a gradational  set of





Figure 7.38 (Top) Dissolution pockets in passage ceilings. Since the cave drained, the pocket at right has begun to fill  calcite speleothems fed from the joint that guided its dissolution. (Photographs by Ford.) (Bottom left) Anastomoses in the roof of a passage in Mammoth Cave, Kentucky. (Bottom right) ‘Boneyard’ – intense pocketing associated with H2SO4 formation in oxidizing waters, shown here in reefal rock at Carlsbad Caverns, New Mexico; also characteristic of coastal mixing caves.  (Photographs by A.N. Palmer.)



features (Figure 7.38). Independent anastomoses are the subsidiaries of primary tubes. They may continue to extend throughout the phreatic history of a cave. The frequency   of   their   divergence   and  convergence   is   a function of properties of the fissure and of its  gradient.

Vertical joints, steeply dipping bedding planes, etc. show relatively little anastomosing.
  Excellent anastomoses can originate late in the history of a cave where water from an established large passage opens up hitherto impenetrable bedding planes or fractures




(i.e. effective fissure frequency is increased). This is best seen where stratal dip is low. Often it appears that the penetration is by floodwater, e.g. into bedding planes overlying the original ceiling in many places in Mammoth Cave, Kentucky.
  Pendants (Ger. deckenkarren) are residual pillars of rock between anastomosing channels. They can develop in bedding planes and joints, where they are gradational from anastomoses. They also appear on unfissured  ero- sional surfaces such as cave walls where they developed at the contact with rather impermeable clastic fill. They may be as much as 1 m long and can cover tens of square metres  of  cave  wall.  They  can  be  carved  by water draining up, down or along the contact.  Very diverse and complex patterns can be created.
  Ceiling half-tubes (Fr. chenaux de voute, Ger. wirbelk- anal) are equally common but more controversial. Some develop where a bed is more resistant. We consider that the  great  majority  develop  to  carry  the  surviving  flow through a passage that has become choked with sediment,
i.e. they are a stage beyond the ideal paragenetic passage of Figure 7.19. Although normally found in the apex of a passage, horizontal examples are known in walls, while others climb from wall to apex. In the apex, they  often transform into a broader pattern of pendants  (and back again), especially where ceilings are horizontal. Lauritzen (1981) has reproduced them experimentally.
  If half-tubes are in the apex, they are the last places to fill during a flood. This led Bo¨gli (1980) to propose that they develop because the CO2 of trapped air is dissolved there,  enhancing  the  local  solvent  capability.  They  are found in deep phreatic conditions (and in gypsum caves), so this explanation can be only partial.
7.10.3 Solution pockets and cupolas
Solution pockets are one of the most attractive  features of phreatic caves and one which most surprises geomor- phologists who are not cave specialists. They may occur in floors and walls but are best developed  in the roofs (Figure 7.38). They are varieties of blind  pockets that extend as much as 30–40 m upwards. Many terminate in a tight joint or microjoint that they have  followed during expansion. They may be single or  multiple features, rounded like conventional cupolas,  or elongated along the guiding fracture. Some are  multicuspate and transi- tional to honeycomb structure; these develop particularly well in vuggy rock, e.g. reefs. Some pockets are complexly multicuspate but have neither vugs nor joints to guide them. Osborne (2004) gives a comprehensive review.
  It is now well established that pockets can be created by  condensation  corrosion  in  vadose  conditions.  These

are considered in section 7.11. In relict phreatic  caves, however, the majority of solution pockets will generally be of phreatic origin except, possibly, in periodically wet– dry entrance zones or climatic chimney sites (section 7.11). Several different mechanisms have  been proposed to explain these. Most widely accepted  is dissolution by cellular convection in near-static waters, driven either by thermal gradients or by solute  density gradients. Bo¨gli (1980) firmly believed that  mixing corrosion explained them in meteoric water  caves, where enriched subsoil solutions descending the guiding joints mixed with bulk water flowing in the cave passage to create mixing points of accelerated dissolution; Veress et al. (1992) presented a  comprehensive analysis of the geometry produced by such mixing. However, the likely mixing ratios (one volume  from  the  joint  per  100–1000  volumes  or  more from the passage) seem to preclude this as anything more than a local trigger mechanism in limestone caves; also, pockets of identical form are seen in gypsum caves where mixing corrosion is not a factor and, as noted,  many pockets lack a source joint. Pocketing certainly  occurs where salt and fresh waters mix at the halocline in coastal caves in young limestones, but it tends to be  small and rough, unlike the typical smoothly rounded  or edged forms illustrated in Figure 7.38. It has been  suggested that pocketing may be due to flooding (i.e. an epiphreatic phenomenon), or to compression of air during floods. In many phreatic caves, however, it is found that the taller pockets terminate upwards at one given  elevation that was determined by a palaeowater-table,  i.e. they were always submerged. Some of these  display a corrosion notch just below the top that marks the low-stage water level, e.g. the Cheddar caves shown in Figure 7.22.
7.10.4 Vadose passages, corrasion and potholes
The form of vadose passages is that of entrenchment, with or without widening. At its minimum  development, the entrenchment is an underfit in the  floor of a phreatic passage (Figure 7.39a). This suggests that regional phrea- tic flow has been rerouted and the passage now handles only local epikarst drainage.  T-form or keyhole com- pound passages as in Figure 7.39b suggest that the same river    has    always    occupied them, switching from phreatic to vadose  conditions. Figures 7.39c and e are characteristic of     drawdown vadose morphology; entrenchment  predominates but the phreatic part was first and fixes  the position of the trench on the map. There may be multiple entrenchments, where each floor represents a  former  baselevel,  as  in  the  example  from Belgium  that is  shown Figure  7.39d. Single  trenches as deep as 100 m are known; they are canyons with a roof on.





Figure 7.39 Vadose entrenchments: A–F, see text; cross-section D from Grotte Ste. Anne de Tilff, Belgium (Ek 1961); G, McClung’s Cave, West Virginia, a typical example of entrenchment from an initial phreatic passage in limestones down  into mechanically weaker shales; H, purely dissolutional stream potholing in limestone arrested by a basal shale band; J, a large pothole eliminated by underfit stream entrenchment, which destroys its plunge. Reproduced from Ford, D.C. (1965b) Stream potholes as indicators of erosion phases in caves. Bulletin of the National Speleogical Society, 27(1), 27–32.


  Many  entrenching  streams  are  able  to  establish  long profiles that in fluvial geomorphology would  suggest rough equilibrium. The channel becomes  armoured by bedload  moved  only  during  floods.   This encourages channel widening. Cave walls are   undermined,  and large blocks collapse from them into the channel which deflects flow to the opposite wall,  where the process is repeated. By the mixture of undercutting and breakdown a  trapezoid  cross-section  of stable width is achieved (Figure 7.39f). This is a very common form.
  Although all categories of vadose channels can be created by dissolution alone, mechanical erosion by bed- load  (corrasion)  is  often  important.  This  is  attested  by

innumerable instances where the entrenchment is largely or entirely in underlying insoluble rocks. Gouffre Pierre St Martin, one of the world’s deepest systems (Table 7.2 and Figure 2.17) is a celebrated instance. Figure  7.39g shows a more extreme example; in the ‘Contact’ caves of Greenbrier County, West Virginia, passages extend for tens of kilometres in insoluble but mechanically weak shales beneath initial, much smaller, limestone solution caves.
  Where channel gradients are steep and the rock is hard, stream potholes (Fr. marmites) may develop. These occur in all strong rocks, being drilled when grinder boulders are trapped and spun (rock mills) in any small hole  in the channel bed. However, they are most frequent and display




the most regular form in hard limestones, dolomites and (pre-eminently) in marbles, because dissolution in the swirling water reinforces the grinding there and may replace it entirely (Ford 1965b; Figure 7.39h). To main- tain and deepen a pothole a minimum plunging force (height times discharge) is necessary. In some caves this is lost, a narrow entrenchment being cut through the pothole so that it is left abandoned in the wall  (Figure 7.39j). There are two successive flights of eliminated potholes in Swildon’s Hole, England, and a third flight in the active channel is in process of  elimination. It is apparently an effect of changes in the dominant discharge.
7.10.5 Meandering channels in vadose caves
Three distinct types of meandering channels occur in vadose  caves.  The  entrenched  meandering  canyon

develops where a waterfall (a knickpoint) recedes  along a meandering channel (Figure 7.41a). The  canyon has simple  vertical walls  and  meanders only  in plan view. This type is common where strata are flat-lying and there is a deep vadose zone with many invasion streams.
  Ingrowing meandering canyons are created by mean-
dering entrenchment down into bedrock. There is no waterfall   recession.   As   the   channel   is   cut   down   it migrates forward (Figure 7.41a) and it may also do  so as it rises (Figure 7.41b). Ingrown meanders are common in surface canyons (e.g. the famous ‘goosenecks’ of the San Juan River, Colorado),  but   they achieve  their supreme  morphological   development in well-bedded limestones in caves. Many examples are several tens of metres deep and some  kilometers in length, but too narrow for an explorer to pass through most parts. Deep ingrowing meanders will often wander laterally far from





Figure 7.40   (Top) Vadose entrenchments; note dissolutional scallops in left and centre frames. (Bottom) Basal undercutting  to create trapezoid or breakdown forms. (Photographs by Ford, A.N. Palmer and A.C. Waltham.)





Figure 7.41   Meandering channels in caves. (a) Bedrock meanders ingrowing below an initial phreatic passage. (b)  Paragenetic passage meandering above an initial phreatic passage. Reproduced from Ewers, R.O. (1982) Cavern development in the dimensions of length and breadth. McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, 398 pp. (c) Ingrowing bedrock meanders in caves compared with alluvial channels and surficial bedrock channels. (Modified from Smart and Brown 1981.) Bedrock cave meander measurements in Ireland and New Zealand trend counter to the norm found in surface rivers. (d) Part of the composite (bedrock and alluvial)  channel pattern in Hurricane River Cave, Arkansas, USA. (Adapted from a map by N.W. and J.O. Youngsteadt, with permission.)


the original passage above if they encounter a particularly penetrable bedding plane.
  Smart and Brown (1981) studied ingrowing meanders in the Burren, Ireland, and at Waitomo in New Zealand. The most striking result is that the relationship between meander wavelength and channel width is the converse

of that found in other meanders, alluvial or bedrock (Figure 7.41c). In the examples they measured, channel width increases downstream (the standard response to increased discharge from addition of tributaries) but canyon height diminishes as the water table is approached; this may have determined the unusual behaviour.




  Alluvial meanders develop where the channel is formed  in  sand,  gravel,  etc.  on  a  broad  passage  floor. Deike and White (1969) showed that examples  in Mis- souri caves behaved morphometrically in the same man- ner as all surface channel meanders (Figure 7.41d). There is one major distinction, however;  because the rock is soluble the alluvial channel may pass smoothly into the wall (becoming a bedrock channel) and back out again. Where there is slow  downcutting (or paragenetic rise) of the channel floor  this creates tapered fins of rock (bedrock point-bars)  projecting into the passage. They are another channel form that is rarely or never found at the surface.
7.10.6 Vadose shafts
Shafts created by falling water are known up to 640 m in depth. Many of the deepest caves are of the primary or invasion  vadose  types  and  consist  of  spacious  vertical shafts linked by short sections of constricted  meander canyon (Figure 7.17).
  The form of shafts ranges between two extremes. The first is that created by a powerful waterfall. The  water mass  itself  will  tend  to create  a  simple   circular or elliptical cross-section for its fall but this is often mod- ified. Breccia is swept out of any guiding fault, to form a parallel wall shaft. A plunge pool  undercuts the walls which, therefore, tend to display  irregular taper rather than parallelism near the base. Spray at all levels attacks weaknesses to produce local block fall. Many shafts are highly irregular in form as a result of these effects.
  The other extreme is that of the domepit created by a
relatively slow and steady flow (Figure 7.42). This may
7.10.7 
Salt caves – rapid vadose cave development
Rock salt is ~1000 times more soluble than limestone. As a  consequence,  cave  development  is  very  rapid.  Many caves of enterable size have been created where allogenic streams were introduced by salt mining operations during the past few centuries, including  some large ones with tourist cave appeal such as Forat Mico in the Cardona salt diapir, Spain (Cardona and Viver 2002).
  Explorable salt caves are largely limited to a primary vadose zone and the water table. Where streams can leak through a caprock, shafts are quickly drilled by (essentially) dissolution mining straight down following intergrain  boundaries.  Vertical  joints  or  other  fractures are not required. The fast, largely first-order,  kinetics prohibit  lengthy  penetration  beneath  any  water  table unless  it  is  along  an  interformation  contact such as an underlying dolomite. In most situations, the cave below the entrance shafts is a  gallery perched on an insoluble base above the water table, or it has the juvenile type of profile of  Figure   7.17. Where there is ponding in perched situations,  deep corrosion notches (below) are soon cut at the water line. Similarly, juvenile profiles are quickly   lowered to the minimum  gradient  required to   transport whatever bedload is supplied from the caprock.
  The greatest known salt caves are 2–6 km in  length. Greatest depths are 150–200 m. The leading studies have been by Frumkin (1995, 2000a,b) at the  Mount Sedom diapir which overlooks the Dead Sea, a very arid locality. The diaper is capped with anhydrite. It is rising rapidly, with active faulting at the margins where the salt also has the tight concertina folding typical of  diapiric deforma-
14

occur as leakages at the base of the epikarst (Figure 5.28)

tion. By

C-dating remnant twigs stranded in upper

or below point-recharge depressions (Figure 5.16a),  and is able to attack drained joints in the vadose zone. In the ideal condition the flow is never large enough to detach
and fall free in the vertical plane. Instead, it is  retained

trenches, Frumkin was able to show that ~25 m of
entrenchment had occurred in 3300 year at  Mishqafaim Cave, keeping pace with the jerky, aperiodic rise of the diapir (Figure 7.43). Using erosion pins,  instantaneous
1 were measured, but

against the rock by surface tension. It disperses  radially from an input point and carves a set of  dissolutional flutings down the walls. The pit has a symmetric dome at

entrenchment rates up to 0.2 mm s—
only for a few minutes of storms during the 5 year observation period. Mean annual entrenchment-rate esti-
1, being greatest where allogenic

the top (where the first dispersion occurs) and is circular below. This kind of pit is best developed where strata are flat-lying  and  joints  are  few  and  with  high  resistance. This is the case in the Mammoth Cave area of Kentucky, where the form was first analysed (e.g.  Merrill 1960). There is a sandstone caprock there which functions as an additional regulator to maintain a steady, filming flow of aggressive water.
  Many shafts show a mixture of the two forms,  with waterfall features down the fall line and fluting of farther parts of the perimeter.

mates range 5–25 mm a—
catchments are largest. Salt caves in the Zagros  Moun- tains, Iran, have also been studied intensively  in recent years (see Bosak et al. 1999).
7.10.8 Scalloping by dissolution, sublimation and condensation
Dissolutional scallops are spoon-shaped scoops (Figure 7.44). They occur in packed patterns so that  individuals are usually overlapping and incomplete.  They are common





Figure 7.42   Fantastic Pit, Ellison’s Cave, Georgia, USA. This is a beautiful example of a fluted domepit. It is 190 m  deep, developed in thick to massively bedded limestones that are flat-lying. (Photograph by A.N. Palmer.)


on  walls, floors  and ceilings  in caves.  Inspection  shows that they are smallest where flow is fastest,  e.g. in a venturi. Measurement reveals that their  length is log- normally distributed, usually with  relatively little statis- tical dispersion. Most scallops  are 0.5–20 cm in length but they range up to 2 m. Width is ~50% of length. In the right conditions it is evident that patterns of scallops of characteristic length extend to   colonize  all  available

surfaces. They are the stable form of these surfaces  in the prevailing conditions.
  It has long been recognized that many scallops are strongly  asymmetrical  in  the  direction  of  flow.   The perimeter is steeper at the upstream end, i.e.  facing downstream (Bretz 1942). Flutes (Curl 1966)  show the
same asymmetry and are really scallops of infinite width; they are rare. In relict caves, scallops and flutes are





Figure 7.43  Long-section and cross-section through Mishqafaim Cave, a salt cave in the Mount Sedom diapir, Israel. It is  an excellent example of ‘episodic vadose entrenchment. Numbers’ are 14C ages in years of relict wood fragments stranded in the upper trenches. Reproduced with permission from Frumkin, A. and Ford, D.C., Rapid entrenchment of stream profiles in the salt caves of Mount Sedom, Israel. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 20, 139–152 © 1995 John Wiley and Sons.


Figure 7.44 Dissolutional scalloping. (a) Section through a scallop: 1, the saturated boundary layer detaches; 2, turbulent eddy (locus of maximum dissolution); 3, diffusion, mixing and reattachment; 4, course of the steepest cusp with further dissolution (the scallop migrates downstream). (b) The characteristic appearance of a fully developed scallop pattern on a surface; the entire surface is occupied and individuals overlap. (c) The predicted relation between Reynolds’ number and the ratio, conduit width or diameter d to
Sauter mean scallop length, L´ 32. Reproduced from Curl, R.L., Deducing flow velocity in cave conduits from scallops. Nat. Speleo.
Soc. Am. Bull. 36(2), pp. 1–5 © 1974 The Geological Society of America.




potentially important indicators of both the direction and velocity of palaeoflow.
  Scalloping is common in limestone, gypsum and  salt caves. However, not all limestone regions display it and it
  
An alternative, direct calculation for a compromise between circular and parallel wall cases is given by Curl (1966) and is accurate to T15%
v

is quite rare in dolomite caves. This is because uniform

v ¼ L´

55 ln D L	81

ð7:3Þ

rock grain size is necessary for good scalloping, and  a

32½

ð   h´32Þþ	]

lack of heterogeneities such as insoluble fragments or open pores. Many limestones and dolomites are too heterogeneous to develop scalloping, e.g. reef rocks.
  Scalloping also develops where wind blows over old, well-densified snow or through ice in a glacier cave.  It even develops (but without the steeper upstream  cusps) on infalling iron meteorites! In these cases the process is mass transfer by sublimation of homogeneous crystalline material. In the karst rocks it is the same,  but  with dissolution   substituting   for   sublimation.   Curl (1966) proposed an elegant theory of scallop and flute formation in which there is detachment of the  saturated boundary layer at a specified Reynolds’  Number (equation 5.6), occurring in the subcritical   turbulent flow regime. Detachment permits aggressive  bulk fluids to erode the solid rock directly (Figure   7.44). The frequency of detachment increases as velocity increases, thus reducing the erosion length  available to each individual scallop. Scallop length  will be inversely proportional to fluid velocity and to  fluid viscosity. Air has a much lower viscosity than  water;  for  a  given  velocity,  scallops  are longer (larger) in ice and snow than on limestone, etc.
  Curl’s (1966) theory has been quite exhaustively tested and confirmed with laboratory simulations and in the field (see Lauritzen et al. 1986). Mean palaeovelocity (v) in a channel may be computed by obtaining ReL from Curl’s graph for circular and parallel wall conduits (Figure 7.44c) and substituting the value in the equation

R´eL

where Dh  is the hydraulic diameter (four times  cross- section area divided by length of the wetted perimeter).
  The concept of dominant discharge is important through- out hydrology and fluvial geomorphology  because this is the flow assumed to be responsible for  channel width in alluvial rivers. It is difficult to establish and may not apply to bedrock channels. In  well-scalloped cave passages, however, we may think in terms of one or several ‘scallop dominant discharges’, i.e. those discharges that create the one or several Sauter  mean scallop lengths measured. In examples from  some Norwegian caves, Lauritzen et al. (1982) have  shown that the modern scallop dominant discharge is approximately equivalent to the annual snow- melt flood,  i.e. to the upper 5% of the flow regime, and some three times larger than mean annual discharge.
  At very high velocities sand may be entrained as suspen- ded load (Figure 8.2). Its abrasive effects then may override dissolutional effects so that scallops  become highly elon- gated and polished, resembling  ‘flute markings’ obtained experimentally by Allen (1972). This will only occur where there is an abundant  supply of hard (i.e. silica) sand and thus is rare in caves. Excellent examples are seen at narrow points in the great gallery of Niaux Cave, Pyrenees, which was  subjected to violent glacial meltwater floods. Simms (2004) compared the mean veolocities required to entrain particles and to produce solutional scallops. He found that the velocities necessary to entrain sand particles of 1 mm would produce scallops of about 10 cm length, and noted that  scallop  formation  continues  at  flow  velocities  two
orders of magnitude slower than the minimum  threshold

v ¼ v
32

ð7:1Þ

velocity for entrainment of any particle.
Air scalloping also develops from corrosion by con-

where R´ eL is a Reynolds number for scallops, based on the fluid velocity at a distance from the wall equal to L´32 and v is the kinematic viscosity (Table 5.4); L´32 is  the
Sauter mean length of scallops

CL3

densation waters, where turbulent air movement near cave entrances introduces humid air that becomes  satu- rated on contact with cooler cave walls,  condenses and dissolves the surface (section 7.11).
7.10.9 Corrosion notches, bevels and facets

L´32  ¼

i
CL2

ð7:2Þ

Scallops are created by an accelerated erosion mechanism requiring turbulent fluids. This survey of solutional forms

being the greatest length (in the direction of flow) of the ith scallop. This device is used to suppress the statistical significance of the subpopulation of very short  scallops that occurs in many scallop distributions  because of bedrock inhomogeneities.

in caves is concluded by going to the other extreme and considering a special family of features developed because the  water is  nearly static,  so  that the  slightest fluid density gradients may establish sharply  delimited zones of accelerated erosion.






Figure  7.45   (a)  Corrosion  notching  at  the  surface  of  a  pool.
(b) Foot caves or swamp notches in tower karst. (c) Corrosion bevelled ceiling in Fung Kui Water Cave, Guangdong,  China. This shows the level of a previous water table. (d)  Corrosion notch filled with layered pyrite, Nanisivik zinc–lead mine, Baffin Island, Canada. (e) Corrosional facets; the  models of Lange (1968) and Kempe et al. (1975). (f) Na Spicaku Cave, Moravia, Czech Republic; corrosion notching is sharpest where passages are largest.


  Corrosion notching is illustrated in Figure 7.45. In  a standing pool heavy solute ions and ion pairs sink, driving a cellular convection that carries fresh Hþ  ions to the walls at the water surface. A sharp notch  is dissolved there, tapering off very steeply below the waterline. This is the normal form. It is widespread  in limestone caves, e.g. at siphon pools where it develops in low-stage conditions. We have seen examples where such notching is as much as 1 m deep, although this is excep-
tional. It can signify palaeowater-table levels very  pre- cisely. Some times there are several notches one  above another.
  This notching becomes much larger in the foot caves of karst towers abutting alluvial floodplains (Figures 7.45b and 9.43). Notching at the seasonal flood level and extending   several   metres   into   the   rock   is   common. Because such notches are more extensive  and create a
flat roof regardless of geological structure, they may be termed corrosion bevels (Ger. laugdecke of Kempe et al.

1975). In examples in some karst towers of southern China, the bevelling extends throughout the length of State  4  (water-table  cave)  passages  that  pierce  through them (Figure 7.45c). These caves have lost  their prime hydrological  function,  because  most   water now dis- charges around the towers on the floodplain.
  Although bevelling at the level of the water table  is extremely common in humid tropical caves, the greatest corrosion notching we know occurs in the  hyperacid conditions of some massive sulphide emplacements. For example, at Nanisivik Mine, Baffin  Island, the greatest notch is > 400 m wide, but only 1 m deep. It is horizontal, slashing across dolomites dipping  at ~15○, and is filled with syngenetic layered pyrite  (Figure 7.45d). Stable isotopic evidence suggests that the pyrite was deposited at temperatures between 80○ and 150○C (Ghazban et al. 1992), so this was a case of  immense stability in fluid layering far below the water table.
  The first theoretical analyses of density gradient corro- sion  notching  in  meteoric  water  were  made  by  Lange (1968), who supposed that beneath the  waterline the corrosional cut would taper away in a smooth exponential function. Kempe et al. (1975) suggested on the basis of physical simulations and  examples in gypsum caves of southern Germany, that the taper should be linear. They measured density currents 1–3 mm thick descending the natural gypsum   walls,  and  calculated  velocities  of
~0.5 cm s—1. These linear corrosion surfaces were termed
facets by Kempe et al. (1975). They are  comparatively rare in limestone caves in our  experience because the surfaces become armoured with silt or clay residuum that inhibits the linear dissolution.  They are better seen in maze caves in pure gypsum,  such as many of the Ukrainian giants (Klimchouk  1996). Retreat of a Lange or Kempe facet under stable water-table conditions yields a corrosion bevel.
7.10.10 Notch caves
Some striking caves can be created entirely by initial slow dissolutional enlargement of vertical or inclined fissures that is succeeded by notching within them  fol- lowing a fall of the water table. The notching (with bevels and  facets,  plus breakdown  that  may  be  induced  by  the undercutting) dominates the enlargement. These we term
notch caves.
  Notch caves require an isolation control that  permits only limited supply and draining of water. In  many instances,   the   isolation   is   strictly   an   effect   of local geology. Ochtina Cave, a UNESCO World  Heritage cavern in Slovakia, is an excellent example.  It is the largest of 16 or more small maze and  chamber caves





Figure 7.46  (Upper left) A syntectonic passage in Malham Cave, Mount Sedom, Israel–Palestine, showing waterline  corrosion notches and an active fault plane in a salt diapir. (Photograph by A. Frumkin, with permission.) (Upper right) Seven corrosion notches can be seen in this view in Cova del Riu, a human-induced cave in the Cardona salt dome, Spain. Adapted from Cardona, F. and Viver, J. (2002) Sota la sal de Cardona, Espeleo Club de Gracia, Barcelona, 128 pp. (Bottom) Ghar Alisadr Cave, a large corrosion notch cave in Iran.


perched far above valleys in the humid temperate hills of the Slovak Raj (Paradise). Water is trapped in lenses of metasomatic limestone, enclosed by phyllites and partly altered to ankerite and siderite by Mg- and  Fe-bearing hydrothermal  solutions  in  the  past.  There  is sporadic flooding via fractures in overlying  phyllites, the water ponding or draining very slowly out through lower phy- llites until it is refreshed by another flood. Convectional dissolution pockets, notches, bevels  and facets are all well developed (Bosak et al. 2003).
  Aridity is another effective isolation control. Rare  but violent flooding and consequent notching are prominent in Kartchner Caverns in the Arizona desert  (Graf 1999), in Pofaddergat, Thabazimbi Cave, and others in arid regions of southern Africa. The greatest notch cave we have seen is Ghar Alisadr, Hamadan,  Iran. This is developed in a narrow ridge of steeply  dipping metamorphosed lime- stones that protrude  above weaker schists in a semi-arid basin. The  limestones are shaly and impure, probably supplying an H2S supplement to normal CO2 dissolution. The only  recharge is occasional rain  onto  the  limestone. Narrow dissolution fissures on bedding planes and cross- joints have been greatly enlarged by notching in a large, semi-static   pool.   Eleven   kilometres   of   passages   are

mapped (Figure 7.46 lower). Calcite shelfstones at, above and below the modern waterline indicate 3 m of oscillation of the  pool  surface  over  the  past  25 000 year or so (Kaufmann 2002); this may be partly  related to cool- climate wetter conditions in the Pleistocene and partly to human regulation of a scarce water resource.
7.11 CONDENSATION, CONDENSATION CORROSION AND WEATHERING IN CAVES
In recent years there has been growing interest in the role that processes of aqueous condensation may play in caves. Thus in a New Zealand cave, de Freitas and Schmekal  (2003)  monitored  and  numerically  simulated for over 1 year the microclimate processes  of vapour transfer and condensation. Much of the  water is acidic and may attack the rock. Earlier cavities are enlarged, and their shape and proportions may be radically changed. At the least there is slow weathering of the walls and ceilings of relict passages, chiefly in cave-entrance zones.
  To simplify, we assume that condensation and its cor- rosion takes place in the three distinct settings presented below; in practice, there may be a mixture of them occurring in a given cave.




7.11.1 Closed cellular convectional corrosion

difference in absolute humidity, surface and underground
3), t is in days and J is the frequency of air exchange

This was the first corrosional situation to be considered in detail. Convection is driven by the heat from a pool  of thermal water in a chamber that is closed to outside air flow (Figure 7.47a). Vapour (including any H2CO3  and H2SO4, etc. carried by the water) is condensed  onto cooler  cave  walls.  Szunyogh  (1989)  analysed  this in detail, deriving a quite complex equation to  estimate
the rate of dissolutional recession of the walls about the

(g m—
(replacement) underground, estimated from cave air-flow data.  Field   studies  were   conducted   in  the   Caucasus Mountains and the Crimean Plateau, locations with high relief,  cold winters and hot,  dry summers.  In summer strong correlations between the discharge of karst springs and the humidity of the external air were often detected. The volumes of condensation water in the springs were
1   to   as   much  as

centre of a hypothetical cell (Figure 7.47b). The film of

estimated  to  range  from  0.012 L s—
1. Dry-season condensation water yields ranged

condensed water (now saturated with respect to calcite) thickens towards the base of the cell, shielding it a little to

8.6 L s—
0.3–10 L s—

1 km—

2, or 0.1 to 9% of the mean annual

produce the onion-form chamber shown in Figure 7.47c. For a reasonable range of pCO2 and thermal gradients in the rock, Szunyogh (1989) estimated wall recession rates of 50–200 mm a—1  for water at  60○C, reducing  to 4–30 mm a—1 at 20○C. Dreybrodt (2003) simplified  the model

precipitation at different locations.
  In contrast to the cellular model, the air flow is linear, along  the  passage  in  the  ideal  case.  Dissolved  rock  is removed in film flow down the walls, or laterally in the form of aerosols when the cycle reverses and evaporation succeeds condensation.



 dM 
dt ¼ 0:26

 Tair  — Trock 
t 2

ðg m—2

s—1

Þ	ð7:4Þ

7.11.3 Advective and cellular condensation corrosion in cave entrance zones


and  Lismonde  (2003)  refines  this  to  suggest  recession rates around  0.9 m  104 a—1.  Typical  spheroidal pockets attributed to condensation corrosion range 1–5 m or so in diameter, so such rates seem reasonable. Where dissolu- tion by H2CO3 is replaced  or augmented by H2S, they may be faster.
7.11.2 Lateral advective corrosion (climatic chimney processes)
Here the ideal situation may be thought of as an inclined cylindrical cave passing from a plateau to a valley below. It is open to the outside atmosphere at both ends. This is the ‘chimney’ model of cave climatologists. If there are strong contrasts in the external temperature (daily where the cave is short, seasonally where it is long), cave walls are chilled by descending air flow when it is cold outside. Moisture may then be condensed on to them if there  is ascending air flow due to subsequent warm conditions.
  This setting has been studied meticulously, both in theory and in the field, by V.N. Dubljansky (see  Dubl- jansky and Dubljansky, 2000). At the scale of large caves and extensive blocks of karstified rock around  them he proposes

A ¼ V Eðes — euÞtJ	ð7:5Þ
where A is the mass of condensate (g), V is the volume of cave and surrounding karst with active air circulation

This is the most common and widespread setting for condensation corrosion. A little can be seen in all  cave entrances except those that are very constricted or thor- oughly screened by vegetation. It applies in  caves that have only one effective climatic entrance as well as those (such as chimneys) with two or more.  However, the quantitative effects are generally more  muted than in thermal or chimney settings with strong air circulation.
  Figure 7.47d shows a model for diurnal corrosion derived  from  micrometeorological  and  condensation field studies in caves of Cayman Brac, Cayman  Islands (Tarhule-Lips and Ford 1998a). The caves are  short, tapering solution cavities of the flank margin  marine type, opening in coastal cliff faces. The climate is tropical, with a diurnal temperature cycle typically ~2–5○C. Dur- ing the day the cave is comparatively cool and air flows out along the floor, drawing warmer replacement air in at the ceiling. At night this breaks down into weaker advec- tive flow at the floor and cellular flow in any chambers above it. Moisture condenses from the warm daytime air. In the large  majority of caves there is a distinctive climatic  entrance zone in which both temperature and relative humidity vary. Condensation and potential corro- sion rapidly diminish as the amount of variation (daily or seasonal or both) reduces to nearly zero in the  deeper interior. Wigley and Brown (1976) showed that the extent of  the  zone  can  be  modelled  as  a   relaxation  (or
‘e-folding’) length

(m3), E is the estimated porosity (0–1), (es — eu) is  the

x0  ¼ 36:44a1:2V

0:2

ð7:6Þ





Figure 7.47 (Upper left) A closed convection cell above thermal waters. Reproduced fromMuller, P. and I. Sarvary (1977) Some aspects of developments in Hungarian speleology theories during the last ten years. Karszte’s Barlang, Special Issue, pp.  53–59. (Centre left) The model of G. Szunyogh (1989) for condensation in a closed convection cell. (Lower left) The cupola form produced by Szunyogh’s closed convection model. (Right) A model of cave-entrance-zone daily microclimate behaviour and  resulting condensation corrosion for a tropical island cave. Reproduced from Tarhule-Lips, R. and Ford, D.C. (1998a) Condensation corrosion in caves on Cayman Brac and Isla de Mona, P.R. Journal of Caves and Karst Studies, 60(2), 84–95.





Figure 7.48   (a) Condensation corrosion has bevelled a cave ceiling and severely corroded the stalactite below it in this scene in a cave in northeast Brazil. (Photograph by A. Auler, with permission.) (b) Bellhole morphology. Reproduced from Tarhule-Lips, R. and Ford, D.C. (1998b) Morphometric studies of bellhole development on Cayman Brac. Cave and Karst Science, 25(3), 119–30. (c) The weathering of a limestone pendant in Martinska Cave, Slovenia. (Photograph by N. Zupan Hajna, with permission.)


dependent only on a (the radius of the passage) and V (the velocity of air flow through it). The zone typically extends 5–6 x0 where the passage has a constant  cross- section.  The  magnitude  of  x0   is  reduced  if  there are constrictions. At one prominent cave on  Cayman Brac, only 30 m separates the cave entrance,  where calcite speleothems are being strongly corroded  by  condensa- tion,  from  interior  chambers,  where  there is vigorous speleothem accumulation. From measurements of solutes in condensation water and  from the dissolution of gyp- sum tablets suspended in  the air, mean corrosion rates around 20 mm ka—1 were obtained; from theoretical con- siderations, Dreybrodt (2003) suggests that these may be somewhat too great.
7.11.4 Condensation corrosional features on bedrocks and speleothems
As noted above, single or multiple spheroidal pockets are produced where cellular convectional air flow is  predo- minant. The best examples, perhaps, are  Sa´torko¨puszta Cave and Ba´tori Cave in Hungary  (section 7.8). Well- formed pockets are also seen where there is local cellular convection in advective flow caves.
  Where   advective   flow   predominates,   the   principal forms on bedrock walls and ceilings are varieties of air scallops and flutes. These have the same  basic form as scallops in stream channels described  above, including the flow asymmetry, but are much  larger (0.5–2.5 m or more in length) as a consequence of the lower viscosity of air, and are generally very  shallow. They are more
prominent and better defined in and approaching air flow constrictions. Where denser air may be ponded behind  a  natural  dam  in  a  cave,  corrosion  bevels  that trim off pendants or trim the entire ceiling can  be seen (Figure 7.48a).
  The impact of condensation corrosion is most apparent where speleothems such as stalactites, stalagmites and

columns protrude into a moist air stream and are corroded by it. Growth of vadose speleothems indicates that  net calcite (or other) precipitation is dominant at a given site. Reduction by corrosion thus signifies a significant change in the balance of forces. Three levels of impact may be recognized:

1. minor, where the stalagmite (etc.) is damaged by small corrosional rills, usually on the upwind side;
2. where as much as 75% of the volume of the deposits may have been corroded away but its original form is still discernible (e.g. the stalactite in Figure 7.48a);
3. major, where the original form is lost and an air scallop form cuts smoothly across its stump and  the adjoining bedrock wall or ceiling (Tarhule-Lips  and Ford 1998a).

  Such damage is widespread in caves in subhumid and semi-arid regions. It is spectacular in the lowest (young- est) level of Carlsbad Caverns, the Lefthand Tunnel, where there is a H2S component in the corrosive vapour; most  stalagmites  and  columns  growing  in  constrictions display 50–75% loss from upwind (Hill  1987). Where there is only CO2 corrosion, a  particularly common feature is pocketing corrosion  upwards underneath pro- truding carapaces in large  stalagmites, indicating that rising air currents have   focused condensation there. Although chiefly a warm-climate phenomenon this occa- sionally can be  seen  in  climatic  chimney  situations  in temperate  caves, e.g. above the Concert Chamber in Baradla  Cave, Hungary, where an ornamented stala- gmite   some 10 m in  height  is  deeply  indented  by pockets.
  In the case of speleothems it is often apparent that the condensation corrosion has been episodic. Periods of net corrosion are succeeded by hiatuses with very slow weathering, or by renewed calcite deposition. Evidently there is climatic or microclimatic control, but attempts to




firmly  correlate  episodes  of  corrosion  to,  for  example, global glacial conditions or lower sea levels, have so far failed because of local factors such as erosion or infilling disrupting the cave air-flow patterns.

7.11.5 Bell holes
Bell holes (Wilford 1966) are a geomorphological pecu- liarity, strictly vertical cylinders of nearly perfect circular cross-section, seen in the ceilings of a small minority of caves in the tropics. Their verticality is maintained regard- less of lithological variation, stratal dip or the regularity or
gradient of the ceiling (Figure 7.48b). There may be shallower bell pits (Lauritzen and Lundberg 2000) in the floor beneath them. Careful study in Cayman  Brac determined that they occur only in the  illuminated or
partially illuminated entrance zones (Tarhule-Lips and Ford 1998b). Height ranges 0.5 to 5.7 m in four sample caves in dolomitic limestones; their diameters are propor- tional, 0.6–1.3 m. It is proposed that these bell holes were formed by condensation corrosion strongly abetted by microbial activity. Colonies of microorganisms (biofilms) establish themselves in patches on ceilings in the entrance zones, where they obtain moisture from condensing water. Dissolution of the bedrock by these  microorganisms initiates a depression in the ceiling. When deep enough, this traps the warmest air, inducing extra condensation in a positive feedback mechanism.  The verticality of the holes is attributed to the fact that only the most soluble intergrain calcite cements are dissolved by the microor- ganisms and condensation  corrosion; the less soluble grains themselves are  removed by gravity, which is most effective when operating straight down.
  In  some  very  large  tropical  cave  entrances  we  have seen apparent bell holes that are as great as  ~8m in height and 1.5 m diameter, exposed to view  by later condensation cutting across them; thus the  maximum sizes  of  bell  holes are  not  yet  established. Densely packed, small, bell-hole-like features occur in limestone and  dolomite  in  the  zone  of water-level oscillation of some freshwater lakes in  Canada and Ireland; they are weakly illuminated and  may also be mixed bio- and condensation corrosional in origin.

7.11.6 Weathering in relict caves
Where limestone and dolomite caves have been drained and relict for long periods it is common to find that the walls and ceilings are weathered. Condensation is the source of the moisture. However, its rate of deposition is too low to permit effective film flow that can remove the solutes and so sculpt the walls as it does in  spheroidal pockets,  for  example.  Velocities  of  air  flow across the

surfaces are similarly too low for rapid removal of solutes as aerosols, so that air scallop and flute corrosion does not occur either. Instead, the rock surfaces are subject  to a very delicate, preferential dissolution of all tiny  weak- nesses. Microboxwork may develop where calcite  veins are frequent. Most common are patterns of  dense, irre- gular pits 0.3–1.0 cm in diameter and a millimetre or two deep; in Bone Cave, West Virginia, we have found that they follow silty streaks in the limestone. Rims are soft and can be scraped away by fingernail, or even the claws of mice! Zupan Hajna (2003) has studied such weathering in detail in caves of Slovenia (Figure 7.48c). The weath- ering rinds generally extended to depths of 1–5 cm there, and were Ç 90% calcite or dolomite. The water content ranged 24–40%.
  The weathering is greatest in the cave-entrance zones defined   above,   although   it   often   extends   throughout chimney caves. It can also be found deep in the interiors of some relict caves without vigorous airflow, where it is probably the result of lengthy wetting and drying cycles, and proceeds very slowly indeed.
  Palmer and Palmer (2003) describe a different mode of weathering  in  Mammoth  Cave,  Kentucky.  Diffuse  see- page loses its CO2 passing through sandstone above the cave; it becomes acidified when it is wicked out  to the cave walls and encounters the atmosphere,  contributing to weathering that is 0.2–2.5 cm deep. Precipitated in the rind there may be trace amounts of  secondary silica derived from the sandstone.
7.12 BREAKDOWN IN CAVES
Jagged surfaces of rupture in walls and roofs and  piles of angular rocks that have fallen from them are  found in a majority of caves (Figure 7.49). They constitute the third basic morphology seen underground, modifying or replacing previous phreatic or vadose  solutional forms.
This morphology is termed breakdown or collapse by
English-speaking speleologists, incasion by many European specialists.
  The cause of all breakdown is mechanical failure within  or  between  rock  beds  or  joint-bounded  masses. The summary of cave breakdown that follows  is also applicable to cliff faces exposed in surface karst, e.g. at stream sinks, pinnacles, towers, etc.
  The load on a point in a rock mass may be expressed simply as

p ¼ rgh	ð7:7Þ

where r is rock density and h the thickness of the rock mass or height of the cliff overhead. The distribution of





Figure 7.49   (a) Distribution of stress lines around a cave and tension dome. (b) Critical spans (passage widths) or  breaking thicknesses for beams and cantilevers in limestones with horizontal bedding. Reproduced from Waltham, A.C.  (1996) Ground subsidence over underground cavities. Journal of the Geological Society of China, 39(4), 605–26. (c) Deformation of the theoretical breakout dome where stratal dip is steep. (d) Pressure-release spalling where load is maximum, e.g. at a pillar or the foot of a wall.


this load, as a stress field about a cave cross-section,  is given in Figure 7.49a. A tension dome is created in the rock above the passage. Its height is determined princi- pally by passage width. Rock in the dome is subject  to sagging and the overlying weight is transferred to  the adjoining passage walls, greatly increasing the  stress there. There is also tension in the floor, but in  natural caves  (as  opposed  to  mined  cavities)  this  is  of little significance.
  The largest cave breakdowns are failures in the tension dome. These are most regular in form where strata  are well-bedded and horizontal. As a consequence, this is the situation used in basic analysis. Bonding across bedding planes is presumed to be much weaker than  strength

than simple cantilevers. Cliffs at the surface most often fail as cantilevers.
  Mechanical rupture and fall of the bed will occur where a critical span is exceeded for a given  thickness and strength, and vice versa. A simple   equation  for  a beam is

rl2
tcrit  ¼  2S	ð7:8Þ
where tcrit is critical thickness, l the span of the  beam (passage width) and S the bending stress. For a cantilever:

3rl2

within the beds; therefore, the beds sag elastically away
from each other. Each bed then can be considered to

tcrit  ¼

2S	ð7:9Þ

function as a separate beam if it extends the full width of  the  passage,  or  as  a  cantilever  where  it  is  fractured through (e.g. by a wide central joint) or does not extend the full width. Fractured spans are usually  much stronger

i.e. cantilevers are much weaker. Rock density is  used here as an approximation for strength: in mining practice, triaxial  compressive  test  values  are  substituted for it (Brady and Brown 1985).





Figure 7.50   Ceiling breakdown occurring at a passage junction. (Photograph by A.N. Palmer.)

The bending stress is defined as:

Mc
S ¼  I	ð7:10Þ
where M, the maximum moment of the beam, is given by

M ¼ btrl2	ð7:11Þ
with b the width of the beam, i.e. normal to t and l

t
c ¼ 2	ð7:12Þ

medium strength can support roofs up to 20 m wide before  failure  where  they  are  unbroken  beams,   and massive beds (> 1.0 m thick) may extend 35 m or more. This model uses only flexural strength, assuming that the rock breaks like a piece of elastic that is  suddenly overstretched. This does not allow for plastic creep or the development of cracks in highly stressed  areas. Failure usually occurs where open cracks allow rotational move- ment of the bending beds. This is considered in a crack
propagation model by Tharp (1995):

. KI .n


and I, the moment of inertia of the beam, is given by

v ¼ c

KIc

ð7:14Þ

I ¼ bt3	ð7:13Þ
Figure  7.49b  models  critical  spans  (passage  widths)  or breaking thicknesses for beams and cantilevers in  lime- stones with horizontal bedding (Waltham 1996).  The unconfined compressive strengths (UCS) range  from a weak 25 MPa (r ¼ 18 kPa m—3) that is found  in many chalks up  to 100 þ MPa (r ¼ 26 kPa m—3)  found in the strongest cavernous limestones. Note the critical impor- tance of bed thickness. Thick-bedded   carbonates  of

where v is the velocity of crack propagation, KI is the stress intensity (MPa m0.5), KIc is the ‘fracture toughness’ of the given rock and c is an empirical constant (Tharp 1995). In practice it will be difficult to estimate KIc,  especially in
soluble rocks where dissolution within the widening cracks may disturb simple, progressive, p hysical failure;  Tharp suggests that this may reduce the rock strength  to about one half within 100 year. In Figure 7.49b the  values 1% and 2% estimate the reduction in strength of a cantilever in which crack width is 1% and 2% of the cantilever length.




  Failure in the tension dome tends to progress upwards, one or a few successive beds falling at one time. As the form becomes increasingly arched it is strengthened and the rate of bed fall may reduce. Breakdown finally stabilizes, however, when either (i) the span of the  bed newly exposed is less than the critical width for  its thickness, or (ii) the dome below becomes fully clogged with fallen breakdown which supports the  remaining span. Clogging must occur unless there is  concurrent removal of the breakdown by dissolution, settling, stream action, etc. at and towards the base of the pile because the volume occupied by breakdown will always exceed that of the previously unbroken rock.  The stabilizing height where there is no concurrent removal is given by

k

wide Carlsbad passages extend into adjoining  backreef beds, breakdown promptly occurs.
  Where  cavernous  strata  are  generally  horizontal  and medium- to thick-bedded, it is common to find collapse domes at particular places only. They tend to develop at passage junctions or where a prominent joint intersection creates a cantilever. At the extreme there  is partial or complete failure throughout the length of a passage. This is   characteristic   of   most   large   passages  in   gypsum because  the  rock  is  weakened  by hydration stresses. Klimchouk and Andreichuk   (2003) give a detailed account of breakdown in the  Ukraine gypsum maze caves, recording 1800 collapses per square kilometre in Zolushka Cave as a  consequence of its dewatering for quarrying purposes.
Where strata dip steeply the same tension dome with a

h ¼ h0 k

— 1	ð7:15Þ

vertical orientation exists in theory, but it is evident that updip walls and roofs are the more unstable, creating

where h0 is the initial height of the cave (before there is any collapse into it) and k the volume increase created by piling the breakdown (Andrejchuk 1999). For  example, where h0 ¼ 10 m and the void volume in the pile (its bulk porosity) is 10%,  clogging  occurs  100 m above the original ceiling; for 20% porosity the  limit is 50 m and for 50% it is only 20 m.
  The proportion of failure in the tension dome (partial, or completed to either upwards limit) and its geographical extent varies greatly within and between caves. There may be no breakdown. For example, it is negligible  in much of the Big Room at Carlsbad Caverns (Figure 7.51) although the room is often wider than 50 m.  This is because it is located in massive reefal rock.  Where the

asymmetric  breakdown  (Figure  7.49c).  Here,  the  adhe- sion across bedding planes and joint faces (neglected in the analyses given above) becomes an important variable. In mines, adhesion will be  measured by laboratory or in situ shear-box testing.
  Tension dome breakdown that is completed to stability at a given time may not be stable over the thousands to millions of years that the cave may then survive,  espe- cially if it is in a vadose state. Infiltrating  waters drain preferentially towards domes and, if  chemically aggres- sive, will attack the rock, reducing S values and convert- ing beams to cantilevers, etc. This renews the process of
upwards failure of rock, termed stoping. Many karst
terrains contain deep breccia pipes or geological organs





Figure 7.51 Examples of the largest cave chambers or rooms. Sarawak Chamber, Lubang Nasib Bagus (Good Luck Cave), Mulu National Park, Sarawak; Belize Chamber, Actun Tun Kul (Tun Kul Cave), Belize. Big Room, Carlsbad Caverns, USA and Salle de la Verna, Gouffre Pierre St Martin, France. The great shaft of El Sotano, Mexico, is compared with the 430 m high Empire  State Building, New York.




(section 9.13; Quinlan 1978) that are the debris-filled products  of  long  sequences  of  tension  dome  formation and collapse. Frequently, they extend into  non-karstic cover strata. Where the latter are mechanically weak but elastic  (e.g.  clays,  many  shales), it is common for the progressive  fragmentation to be replaced by cylindrical downfaulting en masse. Stoping upwards has propagated through more than 1000 m or more of cover rocks at sites in Canada and Russia. In mines, rock bursts  (explosive release of stress) sometimes shatter walls and floors. This is unknown in natural caves, because the  slow rate of their excavation permits less violent  adjustments  to  the stresses  being  imposed.  However,  it is common to see pressure-release spalling of  particular beds exposed in cave walls (especially at  pillar  sites  such  as  passage junctions),   or   at   or   near the bases  of  limestone  or dolomite cliffs  (Figure  7.50d).  The  spalling  beds  are usually  the  most argillaceous and/or fine-grained in the sequence  The spalled fragments display platy or con- choidal  fracture. Such basal spalling undermines upper walls, widening the tension dome, and so may induce a general collapse at the site.
  White and White (1969) divide breakdown fragments into three categories.

1. Block breakdown: rock fragments consisting of more than one bed remaining as a coherent unit.
2. Slab breakdown: rock fragments consisting of single beds.
3. Chip breakdown: rock fragments derived from the fragmentation of a bed.

  Single blocks with volumes greater than 25 000 m3 are known,  e.g.  from  a  reef–backreef  junction  at  Carlsbad Caverns. Slab breakdown is predominant in thin- to thick- bedded, horizontal strata. There are many forms of chip breakdown because here petrological   properties will determine the shape; splinters, flakes, plates, arrowheads, cubes  and  saucer-shaped   conchoidal fragments are amongst the more common forms.
  Mechanical failure is the proximate cause of all break- down and  cave  genesis is  the  ultimate cause.  Between these extremes, other factors determine the  sites and timing of the breakdown events. Probably,  the  three most   important   factors   are:   (i)   draining   of phreatic caves (e.g. Zolushka), which removes the buoyant force of water, effectively increasing the load by 30% to 50% in different karst rocks; (ii) vadose streams, which over- widen a passage beyond its beam or  cantilever width limits, either locally at meander  undercuts and passage junctions, or generally along a  passage that becomes alluviated; (iii) aggressive vadose seepage waters weak-

ening the roofs, as noted above. In very well-aerated caves dissolution by water condensed onto walls may produce much slab and chip breakdown.
  In many caves it is suspected that major falls may have been triggered by earthquakes. In the headwater passages at  Castleguard  Cave,  Canada,  it  is  evident  that   the addition of 200–400 m of glacier ice overhead  induced pressure-release   spalling   (Schroeder   and   Ford 1983): probably, this was a factor in caves in  many formerly glaciated terrains. Gypsum precipitating within limestone from SO4-enriched seepage waters  causes widespread chip and slab breakdown at  Mammoth  Cave  (White and  White  2003)  and  in  many other caves around the world; salt plays the same role in some Nullarbor caves, Australia (section 10.1).
7.12.1 Frost shattering and frost pockets
Frost  shattering  is  an  effective  agent  of  breakdown  in limestone and dolomite caves in cool regions. In  caves where there is only one entrance that admits or discharges thermally significant quantities of air or  where  such entrances  are  far  apart,  frost  penetration  is limited to the entrance zone of vigorous temperature fluctuation, as discussed above (equation 7.6). Effective  frost action is usually limited to the first one or two relaxation lengths. The shattering zone will be longer  or frost action more severe where the cave is a  chimney  with  two  or  more large  entrances  at  different elevations, as is the case of many relict  caves in mountainous regions. The frost debris  produced are normally varieties of chips. Slab breakdown is common close to entrances.
  Frost shattering on cliffs may create shallow, shelter- type caves termed frost pockets. These develop in all stronger rocks where there are wetted fractures, but they appear  to   be   most  abundant   in   the   carbonate   rocks
because they  are  wetted  via solutionally  enlarged  open- ings. Solution is the trigger process for larger scale frost action about the point  of  groundwater   emergence (Schroeder 1979). The pockets often  expand upwards into the tension dome that they create, forming a rounded arch that may be metres to tens of metres in height. At a distance these cannot be  distinguished from the frost- modified entrances to large caves, which has led to many exaggerated reports  of dissolution cave frequency in mountainous regions.
7.12.2 The largest known voids
Great open spaces in caves are termed rooms by Amer- ican cavers and chambers by British cavers. Some of the largest that are known are shown in Figure 7.51. Sarawak




Chamber, discovered in 1980 in the Mulu karst, Sarawak, is the largest. It has a volume of approximately 20 106 m3. Miaos Chamber, Gebihe Cave, China has ~10 106 m3. Belize Chamber, Salle de la Verna and the Carlsbad Big Room are each in excess of 1 106 m3. Hundreds of rooms are known with volumes of 100 000 to 500 000 m.
  A majority of these rooms are centred at vadose river passage  junctions  where  undercutting  has  widened  ten- sion domes to produce repeated breakdown. The  rivers

are able to remove much of the debris in solution, and so maintain open voids rather than breccia pipes. Carlsbad Big Room and some large chambers occurring in hydro- thermal caves probably owe most of their excavation to the exotic corrosion effects discussed above and display relatively little breakdown morphology.
  Impressive as they are, these greatest cave rooms are minor in scale when compared with the debris-filled volumes of many breccia pipes.


8

Cave Interior Deposits



8.1 INTRODUCTION
Caves function as giant sediment traps, accumulating samples of all clastic, chemical and organic debris mobile in the local environment during the life of the cave. They are the most richly varied deposits that form in con- tinental environments and tend to be preserved for greater spans of time than most others do. It is not by chance that a majority of important Lower Palaeolithic archaeologi- cal sites have been caves.
  Cave sediments have received much more study  than the cave erosional genesis discussed in Chapter 7, because of their archaeological and  palaeoenvironmental signifi- cance and because they  can be sampled and analysed like other sedimentary  deposits. They may be divided
into  cave  entrance  plus  rock  shelter  (abris)  deposits  or
facies, and cave interior deposits (Figure 8.1). This chapter focuses on the latter. Entrance deposits, because of their archaeological  importance,  can  be  considered  a partly separate subject.
Table 8.1 presents a comprehensive classification  of
8.2 
CLASTIC SEDIMENTS
8.2.1 Mechanics of fluvial sediment transport
Local breakdown (section 7.12) and allochthonous fluvial sediments are the predominant categories of clastic depos- its. Sediment transport in open alluvial channels such as rivers has been studied intensively (e.g. Middleton 2003). However, vadose caves are usually rock-bound channels, hence width is fixed during an event, channels are parti- cularly rough and they usually lack floodplains. Phreatic and floodwater caves are  approximately equivalent to manmade pipes, but with  much higher friction due to their irregularity.  Transport of solids in slurries through filled pipes has  been the subject of much engineering experiment. In particular, a study by Newitt et al. (1955) was particularly important, so its findings are followed in our discussion.
  Sediment begins to be moved when the shear stress at the bed (boundary) exerted by the specific stream power exceeds a critical value (equations 5.17 and 5.18). A
2) is:

cave interior sediments. There is a basic division  into clastic, organic and precipitated types and into sediment

general expression for boundary shear stress t0 (kg m—
a

formed outside of a cave and transported into it (allogenic or allochthonous) and that created within a cave  (auto-

t0 ¼ rgy 2d

þ w	ð8:1Þ

genic or autochthonous).
  This introduction closes with a warning. Cave sediments can be most complex. The law of superposition (that an upper deposit is younger than a lower deposit on which it rests) is often violated because of shrinkage,  slumping, flowstone intrusion, burrowing and other  effects. Many facies are diachronous (i.e. they differ  in age laterally). Variation in rates of deposition can  be  extreme.  Down- stream  movement  of  sediment  may be much obstructed because breakdown barriers sieve it to varying degrees or dam it entirely for long  periods. Undoubtedly, there is much reworking and redeposition.

where  r  is  fluid  density,  y  is  channel  slope,  a  is  cross-
sectional  area,  d  is  depth  and  w  is  width.  The  critical value tcrit increases with particle diameter and density but is also dependent on its shape, packing  among other particles, etc. An approximation is
  tcrit ¼ 0:06ðrs  — rÞgD	ð8:2Þ
where D is particle diameter (mm), and rs is particle density. The greatest particle moved by a given flow  is estimated by

Dmax  ¼ 65t0:54	ð8:3Þ



Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd





Figure 8.1   A model depicting the principal categories of clastic and precipitate deposits in hydrologically active or relict caves.


Equations estimating bedload transport en masse face many   problems.   However,   that   of   Meyer-Peter   and Muller (1948) is widely used

measured grain sizes at 59 stations in two stream caves in Kentucky and Missouri and used shear-stress analysis to determine that 85% of grains could be transported at the underground equivalent of river ‘bankfull’ stage,  which

rate ¼ 0:253ðt0  — tcritÞ3=2	ð8:4Þ

in these regions had a recurrence interval of

~1.7 year.

For deposition, the terminal settling velocity vt for a spherical particle is given by Stokes’ law or similar equations
1 ðrs  — rÞ	2
  
For pipefull flow Newitt et al. (1955) noted five modes of transport:

1. a slowest mode of rolling grains producing ripples on a stationary bed;

vt ¼ 18	m	gD

ð8:5Þ
2. 
saltation of individual grains above the bed;
3. a sliding bed involving, at first, the upper part of the

The effects of these relationships in open channels  are summarized in Figure 8.2. Dogwiler and Wicks  (2004)

bed load but extending to all of it with further increase of velocity;



Table 8.1   Cave interior deposits

Source	Deposit type	Origin	Comments


Allochthonous or allogenic



Autochthonous or autogenic

Precipitates
and evaporites*


Clastic	1 Fluvial	Many kinds – dominant allochthone 2 Filtrates	From seepage – minor
3 Lacustrine	Rare
4 Marine	Beach facies
5 Aeolian	Normally minor except at entrances 6 Glacial and glaciofluvial injecta	Common in glaciated regions
               7 Dejecta, colluvium and mudflows	Normally restricted to entrance areas
               8 Tephric	Volcanic areas; inwashed ash and pumice Organic	9 Waterborne, windborne, etc.	Scale ranges from spores to tree trunks
10 Exterior fauna	Sometimes cave-using species Bones, nests and middens, faeces
Clastic	11 Breakdown	Mainly by failure; minor thermoclastic
12 Fluvial	Derived from breakdown or erosion of karst rock 13 Weathering earths and rinds
14 Aeolian	Derivatives of 11, 13
15 Ice	As water ice, glacie`res, frost and glacial injecta
16 Calcite	Most significant autochthone 17 Other carbonates and hydrated
carbonates
18 Sulphates and hydrated sulphates 19 Halides
20 Nitrates and Phosphates 21 Silica and silicates
22 Manganese and hydrated iron oxides
23 Ore-associated and miscellaneous minerals


*More than 250 different minerals are known to be generated in caves. The dominant ones are listed.


4. heterogeneous suspension;
5. homogeneous  suspension  at  the  highest   velocities (Figure 8.3).

  Their experiments were limited to horizontal pipes of circular cross-section, and to grain sizes up to 10 mm. Later experimenters have obtained similar results  from larger pipes.
  There is no doubt that at least the first four of  these transport modes occur in phreatic or flooded caves. There are many instances of pebbles and cobbles being carried straight up vertical shafts and expelled at the  top. This represents heterogeneous suspension, at the  least. An example  from   Castleguard   Cave   is    plotted on Figure 8.3; 40–100 mm diameter pebbles of dense lime- stone (r ¼ 2:85) are carried > 7.5 m up a floodwater shaft there (Schroeder and Ford 1983).  Minimum velocities
> 0.8–1.0 m s—1 are calculated from the settling laws, in
good agreement with mean velocities of 1.2–1.3 m s—1 obtained  from  measured  maximum  flood   discharges.

Note that the Castleguard grains plot in the  ‘stationary bed’ domain of Newitt et al.’s (1955) experiments. This does not invalidate those  experiments, but does empha- size that grain shape   and other factors create great variability in real behaviour.
  Figure 8.4 from Gillieson (1986) presents a summary of  the  relationships  between  cave  hydraulic  conditions and common sedimentary structures.
8.2.2 Deposits of gravel to boulder-sized material
This is typical bedload in many hilly karst regions if there are extensive allogenic catchments. It is important in most glaciated terrains, where it is reworked from till and out- wash. It can also be generated from autogenic breakdown. The extreme of transport is seen in steep  floodwater caves such as many alpine systems, where the maximum permitted grain size may be decided by the  minimum passage diameter. Allogenic boulders of 1t or more firmly wedged between floor and roof deep in  the cave are





Figure 8.2 Curves showing the relationships of grain size to critical erosion velocities for flowing water with material of differing densities. Fluvial erosion curves refer to velocity at 1 m above the channel bed. Erosion, transport and deposition regimes are defined. Reproduced with permission from Sundborg, A, The River Klaralven, a study in fluvial processes. Geografiska Annaler, 38, 125–316.
© 1956 Blackwell Publishing.





Figure 8.3  Clastic sediment transport regimes under conditions of pipefull water flow (Reproduced from Newitt, D.M., Richard- son, J.F., Abbott, M. and Turtle, R.B. (1955) Hydraulic convey- ing  of  solids  in  horizontal  pipes.  Transactions  Institute   of Chemical Engineers, 33, 93–110.; with data for  Castleguard Cave added.)

common. The dynamics can be likened to those of a vigorous toilet flush.
  A facies that is frequently encountered is a poorly sorted to chaotic mixture of all sizes up to boulders, with patches  that  are  grain-supported  and  others  that   are matrix-supported. There is little preferred  orientation or other structure. Such deposits can have  varying origins
and, in general sedimentology, are known as diamictons.
The top of the deposit is usually an abrupt contact that is often succeeded by well sorted gravel or sand. If in  a sequence of deposits it is usually the basal unit.  Such deposits in caves we attribute to the pipefull, sliding bed mode, i.e. all the mass was in motion, and then deposited simultaneously with sorting only by the dispersive pres- sure of colliding particles (McDonald and Vincent 1972). It is the equivalent of the antidune  mode in alluvial channels. Gillieson (1986) presented  the first detailed descriptions  from  caves,  in  the   very wet  highlands of Papua New Guinea. Sliding  bed deposits are also recognized in subglacial esker deposits, i.e. deposited in floodwater caves formed in glaciers (Saunderson 1977). Figure 8.5 displays   examples of Gillieson’s  results (curves 17 and 18)  and the grain-size envelope for six esker samples (envelope 2).
  In open cave channels or where pipefull velocities are too low, gravels and boulders move by rolling and sliding. They are deposited as shoals or bars of medium-





Figure 8.4   Relationships between water flow and depositional energy as expressed in cave clastic structures. Reproduced  with permission from Gillieson, D., Cave sedimentation in the New Guinea highlands. Earth Surface Proc. and Landforms, 11, 533–543
© 1986 John Wiley and Sons.


to well-sorted grains, exhibiting lateral, downstream and upwards fining trends. Bar form is best downstream  of constrictions such as short siphons. These deposits very often show channel cut-and-fill structures that  include



Figure 8.5 Cumulative distribution of grain size curves for 18 different cave deposits plus samples from six eskers. Data from many sources.

sands and fines. The gravels may be well imbricated. Wolfe (1973) described a palaeodeposit in West Virginia where the imbrication indicated flow in the direction opposite   to   that   indicated   by   solutional   scallops   on adjoining walls: it was a consequence of an  alluvial stream invading an abandoned phreatic cave.
  A distinct facies may occur where there is a choice of routes for floodwater, so that any given passage can  be progressively infilled. As its flood cross-sectional area is decreased  by  filling,  velocities  increase  and  thus  the deposit  coarsens  upwards,  perhaps  terminating  with a lag of boulders or cobbles jammed into the roof.

8.2.3 Sands and their sedimentary structures
Allochthonous sand is an abundant constituent of  cave sediments because of the common occurrence of  lime- stone and sandstone together in basins. The typical sand structures of flumes and alluvial channels  (Middleton 2003) have been reported many times in  caves. Sorting ranges from moderate to very good.  Fining upwards, laterally or downstream is common,  as is coarsening upwards. Sands are often interbedded with silts and clays.
  In Figure 8.5, curves 6, 7 and 8 are representative of coarse and medium sands measured in the temperate




river caves of Slovenia (Gospodaricˇ 1976, Kranjc1981); curve 9 is the mean for well-sorted sands from the Niaux System (Pyrenees), where the deposits are proglacial outwash into giant passages (Sorriaux 1982); and  curve 10  is  sand  ejected  from  a  phreatic  tube  only  67 mm in diameter (Gale 1984). More recent studies have produced grain-size curves that are very similar in form and range (e.g. Valen et al. 1997).
8.2.4 Silts and clays deposited from suspension
Silts and clays are the most widespread clastic deposits in caves. Because they are transported in suspension  they may coat walls and even ceilings, although most  accu- mulation is on the floors.
  Their   sources   are   the   most   diversified.   Allogenic sources include eroded soils, reworked fluvial and lacus- trine deposits, and windborne dust and tephra (Figure 8.5, curves 14 and 16). There may be filtrates  from  soils overhead,   and   there   is   often   a   significant autogenic component from the weathering  of walls (curve 15) or the winnowing or  decomposition of older sediments. Terra rossa at the surface in southern France (curve 12) is winnowed to  curve 13 at a depth of 30 m. Mixed allogenic and autogenic fines are often the final deposit in
relict caves and are referred to as cave earths.
  The clays and silts usually accrete as laminae that are parallel to the depositional surface, which may be  hor- izontal, inclined, vertical or inverted. There may  be marked fining upwards within a lamina, which creates a colour change that gives it the appearance of a couplet,
e.g. from buff (silt dominant) to grey (fine silt–clay)  in many glaciated regions. Thickness of individual laminae are reported to range from ~0.2 to > 50 mm,  but 1– 10 mm is most common. Aggregate sections  can total many metres.
  Some clays lack lamination or fining structure, which suggests  that  they  were  decanted  from  a  homogeneous suspension that was steadily renewed.  However, this is rare. Lamination and fining   (sometimes coarsening) upwards are normal and represent deposition from wan-
ing floodwaters or other pulsed flow, termed slackwater
deposits (e.g. Gillieson 1996).
  Typically, silts and clays grade laterally from centres of passages and are finest grained in deep recesses (curve 19). Floods can repeatedly scour and fill along the main passages but there may be only accretion in the recesses which thus can build up great banks with the most complete sedimentary records. ‘Mud mountains’ > 20 m in height are known in protected places.
  Where  frequent  flooding  and  draining  occur  silt  and clay banks steeper than ~ 40○ may exhibit  patterns of

rilling; rills are dendritic on slopes between 40○ and 70○, becoming parallel where they are steeper. These ‘surge- marks’ are depositional, at least in part (Bull 1982).
  Thin deposits onto vadose cave roofs are often reorga- nized into stringers and subcircular clusters of clay when the cave dries. They have the appearance of worm trails and are termed vermiculations (Bo¨gli 1980). The pat-
terns appear to be produced by a combination of droplet distribution and electrical charge attraction.
  In extraglacial regions clays and silts are normally composed of clay minerals, quartz fines and some dolo- mite and calcite silts. Where there are allogenic  catch- ments the clay minerals are most often dominated by the suites in their soils. In glaciated areas the proportion of carbonate grains typically increases to 20–80% or more of the fines. They are reworked ‘glacier flour’ produced by basal ice erosion.
8.2.5 Characteristic sedimentary facies and suites
All categories of sediments noted above can be found in common  phreatic  caves.  Allogenic  gravels  and   even boulders may be transported through a surprising number of deep loops. At Wookey Hole, the downstream end of a classic  ‘multiloop’  cave  system  in  the  Mendip Hills, England (Figure 7.15; Farrant and Ford  2004) divers have found that medium gravels are in constant agitation even at low stages of flow, being driven up a very steep slope at —90 m by the force of the cave river, and rolling back again. Where there is such large and coarse clastic load, paragenetic deposition with roof dissolution and wall pendant formation is particularly common. The facies can include sands,  granules and gravels, usually in fining upwards  sequences. However, laminated silts and clays are  more usually dominant in the phreatic environment, and paragenetic dissolution is more muted. Laminated fines in small amounts are the chief deposits in  thermal water caves and artesian mazes.
  The standard suite in gentle vadose or shallow phreatic caves is a series of cut-and-fill deposits with marked lateral fining (Figures 8.6 and 8.7). There may be a sliding bed facies at the base of any given sequence  or this facies may cross-cut remnants of earlier  sequences along a central channel.
  Where a dam of breakdown is abruptly created in such caves the effects can be highly variable. Most often, there is infilling with  parallel  beds  or  delta  facies  on the upstream side, initially coarse, becoming finer as the barrier becomes increasingly clogged. Downstream, there is reworking or complete scouring of older deposits, plus a varying addition of finer grain sizes passed through  the dam or winnowed from its components. If much of the dam





Figure 8.6   Some representative cave sediments. (Upper left) A basal chaotic (probably sliding bed) layer is terminated by clay at   the level of the hand. A sequence of pebble–silt–clay overlies this and fills the passage to the roof. A later, imbricated fill of pebbles is emplaced in the upper clay by cut-and-fill processes. (Photograph by Ford.) (Upper right). Banks (dunes) of flood silt  and clay, Selminum Tem Cave, New Guinea. (Photograph by A.S. White, by permission.) (Lower left) An ‘abandonment suite’ of pebbles fining upwards to clays succeeded by silts fining upwards to clays. (Photograph by Ford.) (Lower right) Typical  flood clays (‘slackwater deposits’) in a backwater passage. Note the dendritic surge marks. (Photograph by A.N. Palmer, by permission.)


is then swept away in a flood, a particularly  complex ‘pond-and-sieve, winnow, cut-and-fill’ suite is left.
  Where upper passages are progressively abandoned by flowing water distinctive ‘abandonment suites’ may occur. These are cut–and-fill sequences with marked lateral fin- ing, that also tend to become finer upwards as the floods become weaker and weaker in their capability. The final deposits tend to be finest at the upstream end (the overspill flood entry point where only suspended  load can now enter) and coarsen downstream as a result of local rework-

ing. In Figure 8.5, grain size curves 3, 4 and 5 generalize the progression from perennial channel sediments to the overspill channel and then to the completely  abandoned channel in river caves of West Virginia (Wolfe 1973).
  Varved clays are rhythmic sequences of laminated silt
and clay each appearing as a couplet that is darker  and coarser  below,  finer  and  lighter  above.  They  form in proglacial lakes, the finer fraction only settling out when the lake is frozen over in winter, i.e. ideally, each couplet represents  one  year’s   accumulation.  Thick  sequences





Figure 8.7   Representative drawings of sedimentary sections in caves. (Top left) Coarse fill in a compound (phreatic ! vadose) conduit in Sirijordgrotta, Norway, with a modern stream below. Note that, despite the small size of the passage, the filling is capped with a calcite flowstone that has survived there for ~128 000 yr. Reproduced from Valen, V., Lauritzen, S-E. and Løvlie, R. (1997) Sedimentation in a high-latitude karst cave: Sirijordgrotta, Nordland, Norway. Norsk Geologisk Tidsskrift, 77, 233–50. (Lower left)
D. Gillieson’s (1986) drawing of a colluvial diamicton (mud flow), with clay above, in a New Guinea cave. Reproduced  from Gillieson, D. (1986) Cave sedimentation in the New Guinea highlands. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 11, 533–543. (Right) The author’s interpretation of a complex sedimentary section in Grotte de l’Entre de Ve´nus, France. There are six channel cut-and-fill sequences, including two with partial sliding bed facies, within a section only 1.5 m in height. The passage cross-section (above) shows that this sequence was then cut through in a seventh erosional event. Reproduced from Delannoy, J-J. and Caillault, S. (1998) Les apports de l’endokarst dans la reconstitution morphoge’nique dun karst: exemple de l’Antre de Ve´nus. Karstologia, 31, 27–41.

of varve-like rhythmites are common in caves in gla- ciated regions. Figure 8.5 curve 11 is the envelope  for 14 samples from Castleguard Cave. They may be  the predominant deposits, with later channels carrying  bed- load being cut through them. They represent  deposition from pondings beneath or along the flanks of Quaternary glaciers. They have a high carbonate content. It is not yet established whether each couplet is an annual (true varve) deposit or represents some other event; see Schroeder and

Ford (1983), Maire (1990), Campy (1990), Lignier  and Desmets (2002) for discussions. Reams (1968) attributed couplet laminae in caves of Missouri to individual floods generated by thunderstorms.
  Where   surface   rivers   impound   and   backflood   the downstream ends of caves, any sediments they are  able to introduce tend to be those typical of the local  flood- plains, chiefly fine sands, silts, clays, floating and water- logged organic debris, etc. (e.g. Springer and Kite 1997).




8.2.6 Other types of clastic deposits
Caves everywhere display cones of dejecta accumulated by a mixture of piecemeal falls and small slurries  from steep or vertical openings to the surface (Figure  8.1). Passages  that  slope  more  gently  from  the  surface may channel tongues of colluvium for many  tens of metres. This is unsorted debris, usually  matrix-supported and with a high organic content.  Sorriaux (1982) described instances where fluvial sediments in Pyrenean caves have been remobilized as mass waste flows. Gillieson (1986) showed that fluidized polymodal mudflow deposits (dia- mictons) were able to penetrate up to 3 km into caves of the Papua New Guinea highlands.
  Glaciers may discharge meltwater and clastic load directly into  caves.  Typical here  is  an injection  facies; the passage entrance is blocked by wedged boulders and a tail of gravels and sands extends  inwards. There are also simpler injecta where an  advancing glacier merely bulldozed till or outwash  into entrances, filling them
entirely.

in situ where clasts of local origin are trapped against a barrier that the flowing water must ascend. Curve 1, Figure 8.5 presents an extreme illustration of this, depict- ing pebbles of the dense, particularly resistant, limestone that were trapped and rounded at the bottom of the 7.5 m floodwater shaft mentioned above in Castleguard  Cave. Each pebble will have swept up the shingle beach there hundreds of times, and rolled back down; the net down- stream movement of most was zero. However,  in com- prehensive studies in the Slovene river caves  Kranjc (1989b) found that autogenic gravels could   become very well rounded by 5–10 km of travel downstream.
  The sizes of allochthonous pebbles, cobbles and boulders, and their proportion in the total bedload is certainly   reduced   during   transport   through   caves.   In large karst basins in West Virginia, Wolfe (1973) found that mean bedload grain size was weakly  related  to channel  length  and  gradient  (Table  8.2),  but filtering in breakdown destroyed any trend at the outlet of the longest basin there. Kranjc (1982) noted a mean diameter loss of
1  for sandstones transported at least 11.5 km

  Caves that terminate in the coastal breaker zone may contain beach sand and shingle deposits. These take the form of berms (barriers) with steep fronts facing the waves and gentle backslopes that can extend inwards for several tens of metres. Williams (1982b) described a marine gravel deposit injected into a limestone cave graded to a 60 m emerged coastal terrace in New Zealand. Cosmogenic burial dating has since shown  the quartz gravel to have been emplaced 1.25 T 0.43 million years ago (D. Fabel, personal. communication).
8.2.7 Particle shape and changes of shape and size in caves
The  shape  of  a  particle  is  described  in  terms  of  form (platy, bladed, etc.), sphericity and the  roundedness of corners (e.g. Sneed and Folk 1958, Cailleux and Tricart 1963). Most studies in caves have been concerned with pebble and cobble sizes, and  have taken care to differ- entiate autogenic clasts  (usually limestone or dolomite) from allogenic,  non-carbonate clasts. Bull (1978) found no systematic downstream changes of autogenic bedload in river caves  in Wales and attributed variations to original  lithological properties. In general, this is not surprising. Caves that offer sufficient accessible  lengths of alluvial channel for substantial changes of shape to be expected will be  low gradient and likely  to  contain breakdown  barriers  that  screen  out  upstream particles and substitute fresh stocks of angular fragments. Exces- sive roughness of channels also  causes much breaking into angular pieces rather than steady attrition over all the surfaces of grains. Major rounding or shingling can occur

4 mm km—
through Kacne  Jama, but  random samples  of all  clasts (allochthonous plus autochthonous) yielded no   trend there. The sandstone roundedness generally increased to 350–550 on the Cailleux and Tricart (1963) scale (where
~550 is close to spherical), but more resistant chert pebbles remained quite angular.
  There have been many electron microscope studies of the shape of sand and clay size quartz grains in  caves. These grains suffer comparatively little damage  during underground transport, so the studies determine  their origin or provenance. Quartz silts from local  soils are most often detected. In a pioneer study at Agen Allwedd, Wales, Bull (1977b) recognized also a suite of glacigenic sands modified by fluvial transport and a  later suite of diagenetic quartz sands from the local  caprock, plus distinct glacial, fluvial or aeolian features in the silt and clay grains. He was able to correlate particular groups of silt and clay laminae over distances up to 5 km in Agen Allwedd, and later to recognize a  fini-glacial loessic phase (component) in capping muds in caves throughout southern Britain.
8.2.8 Provenance studies
Many  studies  have  used  pebbles  and  cobbles  of  some distinctive lithology as an easy but accurate  means of tracing sediment sources and flow paths. Normally they will be allogenic.
  In fine fractions heavy mineral abundances may differ- entiate the sources. Other studies have emphasized clay minerals and their ratios. Although there is much varia- tion,    abundant    kaolinite    tends    to    indicate    warm



Table 8.2   The principal minerals deposited in caves

Group
Mineral
Formula
Carbonates
Calcite
CaCO3

Aragonite
CaCO3

Magnesite
MgCO3

Huntite
CaMg3(CO3)4
Hydrated carbonates
Mono-hydrocalcite
CaCO3.H2O

Tri-hydrocalcite
CaCO3.H2O

Nesquehonite
MgCO3.H2O

Hydromagnesite and others
4MgCO3.Mg(OH)2.4H2O
Sulphates and hydrated sulphates: halides
Anhydrite
CaSo4

Barite
BaSO4

Celestite
SrSO4

Thenardite
Na2SO4

Halite
NaCl

Bassanite
CaSO4.H2O

Gypsum
CaSO4.2H2O

Epsomite
MgSO4.7H2O

Hexahydrite
MgSO4.6H2O

Mirabilite
Na2SO4.10H2O

Bloedite and others
Mg2SO4.Na2SO4.4H2O
Sulphides
Pyrite
FeS2

Marcasite
FeS2

Galena
PbS

Sphalerite
ZnS

plus fluorite (fluorspar)
CaF2
Phosphates and nitrates
Whitlockite
Ca3(PO4)2

Monetite
CaHPO4

Hydroxyapatite
Ca5(PO4)3.OH

Carbonate-apatite
Ca10(PO4)6CO3.H2O

Crandallite
CaAl3.(PO4)2.(OH)5.H2O

Taranakite
(K.NH4)Al3(PO4)3(OH).9H2O

Potassium nitre (Saltpetre)
KNO3

Soda nitre
NaNO3

Nitrocalcite and others
Ca(NO3)3.4H2O
Iron, manganese and aluminum oxides
Geothite
Fe OOH

Hematite Limonite
Fe2O3 Fe2O3.nH2O

Birnessite
MnO2

Hollandite
BaM8O16

Psilomelane
(Ba.H2O)2Mn5O10

Todorokite
(Na.Ca.K.Mn.Mg)6O12.3H2O

Bauxite
Al2O3.3H2O

Boehmite
AlO(OH)

Gibbsite and others
Al(OH)3
Silica
Quartz, chalcedony and
SiO2

cristobalite (opal)

Ice

H2O


conditions either in the source rock or during its weath- ering. Illite and chlorite are usually the most prominent clay   minerals   in   glaciated   regions,   while   increasing montmorillonite suggests a drier climate,  etc. Wolfe (1973) found a kaolinite:illite ratio of ~ 3:1 in Carboni-

ferous source rocks. This reduced to 1:1 in modern sediments entering the caves and towards 0.6:1 as  they were traced 8–12 km underground. The ratio in  aban- doned passages also decreased downstream, from 0.6 to
< 0.4, indicating that there was further alteration of




kaolinite as the ancient deposits weathered a little in the caves. Lynch et al. (2004) showed that most clay  dis- charged from a major Texan spring that is an important water resource was allochthonous, deriving from distant upland soils and prone to convey bacteria  and other contaminants from there.
8.2.9 Diagenesis of cave sediments
The nature and amount of diagenesis occurring in  cave sediments is usually much less significant than  that in original limestones (Chapter 2) and has been  little stu- died. Physical processes include effects such as loading (load casts or deformation), drying out, abrupt rewetting, etc. Shrinking away from walls is common;  it permits later sediment to intrude. Polygonal dessication cracking may extend to depths greater than 1 m.
  Burrowing by animals  (bioturbation) is a  second
physical category. Cave-specific (hypogean) fauna in the interior are small and weak. They can do little damage but disturb the uppermost laminae of soft sediments which, however, may suffice to ruin their palaeomagnetic signals (see  below).  Burrowing  by  large mammals  such as badgers (and humans) is important in many entrance deposits.
  Drying permits oxidation, which extends throughout most well-drained sediments. Periodic wetting encourages further hydrolysis of aluminosilicate  minerals and the alteration of clay minerals. Such  chemical weathering takes place in most cave sediments, but normally at very low rates.
  Osborne (2001) has investigated such diagenesis in Australia,  where  many  caves  are  unusually  old  and  so provide  more  time  for  the  slow  changes  that  occur. Chemical   precipitation   within   sediments   is   the most important process. In vadose settings,  meniscus calcite cement is first deposited, succeeded  by void-filling spar that can convert the loose sediment into a solid rock of low porosity. Between these extremes, patchy, layered or graded cementation is common. In phreatic settings there is acicular cementation. Because of their low permeabil- ity, allogenic clays (e.g. kaolinite,  illite, quartz) resist cementation and can survive for  millions of years in a soft, wet condition.
  Other precipitates include surface veneers of  gypsum and other crystals where enriched solutions in the original sediment have been drawn out by capillary suction as it dried. In parts of Mammoth Cave silts  and clays have
suffered evapoturbation to depths of 1 m or more, i.e.
gypsum precipitated between the laminae breaks them up. In quartz sand deposits amorphous silica (crystallites) may  precipitate  onto  grain  surfaces,  although  this  will

rarely cement them. Nitrate and phosphate minerals also accumulate in cave earths, as discussed below.
8.3 CALCITE, ARAGONITE AND OTHER CARBONATE PRECIPITATES
Calcite  is  the  principal  secondary  precipitate  in  caves. General terms for it include speleothem, sinter, traver- tine and tufa. The first two terms are generally used to describe dense crystalline deposits found in cave  inter- iors, although both sinter and travertine are also used to describe predominantly chemical precipitates  deposited
at  springs.  Tufa  refers  to  softer  porous  material  found near cave entrances where rapid deposition is encouraged by evaporation. In most karst regions the  mass of sec- ondary calcite will far exceed that of all other secondary minerals combined. Aragonite is more  widespread than has generally been supposed and is  possibly the second mineral in abundance, with gypsum being the third. The other carbonates and hydrated carbonates are much less significant; they form small but attractive decorations in a minority of caves.
  Speleothems   (stalactites,   stalagmites,   helictites   and flowstones, etc.) are the chief attraction in the  majority of the world’s tourist caves (e.g. Figure 8.8). It was their visual aesthetic appeal that also attracted many scientists to study caves. As a consequence, speleothems are the subject of many detailed studies, general  reviews and lavishly illustrated popular books. A  review by Hill and Forti (1997) with other  contributing specialists presents the most complete  account; see also Cabrol (1978), Bo¨gli (1980) and Cabrol and Mangin (2000). Railsback (2000) has prepared an online atlas of sample microfabrics. Here we can give only a broad summary of the many interesting features.
8.3.1 Calcite and aragonite crystal growth
In the  evaporitic  conditions  of  most cave  entrances  and seasonally dry caves, calcite deposition is by the  rapid formation of separate crystallites. This creates a  soft calcite of globular or irregular clumps of tiny  crystals, earthy in texture, with high porosity and  often pasty to the touch, at least on first deposition.  Hard calcite is precipitated by slow exsolution of CO2  from solution in humid cave interiors (Figure 8.1). Some speleothems are composed of sequences of hard and soft calcite, or have soft calcite on upwind sides.
  Most hard calcite grows by the competitive  enlarge- ment and coalescence of crystallites deposited as syntax- ial (axially aligned) overgrowths on previous  crystals (Figure 8.9). In most speleothems  it  is   present  in





Figure 8.8 Stalactites, stalagmites and columns growing in a cave. J.W. Valvasor’s engraving of AD 1689 showing a  decorated chamber in Postojna (Postumia or Adelsberg) Cave in Slovenia. Cave lighting then was not as revealing as it is today but visitors clearly did not lack in imagination. Reproduced from Valvasor, J.W., Die Ehre des Hertzogthums Crain. Lubljana, Endter. 4 vols, 1687.



Figure 8.9 Ilustrating calcite crystal ontogeny. (Left) Competitive growth and selection from an initial substrate that is flat; favourably oriented crystals succeed in a length-fast mode. (Centre) Length-fast growth from a more realistic, irregular, substrate; initial crystallites are numbered. The gently undulating surfaces of stage II growth in the figure are very common features  in stalagmites and flowstones. Adapted with permission from Self, C.A. and Hill, C.A., How speleothems grow: a guide to the ontogeny of cave minerals. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 65(2), 130–51. [BCRA] (Right) A photomicrograph of  length-fast growth upwards in a stalagmite from China. It is in the equivalent of stage III in the centre illustration. Vertical extension is clearly seen in the crystal fabric but transverse banding is more prominent. The 16 numbered bands are considered to be  successive annual accumulations. The scale bar is 500 mm in length. Reproduced with permission from Ming, T.,  Tungsheng, L., Xiaoguang, Q., and Xianfeng, W. 1998. Signification chrono-climatique de spe´le´othe`mes lamine´s de Chine du Nord. Karstologia, 32(2) ; 1–6, 2003.




microcrystalline  form  with  the  c  axis  oriented  roughly across the direction of growth (length-slow or ‘coconut meat’ texture of Folk and Assereto 1976) or  as coarser palisade, columnar or equant crystal aggregates with the c axes oriented to growth  (length-fast – see Railsback 2000). Large monocrystalline speleothems occur but are rare. A final crystalline type is an irregular mosaic, created
by inversion from aragonite. Russian mineralogists adopt an ontogenetic approach that aims to link a  particular crystal fabric with the specific environmental conditions in a cave; see Onac (1997) and Self and Hill (2003) for reviews. Frisia et al. (2000) correlate columnar and fibrous fabrics with low supersaturation and  continuously wet conditions. Where discharge varies or there are abundant growth inhibitors, the defects  increase. They are at a maximum in evaporative conditions, as many have noted. Spaces left between the growing individual crystals are sealed off by later  deposition and constitute inclusions, normally filled with fluid. Variation in the abundance and
scale of fluid inclusions creates the smallest features that
can be distinguished by eye or hand lens, which are faint, parallel growth layers. They reflect variation in rates of deposition. Stronger layering is created by temporary cessation and drying, by periods of dissolving at the
growth front (re-solution) or other erosion, or by deposi-
tion of foreign particulates. Syntaxial crystal growth may extend through such breaks, or new generations of crystals may start upon them with greater or lesser

bonding across the break. At the extreme, there is  no bonding; the speleothem can fall apart at the hiatus.
  Aragonite in caves displays a principal habit as radiat- ing clusters of needles, termed ‘whiskers’, ‘flowers’, ‘anthodites’, etc. They grow from bedrock or calcite speleothems. There is also massive, acicular aragonite in regular  stalagmites and  flowstones. It  may be  inter- laminated with calcite or display a patchy  appearance where inversion to calcite is occurring.
  There has been much discussion of why aragonite is found in some caves (or parts of them) and not others. Figure 8.10 indicates that it is metastable in the domain of calcite and dolomite. The latter is almost unknown as a primary precipitate in caves, so it is widely   accepted   that   depletion   of   Ca   ions   in   Mg- rich solutions is the principal factor (Hill and  Forti 1997, p. 238), usually by prior deposition of  calcite. The ‘popcorn ! aragonite ! hydromagnesite  globule’ model (see Figure 8.14) thus is a potent  example of the process at work. Other suggestions   include ion substitution or ‘poisoning’ (e.g. by Sr) or  unspecified effects of organics or other seed nucleii  when growth is initiated.
8.3.2 Stalactites and draperies
The  principal  forms  of  speleothems  are  shown  in Figures 8.11 and 8.12. The fundamental form is the





Figure 8.10   Stable and metastable (dashed lines) phase relationships in the system Ca–Mg–CO2–H2O, showing a model evolutionary path for a hypothetical water.





Figure 8.11   Model depicting the many different forms of aragonite and calcite precipitates found in caves. Reproduced from Hill,
C.A. and Forti, P., Cave Minerals of the World (2nd Edition). Huntsville, AL, p. 463 © 1997 National Speleological Society of America.


Figure 8.12 (Upper left) Soda straw stalactites, stalagmites and flowstone. (Lower left) Stalactites and stalagmites aligned along joints. (Photographs by A.C. Waltham, with permission.) (Right) Giant stalagmites and columns in Ogle Cave, New Mexico. The large scale and highly ornamented form are typical of warmer caves with some evaporation. (Photograph by A.N. Palmer, with permission.)




soda  straw  stalactite  (Fr.  fistuleuse),  a  single  sheath  of crystal enclosing a feedwater canal. Growth occurs at the tip and the c axis is oriented down the straw.  Andrieux

(1973b) specified their diameter by the relation
1
C qÞ2

(1963) suggested that straw stalactites require a slow,
steady feedwater without suspended fines or organics to block the canal. Some straws grow to 3–6 m in  length

D ¼ ð

p; z	ð8:6Þ

before breaking under their own weight.
  Leakage through the walls of straws may overplate and thicken the sheath. Partial or complete blockage of  the canal compels leakage, usually at the stem, thus forming the common tapered or carrot-shaped  stalactite. C axes can be subparallel to the canal,  radiate from it, or be randomly oriented.
  Curl  (1973a)  suggested  that  because  of  gravitational forces and surface tension effects the minimum diameter of straw stalactites must be ~5 mm. Hill and Forti (1997) cite diameters of 2–9 mm. Very fragile forms of submi- nimum diameter can grow as  sheaths on hanging tree roots in caves where there is little air movement.
  The  more  complex  forms  of  tapered  stalactites  have been analysed by Short et al (2005). Because of acceler- ated deposition at points of water extrusion they can grow protuberances in a myriad of forms, including crenulations and corbels with curtains (drapes) or subsidiary stalactites. Maximum dimensions are  determined by the strength of attachment to the roof, strength of roof rock, or dimensions of the cave. It is rare to see free-hanging stalactites longer than ~10 m and greater than 1–2 m in diameter.
  Aragonite soda straws are rare. Somewhat more com- mon is the clumped ‘spathite’ or ‘chapelets de  boules’ form (Figure 8.11). The narrow necks may  represent temporary halts in growth.
  Draperies or curtains develop where the feedwater trickles down an inclined wall or beneath a tapering stalactite. Deposition is along the trickle course, with the c axis perpendicular to the growth edges so that scalenohedral crystal patterns normal to it are well  dis- played. The form may be sinuous. Overgrowth may not occur because the feedwater is limited to the lower edges; thus, curtains tend to have the width of a few crystals and to be translucent. Colour-banded varieties  are common and are known as ‘bacon rashers’.
8.3.3 Stalagmites and flowstones
The forms of stalagmites are similarly varied, and  they grade into general coverings spread across floors and walls termed flowstones. Stalagmites were divided into  three categories by Franke (1965). Those of uniform diameter
add almost all new growth at the top (not down the sides) and are considered to be created by a uniform supply of feedwater  with  uniform  solute  concentrations.  Curl

where C0 is CaCO3 available for deposition (C — Ceq of
equation 3.76), q is flow rate and z is the rate of growth in height. The minimum diameter is about 3 cm. Increase in diameter is broadly proportional to q (i.e. drip rate). Kaufmann  (2003)  developed  this  relationship  to  model the hypothetical variation of diameter of a  speleothem growing throughout one or more glacial  cycles in a temperate region: the results are strikingly like the forms of many ice stalagmites that grow and disappear annually (see Figures 8.17 and 8.18). Gams  (1981) showed that diameter also increases with drip fall height, a first com- plicating factor. ‘Candlestick’ stalagmites of this type are quite common.
  Stalagmites with terraced or corbelled thickening  are Franke’s (1965) second type. At the extreme they possess leaf-like protuberances and are likened to piled plates or palm tree trunks (e.g. in Aven Armand, France, and Ludi Cave, Guilin). In between these growths the stem has a uniform  diameter.  Franke  attributed  them  to periodic variations in growth rate and to greater fall height causing greater splash.
  The third, most common, type is the conical or tapered form. Franke (1965) attributed it to a decreasing growth rate, Gams (1981) to increasing fall height. It is evidently due to there being significant calcite deposition from film flow down the sides. There is a transition to shallow bosses and flowstone sheets. A rare subtype is the ‘logo- mite’, a Christmas-tree-like tapering pile of calcite plate- lets  accumulated  below  drip  points  in  cave   ceilings subjected to condensation corrosion (i.e. the  corrosion solutes are precipitated immediately below);  examples found in Jewel Cave, South Dakota, where a subaqueous crystal lining is being dissolved, are up to 1.5 m in height and decorated with evaporitic overgrowth. An analogous form is the ‘conulite’ (Figure 8.11) where calcite rafts on pool surfaces are sunk and pile up below fixed drip points.
  The greatest reported heights of broomstick and corbelled stalagmites are ~30 m. Tapered stalagmites can be higher. Some bosses attain diameters approach- ing 50 m.
  Flowstones are deposited from a rather uniform  flow and accrete roughly parallel to the host surface. They are most common on floors or gentle slopes but  occur on vertical walls where they are transitional to  stalactites, drapery, etc. Maximum thicknesses up to a  few metres are known underground. Flowstones are  the dominant





Figure 8.13 Excentric speleothems. (Left) A straw stalactite grows from the tip of a vermiform helictite in Lechuguilla  Cave, New Mexico. (Photograph by N.R. Thompson, with permission.) (Centre) Cave pearls, Castleguard Cave, Canada. (Photograph by Ford.) (Right) A ‘heligmite’ bush that is probably of subaqueous origin, draped by sunken calcite rafts, Wind Cave, South Dakota. (Photograph by A.N. Palmer, with permission.)


deposits at karst springs where, because of rapid growth due   to   evaporation   and   incorporation   of   vegetation, thicknesses of tens of metres can occur  (section 9.11). Flowstones may cover a cave floor for tens or hundreds of metres downstream of a single source of feedwater.
  Growth layering and hiatuses achieve their maximum development  in  flowstones.  For  example,   Gradzin´ski et al. (1997) described three strongly  contrasted layers in a deposit 2 m thick in a Slovak cave: a basal, porous layer with acicular fabric and much detritus was abruptly succeeded by dense calcite with varve-like microlamina- tions; above this was a very  dense, darker flowstone containing many internal  corrosion surfaces and dated to the later stage of the  previous interglacial. Many sediment sections in caves everywhere display flowstones interbedded with fluvial deposits, etc.
8.3.4 Excentric speleothems
Excentric or erratic deposits occur in most well decorated caves. They are termed excentric because they grow outwards  from  a  wall  or  earlier  formation,  seeming  to defy gravity (Figure 8.11). ‘The form develops  when
crystal growth forces are dominant over the hydraulic forces   of   vertically   moving   water.   Specifically,   this implies that the flow to the excentric must be sufficiently slow to prevent drops forming’ (White  1976). If drops form, a regular straw stalactite will  grow downwards from the excentric; Figure 8.13 (left) shows it all!
  
There  are  innumerable  varieties.  Most  excentrics  are small individuals rarely being > 1 m and   commonly
< 10 cm in length. These can be divided into (i) helictites or linear forms and (ii) globular or semi-spherical forms. In  addition,  there  is  one  large  calcite  erratic  form,  the shield or palette.

Hill and Forti (1997) recognize four types of helictites:
1. filiform or  thread-like  growths  of  ~0.2–1 mm  in diameter, in aragonite or calcite;
2. vermiform,  sinuous  to  twisting,  often  bifurcating
calcite sheaths of 1–10 mm diameter, is the most common type – in a tangled mass on a wall it looks like the hair of the Medusa;
3. an aragonite, beaded variety, which also curves and
branches;
4. twig-like  helictites  which  develop  more  angular branching.
  All these types possess a tiny central capillary, with the water evaporating from its tip. The cause of the curving is attributed  to  trace  impurities  coprecipitated  at  the  eva- poration front twisting the c axis, coupled with  regular rotation of crystal axes (Sletov 1985, Ghergari  et al. 1998). Branching is due to blockage by crystal  growth during drier periods, compelling diversion or bifurcation of  flow.  From  the  preferred  distributions  of helictites, very stable microclimate and hydraulic  conditions also appear to be important in many caves, but not all. Kempe




and Spaeth (1977) showed that sample capillaries widen and   narrow,   appearing   like   pearls   on   a   string,   and suggested that a seasonal effect might also drive  the deformation.
Cser and Maucha (1966) noted two further types:
5. straight monocrystals, 0.2–3.0 mm diameter, which lack a capillary and are believed to form from aerosol CaCO3 accreting at the tip;
6. straight or tapered monocrystals 2.0 mm or more  in
diameter and often lacking a capillary – most  often this is a wind flag (anemolite), growing into oncom- ing air from an extrusion in a stalactite.
  The  globular  family  contains  many  varieties.  Names given to them include ‘cave coral’, ‘popcorn’, ‘globulite’, ‘botryoidal  calcite’;  ‘boules’  in  French,  etc.  Occurrence ranges  from  single  individuals  growing from a wall or regular speleothem, to lines  or  patches  one  globule deep  and,  finally,  great  clusters like bunches of grapes. Clusters may be tightly packed together and many layers deep.
  Figure 8.14 gives a comprehensive model for the subaerial type. Feedwater is extruded from microfissures and evaporated slowly from the globule surface, i.e. it is an optimum evaporation form. Depletion of Ca ions may permit acicular aragonite to grow outwards from the globule,   tipped   by   hydromagnesite   (Figure   8.10).   In most caves, only the calcite is present. Calcite  popcorn also accretes by condensation around nucleii on the lower parts  of   condensation   corrosion  cells   above thermal waters, and globular deposits form  underwater in satu- rated pools.
  Shields  or  palettes  are  composed  of  an  upper  and  a lower plate, both displaying concentric layering,  jutting from a wall. Kunsky (1950) showed that they form where water is discharged under hydrostatic pressure  from a fissure inclined upwards. The water diffuses  radially outwards between the plates and new calcite accretes to their edges. There is usually deposition of  draperies



Figure 8.14  Development of the ‘popcorn–whiskers–globules’ or ‘calcite–aragonite–hydromagnesite’ sequence common in many caves where there is slow evaporation.

underneath.  Shields  are  up  to  5 m  in  diameter   and 4–10 cm thick.
8.3.5 Pisoliths or cave pearls
Cave pearls are regular accretions of radial calcite about  a foreign nucleus such as a sand grain (Figure 8.13). They grow in groups of a few to thousands in shallow pools agitated by falling drops of feedwater. Homann (1969) showed that gentle oscillation (rather than repeated  rolling)  is  all  that  is  needed  to  cause  regular spherical accretion. Ideal cave pearls are  spheres that range ~0.2 to 10–15 mm in diameter. Those in a given nest are similar in size. If the nucleus is  elongated, then bladed or roller shapes develop.  Irregular shapes form about larger granules. There are  a few known instances of edge-rounded cubical pearls  (e.g. at Cas- tleguard Cave; Roberge  and Caron,   1983) and one example of nested hexagonal pearls, the optimum pack- ing pattern.
  Growth of cave pearls calls for a delicate balance in the supply of water. If too little, the pearls cement together to form the core of a new stalagmite; if too much, they are displaced from the pool. Nevertheless, the balance is attained often enough. Nests of cave pearls are  known in caves everywhere between the arctic and the  tropics. Irregular examples develop rapidly in old mines (e.g. to 2 cm diameter in 5 months in highly saturated waters in a Cu-porphyry mine in Hungary (L. Lennart,  personal communication).
8.3.6 Rimstone dams or gours
These features build up in stream channels or on  flow- stones. The height ranges from millimetres (microgours, often on the downstream faces of larger dams) to many metres. They may be single, or  interlocking to create a staircase of pools. Rims are  straight, curved or crenu- lated. The form is also  common in rivers (e.g. Plitvice Lakes, Croatia; Figure  9.53) and at  tufa springs  and hotsprings, such  as  those of Yellowstone Park, USA, and Pamukkale in Turkey (Figure 9.54).
  Rimstone dams originate at any irregularities that will thin a film of flow. They are the best example of positive feed-back operating in speleothems. Calcite precipitation is fastest at the rim because the water layer is  thinnest there. Transitions to turbulent or to supercritical flow may help accelerate the process. Cavitation  (detachment of flow from a bed, to form temporarily free sheets or drops) may explain dense patterns of   microgours  on  steep flowstone slopes.




8.3.7 Moonmilk
This term is applied to white, amorphous masses of crystals that are pasty or plastic when wet, powdery when  dry.  Moonmilk  has  been  reported  from  caves  in all climatic regions, although it is more prominent in cold or dry caves because there is often a lack of other types of speleothems in them.
  Moonmilk  occurs  on  rock  and  clastic  sediment  sur- faces  or  as  overgrowths  on  earlier  speleothems,  in irre- gular patches varying from centimetres to many metres in area. Patches are often bulbous, like  cauliflower heads. Thickness may be several tens of centimetres, though that is exceptional.
  Moonmilk is composed of loose, fibrous crystals with an average thickness of only 1 mm or so. They  display needle, branched or helicoidal forms. In very  humid regions the crystals are entirely or  predominantly of
calcite or aragonite, plus hydromagnesite in dolomite caves. Where there is effective evaporation, the hydrated carbonate minerals and gypsum become more important, even huntite, dolomite, some phosphates and silicates.
  Moonmilk   has   been   studied   intensively   (Hill   and Forti 1997). The presence of loose crystals of evaporite minerals is readily understood as being due to late-stage deposition from minute quantities of  concentrated solu- tions. But this habit is quite  anomalous for calcite. In many instances, it is  believed that bacteria break down ordinary calcite  crystals and redeposit them as micro- fibres; however,   some wholly  inorganic deposits  are known.
8.3.8 Subaqueous deposits
A characteristic suite of precipitates develops in and on the surfaces of pools of supersaturated meteoric water, normally rimstone pools. The basic form is a wall encrustation of scalenohedral calcite (dogtooth spar) with projecting faces. Sometimes there are botryoidal
crusts instead. At the water surface calcite may precipi- tate on dust particles and float as calcite ice or rafts supported by surface tension until too thick, when it sinks (e.g. Figure 8.13). Raft material and laminated
flowstone grow outwards from the pool edges at the water surface. It may also grow radially from any projecting rocks in the centre, creating lily pad patterns. Calcite even encrusts bubbles on pool surfaces, a testi- mony to the extreme physical stability that can pertain in some cave environments.
  Rising  pools  (e.g.  as  a  rimstone  dam  rises)   may inundate stalactites. Their submerged parts then  accrete calcite or aragonite encrustations and appear as dipsticks.
  
The greatest subaqueous deposits are associated  with the degassing of thermal waters enriched in  exhalative CO2. At the extreme, all surfaces become  coated with dogtooth or nailhead (rhombohedral) calcite spar. These are crystal caves. In Jewel Cave, South  Dakota, all surfaces are covered with 6–15 cm of  nailhead spar in
sheets and bulbous masses (Figure 8.15), except the highest places where it has been removed by condensa- tion corrosion. Other caves nearby contain sheets > 1m thick.
  Continuous calcite precipitation over a vertical  range of > 130 m as at Jewel Cave is exceptional. It  is more common in thermal caves to see strong outward growth of calcite fins or curving folia at and immediately below the water surface, with botryoidal or dogtooth encrusta- tions below them that rapidly diminish with  depth. In some parts of the Budapest thermal caves  there are no deposits below —6 m except sunken raft  detritus. Wind Cave, South Dakota, displays thin,  discontinuous crusts to —70 m or more. This deeper precipitation is associated with very slow renewal of water and slow, steady degas- sing (Ford et al. 1993). Renaut and Jones (2003) survey hot-springs calcites.
8.3.9 Deposits of other carbonate minerals
These are the Mg-rich carbonates plus hydrated  carbo- nates (Table 8.3). They are all tiny in amount,  and products of concentrated solutions created by evaporation or by previous deposition of calcite and aragonite. They are difficult to identify in the field  and so have been reported from comparatively few caves. Most have been recognized only as components in moonmilk. For exam- ple, in the cold and humid  centre of Castleguard Cave (þ3○C and relative   humidity   > 95%)   small   nodular growths   of   aragonite or of  calcite  plus  huntite  are surrounded  by aureoles of pure hydromagnesite moon- milk  (Harmon et al. 1983). Brucite (Fig. 8.10) has not been identified in caves.
8.3.10 Colour and luminescence in speleothems
Pure, inclusion-free calcites and aragonites are colourless and translucent. High frequencies of fluid inclusions will make them white and opaque. Flood muds sealed in by calcite overgrowth can appear to discolour an entire deposit although they are only minor, discrete layers.
  However,  there  is  generally  much  more  colour  con- tained within individual growth layers and at  sites that never flood. The common range is from reds through red- browns, browns, buffs and ochres, to yellows and creams,
with brightness (intensity) varying widely in all. This is





Figure 8.15   Typical passage in Jewel Cave, South Dakota. Walls are covered by 6–15 cm or more of nailhead spar precipitated from thermal phreatic waters. (Photograph by A.N. Palmer, by permission.)



Table 8.3   Conditions of calcite speleothem growth, destruction or decay

Condition	Process	State


The speleothem feedwater is the dominant control

Other waters are the dominant control (usually floodwater)


1 Continuous deposition	Net deposition
2 Periodic deposition	Net deposition
3 Periodic deposition, periodic erosion	Net deposition
4 Periodic erosion, periodic deposition	Net erosion
5 Periodic erosion, no deposition	Net erosion
6 Continuous erosion	Net erosion
7 One of 1–6 may pertain but body	Net erosion (floodwater) re-solution predominates
8 One of 1–6 may pertain but mechanical	Net erosion erosion predominates
9 One of 1–6 may pertain but burial by
  clastic sediments predominates	Burial 10 Permanently inundated by fresh water
or seawater	No change, or net erosion,
or marine boring and overgrowths

All effective water flow has ceased	11 Very slow weathering with minor accumulation	Weathering
of dust and aerosols; loss of lustre
12 Corrosion by acidic waters condensed from	Net erosion flowing, CO2—  or H2S-rich air
13 Speleothem freezes	Shattering
14 Speleothem buried by weathering earth, organic	Burial matter, etc.

one of the major draws in tourist caves. It was long supposed that such colour must be due to metal  oxides (chiefly iron and manganese) being distributed  as parti- cles of pigment amongst the carbonate crystals. These do play a role in some cases, but it is now firmly established that most or all colour in this range derives from humic and fulvic acids that were dissolved in the feedwater and then co-precipitated with the calcite or aragonite. These are complex organic molecules with masses ranging from hundreds to a few thousand  daltons (the fulvics) up to tens of thousands of daltons (the humics): 1 dalton ¼ 1/12
the mass of 12C, the common isotope of carbon.  These
substances absorb strongly at the blue end of the  spec- trum, so producing the red-cream range of colours. In a comprehensive review, White (1976) suggested   that higher proportions of heavier humics create the  darker red and brown hues, with lighter humics and  fulvics produce the yellows and creams. Van Beynen  et al. (2001) confirmed this with detailed studies and  also showed that undissolved particulate  organic   matter
(> 0.7 mm  in  diameter)  contributes  to  the  very   dark
brown-black shades seen in many speleothems.
  Transition metal ions in the crystal lattice can also produce   spectacular   colouring:   Cu2þ    gives   green   in calcite, blue in aragonite; Cr2þ and Co2þ  give blue and

pink to blue respectively; Ni2þ gives green to yellow (White 1997b). All of these are very rare, however, and in most  instances  are  found  only  in  speleothems  that  are small.
  As cave photographers have long known, many calcite speleothems luminesce (emit light) when excited by a U/V flash.  X-rays,  electron  beams,  heating  or  crushing also produce luminescent responses. If the light vanishes imme- diately after the flash (excitation) it is  termed ‘fluores- cence’; if it fades slowly it is  ‘phosphorescence’. The brilliance of the emission is generally proportional to the concentration of luminescing centres in the crystal lattice. Shopov (1997b) gives a comprehensive review. Although some trace elements in calcite will fluoresce, in ordinary vadose speleothems it is now known that most emission is from the fulvic and humic acid contents. The study by van Beynen et al. (2001) encompassed speleothems from subarctic and alpine tundra, temperate and tropical forest, grassland and desert-margin environments, and all colours from translucent white to nearly black. Fulvic acids yielded the higher fluorescence (per ppm) and,  because of their greater abundance in most samples,  were usually more important emission sources than the humic acids. Larger particulate organic matter was also present in many sam- ples and tended to quench the luminescence.




  Shopov (1987) was the first to recognize that, in many speleothems, the fluorescence signals appear as stronger– weaker couplets a few micrometres or tens of micro- metres in thickness and parallel to any growth  banding visible  to  the  eye.  He  suggested  that  in  many instances this must represent annual banding.  Annual or seasonal banding of the fluorophores has now been established by several field studies in Europe and  North America that extracted the humics, fulvics and  particulate organics from speleothem drip waters. For example, van Beynen et al. (2000) found that the  strongest concentrations of fluorophores occurred  during the annual spring thaw flushing of the soil above a cave in Indiana.
  Luminescence   may   also   discriminate   hydrothermal calcite environments. Those precipitated  from very hot solutions ( 100○C) yield a brief  orange-red phosphor- escence; lengthy afterglow  indicates temperatures down to 60○C or less.
8.3.11 Rates of growth of calcite speleothems
Most visitors to caves are interested to know how fast the speleothems grow. Although the theory of their growth is now  quite  well  understood  (section  3.10),  this  remains a difficult question because rate-control  environments are complex. Table 8.3 cites 14 different conditions that a  given  deposit  may  experience.   Some re-solution (net dissolution by waters from the original depositional source) or by floodwaters, condensation corrosion, etc. is seen in most well-decorated caves.
  Rates  of  growth  are  usually  quoted  in  terms  of  the extension of a given form rather than its accumulation of mass. Straw stalactites ‘grow’ fastest because they  have the greatest extension per unit of mass deposited. Rates of many millimetres per year are reported beneath bridges, in
cellars, etc. where dissolved Portland cement is being re- precipitated in evaporative conditions, e.g. 3000 mm a—1 at Caracas, Venezuela (de Bellard-Pietri 1981). Other drip- stones and flowstones grow especially rapidly where they are tufaceous, i.e. built upon vegetal matter.
  There have been many attempts to measure current rates of extension of stalactites in show caves. Rates between 0.2 and  2 mm a—1  are quoted  for straw  stalac- tites, between < 0.1 and 3 mm a—1  for carrot  stalactites, and between < 0.005 and 7 mm a—1 for stalagmites. The sampling is often biased in favour of deposits that appear to be growing the fastest.
  There may be significant seasonal variations in rate of deposition even where deposition is continuous. Gams and Kogovsˇek (1998) summarize long-term field observations in the great caves around Postojna, Slovenia. At Postojna Cave itself, rates of deposition  approximately doubled

when summer soil water reached the speleothems in the autumn months; the range was 18–40 g m—3  of dripwater. Rates of deposition on the instrumented   flowstones appeared  to  be  inversely  proportional  to  the volumes of flow across them.
  A different approach has been to calculate  long-term mean rates in stalagmites and flowstones that have been dated by radiometric methods (section 8.6).  At present, the range that has been detected is about  three to four orders of magnitude, even though the   samples   are restricted  in  their  morphological  type  and largely from humid  temperate  regions.  This  is   to emphasize that growth rates are site-specific to a  considerable degree; they can vary a lot within one cave.
  In summary, in humid cave interiors, carrot stalactites probably grow up to10 mm a—1 and straw stalactites may grow several times faster. Stalagmites rarely extend more than 1 mm a—1 and mean  rates as low as 0.001 mm a—1 have been calculated. Flowstone thickening rates  are generally less than stalagmite extension rates,  perhaps by as much as one order of magnitude.
8.3.12 Patterns of distribution of calcite speleothems
This subject has attracted comparatively little discussion, which is surprising because distribution patterns can reveal much concerning effective fissuration, the epikarst and environmental controls above a cave or in its region. The two extremes are readily identified: many caves have no speleothems; others are largely or entirely filled with them.
  Absence of speleothems in a given region or cave or particular passage is due to four principal causes.

1. Although  vadose,  all  of  the  passage  is  in  a   net erosional state. This is typical of young caves in any region, of the ‘active’ (usually lowest) passages in a multiphase system, etc. The first speleothems become established in sheltered recesses in the roof when the flood frequency begins to drop.
2. There  is  insufficient  soil  CO2   so  that   infiltrating waters are not supersaturated with  respect to the cave air. This is the major factor in  explaining the small number and size of speleothems in many arctic and alpine caves and some semi-arid caves. However, lack of well-developed soils does  not always imply their absence. Castleguard Cave is covered by glacier ice yet some sections of it are  profusely decorated with modern deposits, as a consequence of suspected exotic acid effects (Atkinson 1983).
3. A   non-carbonate   caprock   prohibits   infiltration   of feedwaters, or changes their ionic composition  so




that calcite precipitation cannot occur. This is true of many middle and upper level passages in the Mammoth Cave. Underneath its caprocks there is some   precipitation   of   gypsum   (section   7.10),   but calcite appears in profusion only if the galleries pass under valleys where the capping has been  removed. Low-level passages  in  the  cave   generally   lack speleothems  because  they  are  in  the net erosional condition.
4. There is no hydraulic connection between the epikarst zone and the passage, or connections are intercepted by overlying galleries which capture all precipitates. It is rare to find an entire, extensive cave that does not possess effective linkages to the epikarst, but particu- lar passages remain unconnected or intercepted in many systems. Partial interception is common, redu- cing the number of feedwaters entering lower pas- sages. These effects are most important where fissure frequency is low.

  Where   speleothems   are  abundant   their   distribution varies with characteristics of the fissures  transmitting the feedwater. At one extreme is  limestone possessing high primary permeability. Feedwater emerges at points a few millimetres to centimetres apart, tending to create a dense and uniform cover of straw or carrot stalactites in a roof. This is characteristic of shallow caves in Quaternary limestones, but particular beds or lesser patches of rock in older  strata also display it. At the other extreme, feed- water supply is limited to a single fissure and the stalac- tites, etc. are aligned along it. In most grottoes the supply is from a variety of alignments.
  Often the type and scale of precipitation are functions of the hydraulic efficiency of the final fissures that supply the water. The largest fissures support the largest stalactites, stalagmites, etc. Small fissures support only straw stalac- tites and a few tapered examples plus thin calcite crusts, while the smallest may yield only excentrics and evaporite minerals.
  Microclimatic factors may be locally significant in determining  the  type,  scale  or  density  of  speleothems. This is most obvious in the cases of  evaporites and anemolites; they grow best where air currents are stron- gest. Many hard calcite speleothems  have  soft  calcite overgrowths    on    the    upwind    side, especially near entrances. When there is a  sequence of hard and soft calcite layers oscillation of the cave climate about some critical value of relative humidity may be implied. Some caves display strong vertical zonation of temperature or humidity, with the consequence that excentrics (particu- larly the cave coral types) are seen to terminate abruptly at some upper or lower limit on the walls.
8.4 
OTHER CAVE MINERALS
Hill and Forti (1997) report more than 180 non-carbonate minerals in caves. Some are alteration products such as the standard clay minerals. However, a majority are precipitated from solutions. Some of these are rarely found except in caves (i.e. they can almost be described as ‘cave specific’). Many others attain their greatest  or purest development in the stable, unchanging  environ- ments of deep but inactive caves. Here, we summarize the most commonly encountered types.
8.4.1 The sulphates and halides
Gypsum is believed to be the third cave mineral by volume and frequency. Its source may be gypsum strata, inclusions, etc. in the feedwater course, or it may be complexed from oxidized sulphides and dissolved calcite as explained in equation (3.58).
  Gypsum is deposited in three principal modes in caves. The first is as evaporite inclusions in rock or clastic sediments. The inclusions are typically coarse, tubular or fibrous crystals in lenses up to a few centimetres  thick. They disrupt the rock or sediment (evapoturbation).
  The second mode is as speleothems growing from rock, sediment or calcite speleothems. Hill and Forti (1997) list 18 forms including dripstones, flowstones and crusts. The Chandeliers in Lechuguilla Cave are perhaps the most celebrated example of a dripstone.
However, more abundant are gypsum flowers (‘oulopho-
lites’), needles and whiskers or hair. Flowers are cur- ving,  branching  bundles  of  fibrous  crystals  as  long  as 50 cm. Epsomite and mirabilite, the most common  Mg and Na cave sulphates, also display this form.  Gypsum needles usually grow in dense clusters from  sediment, like needle ice in freezing soils. Whiskers and hair are the finest, monocrystalline strands, readily swayed by a puff of air. Massive, sword-like crystals of gypsum that may exceed 1 m are also known.
  The third mode of deposition is as regularly  bedded deposits or wall encrustations from evaporating lakes or pools, etc. (Figure 7.32).
  Gypsum, plus the minor but frequent epsomite and mirabilite, is most abundant in gypsum caves and in temperate  to  tropical  limestone  caves  that  are   quite dry, at least at some seasons. They may suffer  signifi- cant condensation corrosion in such caves.  They form in lesser amounts in cold, humid caves   such as Castleguard and in arctic caves where  temperatures are
—1 to —3○C.
  The other sulphate and halide minerals in Table 8.2 are much rarer and are known only in warm, dry-to-arid




caves.  Epsomite  loses  one  water  of  hydration  to  form hexahydrite. Mirabilite dries to powdery   thenardite. Anhydrite, bassanite and bloedite are known in polymin- eral crusts or inclusions on or in drying  cave earths. Halite forms crusts, single crystals or  flowers in desert limestone and gypsum caves and is abundant in caves in salt. Celestite is occasionally  reported as crusts or dis- tinctively blue needle  clusters on gypsum,  and barite  is reported as inclusions in cave earths. Both minerals occur in hydrothermal precipitates.
  The   sulphide   minerals   and   fluorite   (fluorspar)   are primarily deposited from metalliferous thermal or  other waters invading caves, with or without contemporaneous dissolution (section 7.7).  Occasionally, there is dissolu- tion and redeposition of these minerals as small stalactites in later caves.
8.4.2 Phosphates, nitrates and vanadates
Most of these minerals are produced by urine, faeces and other  decaying  animal  matter  reacting  with  cave  rock,

speleothems or clastic sediment. Bat guano is the princi- pal source of reactants. The minerals therefore are most common   in   temperate   and   tropical   cave   areas   with abundant bat populations. They attain significant  bulk as microcrystalline aggregates within cave earths  and also  appear  as  thin,  discontinuous  alteration  crusts on walls and speleothems.
  The cave phosphate system is outlined in Figure 8.16. Reactions   between   guano,   etc.   and   calcite   normally produce hydroxyapatite. Other calcium and  magnesium phosphates are rare. Alumino-phosphate minerals such as crandallite and taranakite form in  permeable silts and
clays  on  cave  floors.  Onac  and  Veres¸  (2003)  discuss  a
richly complex example in a Romanian cave.
  Nitrate minerals are of unusual interest because  they have been extracted from cave earths for millenia, to use as medicines and in ceramics. There was  widespread mining in USA caves during wars of the  18th and 19th centuries to manufacture saltpetre (KNO3) by addition of potash (wood ash) mixed with water.  River caves with deep clastic fills in their upper  levels were therefore




Figure 8.16   Phosphate minerals derived from the reaction of guano, bone, etc. decay products with wall rocks, clay fillings  or sulphide ores in caves.




favoured and in the Appalachian region few of these escaped attention. The excavations, tools and vats are still well preserved in many of them; e.g. in the Historic section, Mammoth Cave.
  The   subject   is   comprehensively   reviewed   by   Hill (1981). Where bats are abundant, the nitrates  derive from  nitrous  guano.  There  are  few  bats  in  most Appa- lachian ‘saltpetre caves’, however, and   their typical nitrate earths are alkaline and low in  organic matter. They contain 0.01–4% nitrates by weight, mainly in the top few metres. These are soil  nitrates carried down in solution in seepage waters.
  Nitrates crystallize only where caves are dry and warm (> 12○C). KNO3 and NaNO3 occur as thin wall crusts and small stalactites, and darapskite (Na3   (NO3)(SO4).H2O) occurs as small flowers, hair, dripstones and flowstones. Trace amounts of vanadium  leached from clays or intrusive ores in vadose caves may complex with Ca or other elements and compounds to form vanadates. Tyuya- myunite   (Ca(UO2)2V2O8.5–8H2O,   named   for   Tyuya Muyun  Cave in Khirghizstan, is best known. It and other  vanadates can appear as bright yellow crusts on
calcite and other precipitates. All are rare.
8.4.3 Aluminium, iron and manganese coatings
Most aluminium and iron oxides are carried into caves in suspension but some form in situ. Alumina (in  bauxite, boehmite or gibbsite; Table 8.3) mostly  occurs  as  thin encrustations  in  caverns  directly  beneath  bauxite  sedi- ments  filling  karst  or  palaeokarst depressions (Ba´rdossy 1982). Iron oxides occur chiefly as limonite coatings on walls and  sediments. Some thick limonite within sedi- ments is  reported, and a few instances of limonitic stalactites. In thermal caves or very dry caves haematite is formed.  Tiny crystals of  magnetite precipitate  within the  calcite of many ordinary speleothems, where they carry a chemical remanent magnetism (Latham et al. 1979).
  In many caves, dark brown-black stains or coatings are prominent  on  cobbles  and  boulders  in  stream  channels and may extend up walls or speleothems as  obvious deposits   from   ponded   floodwaters.   They   are usually shiny and soft. These are manganese  oxides, chiefly birnessite but also psilomelane, hollandite and todorokite. They are deposited from highly oxidized (e.g. turbulent vadose) waters carrying Mn,  Ba, etc. ions from the solution of impure limestones.  They are associated also with hydrated iron oxides, for example in some caves in North Island, New Zealand,  where the iron is derived from volcanic ash soils.  Thick deposits of pure manga- nese in Jewel Cave, South Dakota, appear to be residuals

of local limestone solution also, in this case settled out of slowly circulating thermal waters (Hill 1982).
8.4.4 Silica
Most silica precipitated in caves occurs as thin coatings of euhedral quartz in thermal waters. Fibrous, length- slow chalcedony replaces gypsum on some speleothems. Opal (cristobalite) is a very fine-grained silica that occurs as thin interlayers in some calcite and  gypsum speleothems. It is precipitated by high silica supersatura-
tion attributable to evaporation.
8.5 ICE IN CAVES
Ice caves are those containing seasonal or perennial ice or both. Ice caves may be ‘static’ or ‘dynamic’ in their meterological behaviour (Figure 8.17). The static cave is a simple deep hole with no air drainage out of the bottom; thus it traps cold, dense air and excludes warmer air. Such static caves extend permanent ice to lower latitudes and altitudes than other natural cold traps. Most dynamic caves have two or more effective entrances for  airflow and distinct entrance zones where the   temperature
varies > 1○C over the year, as explained in section 7.11 Racovit¸a˘ and Onac (2000) present the most comprehen- sive discussion in English of the theory of ice-cave climates,  ice  growth  and  stability,  hoarfrost  deposition
and sublimation. It is based on long records of field studies at Sca˘ris¸oara Ice Cave, at 1160 m a.s.l. in Roma- nia: see also Maire (1990, p. 507 et seq) and Mavlyudov (2005).
8.5.1 Types of ice
At least seven different types of ice in caves are known. The most common consists of dripstones and flowstones formed by freezing of infiltrating waters (Figure  8.18). These appear every winter in many cave  entrances in temperate regions. They are often  predominant in per- ennial ice caves. The morphologies are similar to those of calcite dripstones and flowstones but with less variety and ornamentation. The ice is clear to opaque and polycrys- talline. Eisriesenwelt, at 1660 m in the Austrian Alps, is a perennial ice cave with  outstanding ice of this type. It includes an entrance  zone of ice flowstone 650 m in length and up to 12 m thick.
The second type is the glacie`re (Balch 1900), a large
ice body created by the densification and recrystallization of old snow (firn or ne´ve´) accumulated in a static cave entrance trap site (Figure 8.17a). It is perennial and
always contains a substantial proportion of infiltrating





Figure 8.17 (a) The structure of static and simple (one entrance) dynamic ice caves. (b) The growth of an ice stalagmite in Sca˘ris¸oara Glacier Cave, Romania, over 49 days in February–March 1965. The width is strongly positively correlated with ambient temperature. Reproduced with permission from Racovit¸a˘, G. and Onac, B.P., Sca˘ris¸oara Glacier Cave, Editura Carpatica, Cluj-Napoca, 2000 (c) Features of Grotte Valerie, a complex dynamic ice cave in the subarctic Nahanni karst, Canada. Vertical scale is much exaggerated.


water  ice.  The  ice  is  opaque  and  bluish  in  section.  It occurs as irregular masses conforming to the topography plus snow or water supply patterns of the  host cave. It usually displays distinct dirt layers formed by concentra-
tion during superficial melt in the summer. At Sca˘ris¸oara
there are > 1000 layers in a mass ~15 m thick; a wood fragment 4 m above the base gave a 14C age of AD 870. Dobsˇina Ice Cave, at 970 m in Slovakia, is another excellent   example   (Figure   8.17a).   The   ice   mass   is 145 000 m3, with a mean depth ~13 m. It is true (flowing) glacier ice in many respects because plastic deformation at annual rates of 10–27 mm has been  measured in it (Lalkovicˇ 1995). The ice temperatures  range between
—0.2 and —1.0○C. This is delicately balanced;  melting problems were encountered in the early years  of tourist display, and were solved by modifying the  natural air

circulation. The mean annual external air temperature at the site is þ6○C.
  The third type is formed by freezing of ponded, static water.  It  may  be  seasonal  or  perennial.  Freezing  takes place from the top downwards and tends to  occur at steady rates once begun. This creates coarse polycrystal- line ice with horizontal c axes (Marshall  and  Brown 1974).  Normally,  it  is  the  most  transparent of all types of ice, although containing  spectacular bubble patterns. At  Coulthard  Cave,   Rocky   Mountains,   water-filled phreatic    passages    are now completely frozen up (Figure 8.18). It is possible to view along them through the clear ice until the passages turn away at an apparent optical depth of many metres. The invariant air tempera- ture is approximately —2.5○C and the ice is sublimating
at about 3 mm a—1, forming large scallops.










Figure 8.18   Ice in caves. (Upper left) Ice stalagmites in the entrance area of an Italian cave. (Photograph by P. Forti,  with permission.) (Upper right) Spectacular growth of hexagonal hoarfrost crystals in a cave in the Rocky Mountains, Alberta, Canada. (Lower left) A cold trap. The ice in the foreground traps a lake of very cold, dry air in the rear. Hoarfrost is seen above the lake; it is due to turbulent air drainage down the walls. Grotte Valerie, Nahanni, Canada. (Lower right) Pond water frozen in Coulthard cave, Alberta, and now ablating slowly in cold dry air. Ablating surfaces are large scallops. (Photographs by Ford.)




  Hoarfrost is the fourth type, deposited from water vapour onto rock or ice surfaces below 0○C. There  are at least four different kinds.

1. Mixtures of small needles, rosettes and hexagonal crystals that develop rapidly at temperatures close to 0○C. They form densely packed crusts of clear to opaque ice growing into oncoming drafts.
2. The   most   spectacular   are   larger,   hexagonal   plate crystals of transparent ice that grow by  accretion at the edges. Individual plate diameters as great as 50 cm have been measured and many interlocked, sequential plates may extend up to 2 m  as stalactitic masses (Figure 8.18). These deposits require formation tem- peratures of —1 to —5○C  and very slow, gentle air circulation to supply vapour.
3. Fused,  regelation  masses  derived  from  type  1  or  2 hoarfrost. They are opaque and bulbous and signify an increase of temperature. In Arctic Canada many relict cave  passages  are  completely  filled  with  such ice at short distances from the entrance (Lauriol and Clark 1993).
4. Regularly tapering, pyramidal crystals with hexagonal cross-sections. These are small and rare.

  Extruded ice forms curving fibrous crystals similar to gypsum  flowers.  Lengths  up  to  20 cm  are  recorded  in Canadian caves. This ice probably forms where  super- cooled water is forced under pressure through  microfis- sures in frozen rock. It freezes where pressure is relaxed at the point of emergence. It is rare.
  Intrusive ice is true glacier ice at the pressure  melting point, intruded by plastic flow into open  caves beneath glaciers. The only known examples fill passages at the head of Castleguard Cave, which is situated beneath ~280 m of temperate glacier ice. The  face of the principal intrusion remained constant in  its position, neither advancing nor receding by melt or sublimation, between 1974 and 1993. A final category  is ground ice in clastic sediments. Where there is  rapid freezing it forms thick, irregular masses. Slow freezing creates segregated ice, consisting
of thin, scattered lenses. At intermediate rates needle ice
(pipkrake) is formed, and may extrude as it does in ordinary soils; it is perhaps the most common type reported   in   caves.   Pulinowa   and   Pulina   (1972)   and Schroeder (1979) discuss Polish and Canadian examples in detail, and also describe their effects on the sediments.
8.5.2 Distribution patterns of cave ice
In static caves and simple dynamic examples the ice may extend to fill all of the cold trap, seasonal or perennial.

This is rarely more than 100 m in length (e.g. Dobsˇina) and for hoarfrost it is normally only a few tens of metres. In multi-entrance dynamic caves patterns become more complex, especially where entrances are at widely differ- ing elevations. However, most ice will form in the entrance dynamic zones, as defined in section 7.12. The greatest quoted extent of ice into cave interiors is 1300 m at the Eisriesenwelt, but this is something of an  over- estimate because subparallel galleries are being  added together. The usual maximum is ~ 400 m.  Perhaps the most complex and unexpected patterns  occur in perma- frost regions. The example of Grotte  Valerie, Nahanni, Canada, is given in Figures 8.17c and 8.18. The site is at 61.5○N and the mean annual  external temperature is about —7○C. The ice zone is  a composite of dripstone and flowstone ice plus  hoarfrost. It extends throughout what is, in the summer season, the interior or downwind half of the dynamic cave. This is because the upwind half (i.e. the conventional dynamic entrance zone) is thawed by warm exterior air that is drawn in. A static cave below the  dynamic cave remains a cold trap at all times; it is
permafrozen, arid and dusty, without ice.
8.5.3 Seasonal patterns of ice accumulation and ablation
In a majority of caves, the ice accumulates in the autumn and early winter and melts in the spring and early summer. In colder mountain regions there may be more complex   sequences.   In   alpine   Canada   dripstone   ice accumulates during the autumn, at a decreasing  rate  as soil-water  sources  freeze  up.  Hoarfrost  accretes to the dripstone in late autumn to early winter. It may continue to form all winter where there are  flowing allogenic streams to provide some humidity; otherwise, the balance swings to net sublimation in the depth of winter if cave entrances remain open to permit cold, dry air to enter. A brief burst of renewed hoarfrost formation in early spring is succeeded  by general  melting that normally proceeds from the entrance inwards. At Ciemniak Ice Cave in the High Tatra of   Poland, Rachlewicz and  Szczucin´ski (2004) found  that sublimation was predominant when temperatures fell frequently below —8○C, hoarfrost or ice stalagmites  grew when they oscillated between —8 and
—1○C, and melting dominated when they were warmer.
  Racovit¸a˘ (1972) studied rates of net accumulation  of perennial dripstone and glacie`re ice at Sca˘ris¸oara Cave, over periods ranging from a few years to approximately the past 370 year. He correlated them to variations in the severity of central European winters and concluded that a
period of net ice build-up began around AD  1700  and terminated  about  AD    1920.  Using  oxygen   isotope




evidence, Marshall and Brown (1974) concluded that pond ice in Coulthard Cave may be ~4000 year in age, accumulating at the close of the Boreal Optimum climate phase. In colder regions it is possible that some ice survives from the last (Wu¨rm/Wisconsin) glaciation.

and soil (¼ ‘dead carbon’). This may distort the age calculation, which assumes standard proportions between  the  three  C  isotopes,  12C,  13C  and  14C.  From the simple calcite and dolomite dissolution  reactions (equations 3.32 and 3.35) it might appear  that half the carbon in, for example, a stalagmite will  derive from
14

8.6 DATING OF CALCITE SPELEOTHEMS

soil air enriched in

C and half from rocks which

AND OTHER CAVE DEPOSITS

are without it because they are too old. Soil CO2  and

HCO—

in  water  are  very  reactive,  however,  which

This section briefly reviews the principal methods used in dating and analysing cave deposits. It is an area of research where new analytic and interpretive methods are developing at a rapid pace (Onac et al. 2006). General reviews   of   Quaternary   dating   methods   are   available in Bradley (1999) and Noller et al. 2000. Bosak (2002) summarizes methods for all of karst research, while Ford (1997) and White (2004) focus on speleothems. We begin with the absolute (radiometric clock) methods. These rest upon the decay of natural radio isotopes in a statistically random manner such that there is a fixed decay constant
(l) for a given isotopic species, or on the filling of traps
(holes) in the crystal lattice by emitted decay  products. Thus the decay is exponential

N  ¼ N0e—lt	ð8:7Þ
where N is the number of radioactive atoms present  at time t and N0 is the number present at the beginning of the decay.
8.6.1 Absolute dating
Cosmogenic isotopes

usually increases the proportion of carbon from ‘live’ sources that is taken up by organisms or in precipitates. Several studies have found that 80–90% ‘live’ carbon is usually present in young speleothems (e.g. Genty et al. 2001a) but even in caves close to the soil it can drop to
~ 60%. Where there is little  CO2-enriched soil air and the groundwater flow path through the dead carbon of the rocks is long, this may fall to as little as 35%. Conversely, bone, shell, even wood fragments, buried in cave deposits may take up ‘new’ 14C from HCO3 in groundwater passing through them, which will result in too young  an age. Carbon-14 dating is quite widely applied in  caves but the results should always be treated with  caution, and calibrated by comparison with results from other methods wherever possible.

10Be=26Al
In addition to manufacturing new isotopes in the  upper atmosphere, cosmic rays strike exposed rocks and soils to create them at the Earth’s surface, chiefly  radioactive 10Be;14 C;26Al  and  36Cl.  During  the  past  two decades there has been substantial exploration of this phenomenon
for geomorphological dating. Harbor (1999) presents a
10

Carbon-14

general  review.  For  karst  studies,

Be ðt1=2  ¼ 1:5a 


Carbon-14 is created in the atmosphere when cosmic radiation interacts with 14N. The half-life (t1=2) is 5730 T 40 year. This new carbon is then available for take up in all organic and inorganic systems, e.g. in HCO—. This gives it very broad dating potential. The cosmic ray flux has varied over time, however, causing some deviations in the pro- duction rate, a first source of errors. Although age estimates up to 75 000 year ago (75 a) are  occasionally published, most workers place the limits of the method around 50 a
(i.e.  eight  or  nine  half-lives),  and  beyond  ~30 year uncertainties in cosmic ray flux rates may render  most results too young. Carbon-14 ages are now usually deter- mined by atom counting in an accelerator mass spectro- meter. Samples need be no larger than 1 mg,  permitting careful selection of the points to be dated.
  In carbonate regions 14C dating is further complicated
because of the abundance of stable 12C and 13C in rocks

(million years ago)) and 26Al ðt1=2 ¼ 0:71 a) are most
important because they are created in the fixed ratio  of 1:6 in quartz, which is common amongst pebbles and sand in cave fills. When quartz rocks are exposed, cosmic rays may penetrate them effectively to depths of 1 m or more (e.g., at —0.6 m the flux is ~1/e of the surface  value). Regardless of the total amount of exposure time any given rock or soil receives, if the host quartz should be swept into a cave where it is out of reach of  further cosmic radiation the fixed ratio will generate a steady decay curve for the two isotopes considered together. At present, the effective dating range of the method is 0–5 year or a little more (see Granger and  Muzikar (2001) for full discus- sion). Unfortunately, the abundance of these isotopes can be measured only  with a cyclotron or similar expensive equipment.
  At the beginning of this chapter we emphasized  that there can be much reworking of clastic sediments within a




cave. In addition, they may have been buried below cosmic-ray  penetration  depths  in  surficial  channel   or terrace deposits before being transported  underground. Therefore, results must be interpreted  with caution. The
10Be=26Al age for a particular sediment section in a cave is
the maximum residence time of the quartz there; it may be considerably less. Nevertheless, the work undertaken  by Granger and colleagues has been most impressive for its care and the coherence of the results. These include dating river gorge entrenchment in Virginia (Granger et al. 1997), confirming that the previously speculative pre-Quaternary history of Mammoth Cave and caves of the Cumberland Plateau, Kentucky and Tennessee   begins at ~5 year (Granger et al. 2001, Anthony and  Granger 2004), and that older sediments in the complex multilevel caves of the Siebenhengste–Ba¨renschach     system   of    Switzerland described in section 7.5 may be 4.4 year in age or greater (Ha¨uselmann and Granger 2004).
  
There are two natural parent isotopes, 238Uðt1=2 ¼ 4:47 × 109 year)  and  235U ðt1=2  ¼ 7:04 × 108 year).  With such long half-lives they and their daughter  isotopes
survive as common trace elements in igneous and derived rocks, especially black shales. They decay by emission of a particles (4He nucleii), electrons (b) and photons (g) to produce stable 206Pb and 207Pb respectively. The heavier of the intermediate daughters, 234Uðt1=2 ¼ 2:45 × 105 year),
230Thðt1=2  ¼ 7:57 × 104 year),      226Raðt1=2  ¼ 1602 year) and  231Paðt1=2  ¼ 3:27 × 104 year)  are  also  suitable for
dating because of their comparatively long half-lives.
  When a rock containing U is weathered, a higher proportion  of  234U  atoms  is  mobilized  than  of  238U  or 235U atoms, i.e. there is ‘daughter excess’ (Figure 8.19). This is because many of the 234U atoms became loosened in their crystal lattice  position  when   emitting the a particle. All three species are readily  oxidized and transported in solution in bicarbonate   waters  as  the

2—	4—

complexed  ions  UO2   (CO3)2

and  UO2(CO3)3

. They

Uranium series methods
Disequilibria in the U species are widely used for dating, for the study of weathering systems and ground- water flow. They are the principal methods of dating speleothems at the present time. Comprehensive general reviews are given in Ivanovich and Harmon (1992)  and  Bourdon  et  al.  (2003);  see  details  for  spe- leothems in Richards and Dorale (2003) and  Dorale et al. (2004).

may  then  be  coprecipitated  in  calcite  or  aragonite,  the latter normally accepting up to ten times more U atoms because of its larger lattice. The long-lived  daughters, 231Pa and 230Th, are essentially insoluble. When detached
by weathering these bond to clay or other particles. Therefore, they are not precipitated in the calcite. In an ideal closed system they will accumulate there only as a function of the decay of the parent U species. One gram of calcite with a trace U content of 1.0 ppm contains 1015 atoms of uranium available for spontaneous decay.




Figure 8.19   Evolution of the longer lived radioisotopes in the series 238U–206Pb to display the various dating schemes. The diagram is illustrative only; gradients are not true to scale.






Figure  8.20  Graphical  illustration  of  the  230Th:234U:238U dating method, the principal method used for carbonate spe- leothems today. Most clean speleothems are deposited with an   initial   234U:238U   activity   ratio   greater   than   1.0   and   a 230Th:234U ratio of 0.0. With the passage of time, ratios evolve to the right. Sample 76501 grew between 250 a and 50 a (with  one  hiatus)  with  an  initial  234U:238U  ratio  always  close to 3.35. The initial ratio in sample 76503 varied  between 5.3 and 6.3. The examples are of a0-dated samples:  modern mass spectrometric methods have reduced the errors by an order of magnitude.
  The chief dating method uses the decay of excess 234U to 230Th, with allowance for the parent 238U. Figure 8.20 shows the graph of the dating equation with results from two different stalagmites plotted on it. Until the late 1980s the abundance of the different isotopes was estimated by
counting a  disintegrations in  a scintillometer.  Counting took approximately 1 week before there  were sufficient numbers for reliable statistics, and one standard deviation
(s)  errors  in the age were  typically  10%.  This  has been replaced by direct counting of isotopes by mass spectro- metry: for corals first by Edwards et al.  (1986–7), for speleothems first by Li et al. (1989). In thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) separate extracts of U and Th are burned off of filaments at 1800–2200○C, with manual control required for the Th  measurements.  In  induction- coupled  mass  spectrometry (ICPMS) liquid extracts are heated to a  plasma at 8000–10,000○C and measured automatically. The two methods give very similar results. Calcite sample sizes need be no more than 0.5–2.0 g and 2s age errors are reduced to ~1% or better: Richards and Dorale  (2003) cite 2s ¼ T40 year for a sample 10 a in age,  T200 year for 50 a, T15 000 year for 500 a. The

current  limit  of  the  method  is  a  little  over  600 a (Figure 8.20). In situ U series dating by  laser-ablation multicollector   ICPMS   is   currently   being investigated (Eggins et al. 2005) with the prospect of dating at a spatial
resolution of 100 mm or better, although currently with less
precision and accuracy than TIMS methods.
  The flow of groundwater through U source rocks  or soils that have already been highly leached may lead to deposition of calcite with a deficiency of 234U rather than an excess with respect to 238U. This offers an absolute  dating  method  if  the  initial  deficiency  can  be determined, and establishes the duration of growth of a deficient calcite where it cannot. Daughter-deficiency is
encountered in a few per cent of calcite speleothems.   The   231Pa/235U   method   permits   dating   only    to
~250 a because the half-life of 231Pa is shorter than that  of 230Th. A major problem is that the natural abundance of
235U is low; 238U:235U ¼ 137:9:1. As a consequence this method has been used most often as a check on 230Th/234U
results. However, 231Pa dating of carbonates by TIMS has increased its precision tenfold and so improved its value for dating in its own right (Edwards et al. 1997).
  Decay of 230Th to 226Ra permits dating to ~10 a.
Because of this short timespan the method is rarely used. Latham et al. (1986) applied it when studying the magnetic record of a Mexican stalagmite that had appar- ently grown to a height of 72 cm in the past 2000 year.
Decay of 226Ra to 210Pb will date for just 100 year;
Tanahara et al. (1998) have used it to date straw stalac- tites in Japan and Condomines et al. (1999) used it  to study some quickly growing thermal calcites in France.
  Decay  of  238U  to  234U  may  be  differentiated  for  five
to six half-lives of the daughter, i.e. to 1.25–1.50 a. Unfortunately,  the  initial  234U/238U  ratio  (U/U0)  cannot be determined analytically unless 230Th is also  in dis-
equilibrium,  i.e.  unless  the  calcite  is  younger  than
~600 a. Where it is older, 234U/238U > 1.0 only indi- cates that a sample is younger than 1.25–1.50 a. However, where U/U0 has been measured at many points in a single speleothem or in a very small geographical area over the range, 0–400þ year, the mean ratio may  be applied to older samples if the standard deviation  is low. This is RUBE dating, for ‘Regional Uranium  Best Estimate’ (Gascoyne et al. 1983). In Figure 8.20  it is seen that sample 76501 has a rather steady U/U0 ratio and might be suitable, whereas sample 76503 (from the same cave) is emphatically not. Such large  variations are common in vadose speleothems. Some  display apparent systematic change over the course of  a glacial cycle (~100 a), the ratio decreasing as the  duration of the cold conditions
increases, then reversing as a warmer climate accelerates weathering rates again. 234U/238U thus has been most




successful for dating thermal water calcites in large aquifers where U/U0 variations are substantially damped by groundwater mixing, for example in Devil’s Hole, Nevada (Ludwig et al. 1992), and Wind Cave, South Dakota (Ford et al. 1993).
  Finally, the decay of parent uranium to stable lead in principle permits dating of calcite back to the origin of the Earth itself. There is a great deal of background lead in the natural environment, however, that also  accumulates in
trace amounts in most calcites (Jahn and Cuvellier 1994). Discriminating radiogenic 206Pb or 207Pb from the back- ground is a major problem because there will be little of the radiogenic lead until a speleothem is at least several
million years old. Lead-204 is non-radiogenic: the parent/ daughter ratios, 238U/204Pb–206Pb/204Pb and 235U/204Pb– 207Pb/204Pb, thus may build isochron graphs that give ages by approximation. For statistical reasons, however,  this requires that the U content must vary substantially within a sample: in practice, that rarely occurs, at least within the limits of current technology. Using TIMS, we have failed
in attempts to date ancient vadose speleothems from the oldest caves surviving in the Austrian Alps and the Canadian Rockies, the thermal subaqueous calcites from Jewel Cave (Figure 8.15), and a very thick and extensive subaerial tufa (Pliocene?) on a hilltop in Spain. In every case there was insufficient variation in the U content. We have succeeded with a calcite filling in the earliest palaeo- karst phase in the Guadalupe Mountains, New  Mexico (90–96T7 a; Lundberg et al. 2000). Richards et al. (1996) have succeeded with much younger  speleothems  from sites  exhibiting  exceptionally  high  U contents. Using MC-ICPMS, Woodhead et al.  (2006) have obtained a reasonable late Tertiary age for speleothems from caves in the Nullarbor Plain, Australia (section 10.2) and ages around 1 a for samples from Antro del Corchia Cave, Italy:
poor resolution of 204Pb by ICP methods is overcome by
alternative isochron techniques but it is acknowledged that the  estimation  of  initial  234U/238U  ratios  remains  a con- siderable problem where ages are less than a few million years. Because multiple analyses are required, U/Pb dating
is more expensive than other U series.
  There are three basic requirements for all U series methods.

1. The calcite or aragonite (or gypsum) speleothem must contain sufficient U. Measured concentrations  range
  0.01 ppm to > 300 ppm. 0.01 ppm is the current reasonable minimum for 230Th/234U dating. > 80% of assayed calcite speleothems and all aragonite spe- lothems contain more than this minimum concentration.
2. The  system  must  be  closed  after   coprecipitation of U and calcite. Often this will be  violated. Many

speleothems are partly or wholly recrystallized. Others are porous so that water flows freely through them and may preferentially leach 234U. This results in too great an age being calculated. For this reason
stalactites (with their central feedwater canals) and porous tufa deposits are to be avoided, if possible.
3. The most important requirement is that no 230Th or
231Pa be deposited in the calcite. In fact, most calcite contains a proportion of these species and of 232Thðt1=2  ¼ 1:39×1010 year)    bonded    to    clay    or
other particulate detritus deposited in the speleothem. They are contaminants. As they increase, reliability of calculated  dates  deteriorates.  In  practice,  where  the ratio, 230Th/232Th, is > 20 it is presumed that  radio- genic  230Th  completely  predominates  and  that con- tamination is insignificant; most dating   computer programs now correct for it. For highly contaminated deposits (230Th/232Th < 5.0) multiple  determinations are recommended in order to  calculate the isochron, 230Th/232Th versus 234U/232Th. Multiple leachings of samples have also been tried. These approaches often fail, however. If possible,  samples that are visibly dirty should be avoided.  Unfortunately, those are often the most interesting,  e.g. flowstones in cave
entrances, or spring travertines.

  Uranium series methods are also applied to bones and shells. Because of post mortem uptake of 234U and other factors    the    analytical    difficulties    are    considerable (Schwarcz 1980).
  Several thousand U series dates of speleothems  have now  been  published  and  their  number   increases by hundreds every year. The coverage is worldwide. Dates are used to determine mean rates of growth of stalagmites and flowstones, as noted in section 8.3. More fundamen- tally, vadose speleothems give the minimum ages for the cutting of the vadose trenches or draining of the phreatic passages that they now occupy.  By extension, mean maximum rates of channel  entrenchment  can  be  com- puted  (e.g.  section  4.4)  and the rates at which river valleys or glacial valleys  have been entrenched below palaeospring positions; the principles are set out in Ford et al. (1981). In early work, Ford (1973) used the dated drainage of phreatic caves  on a rising anticline to esti- mate the age of  antecedent canyons along the South Nahanni River,   Canada.  Williams  (1982b) dated  the tectonic uplift  of coastal terraces in New Zealand by the same means. A feature of most work of this kind is that the caves or their draining have proved to be much older than was previously supposed.
  Speleothem ages can be used to date episodes of clastic sedimentation and erosion in the cave interior facies





Figure 8.21 Polished sections through three small stalagmites to show something of the depositional variety that occurs. (Left) A typical stalagmite from a quarried cave beneath forest in the eastern USA. Continuous growth banding is clearly seen from the base upwards but it lacks strong contrasts because this sample grew under quite uniform environmental conditions in the later Holocene. Note its deep root into underlying clays. (Centre). A stalagmite from Cueva del Cobre, Spain, close to the modern alpine treeline. It exhibits stop-and-go growth. Calcite (grey layers) grows today. The sharp white layers are aragonite that grew under cooler, drier conditions. Uranium series TIMS ages are in thousands of years, with two standard deviation errors cited. Calcite deposition ceased shortly after 27 ka and there was slow weathering in glacial climatic conditions until aragonite accumulation could begin at 17 ka; it switched to calcite again 14.7 ka. (From C. Rossi, with permission.) (Right) Stalagmite I from 18.5 m below sea level in a drowned cave on the west coast of Italy. ML1, 2, 4 are marine deposits of serpulid worm casts and calcite overgrowth. The hard dark calcite layers grew when the cave was above sea level, between ~206 and 145 ka, with one marine interruption ~200-190 ka. Reproduced from Antonioli, F., Bard, E., Potter, E.-K., et al, 215-ka history of sea level oscillations from marine and continental layers in Argenterola Cave speleothems, Italy. Global and Planetary Change, 43(1–2), 57–78 © 2004 Elsevier.


discussed above. More obviously, the methods are applied to date spring travertines or speleothems in  entrance facies containing bone, artefacts or other  remains of early humans or fossil fauna, even fossil footprints (Onac et al. 2005).
  Speleothems in caves of the Bahamas, Bermuda  and elsewhere that are now submerged supplied the  first absolute dates for Quaternary global low sea   levels (Harmon et al. 1978, 1983; Figures 8.21 and  8.22b). Speleothem growth in glaciated regions and their periph-
eries tends to cease during periods of greatest cold.

40Ar/ 39Ar dating of alunite formed in H2S caves
During the formation of caves by the H2S processes described in section 7.8 common clay minerals such  as montmorillonite, illite and kaolinite that are present  in small quantities in the limestone may react with the acids to form alunite, natroalunite and other hydrated sulphate minerals that then accumulate in small  quantities in solution pockets or on passage floors.  Alunite  (KAl3 (SO4)2(OH)6) has very small, tight crystals that function as closed systems after  precipitation. The K content

Harmon et al. (1977), Baker et al. (1993a) and  others

decays  to

40Ar and thus may be dated by the

40Ar/39Ar

have used this feature to broadly date interglacial  and interstadial periods (Figure 8.22a).
  Finally, U-series dating fixes the chronology of stable isotope and other palaeoenvironmental records recovered from the speleothems more accurately than is possible for the other long Quaternary records such as marine cores or ice cores (section 8.7).

method that is well established for dating lavas and other
K- rich rocks. Polyak et al. (1998) achieved great success when they made the first applications of the method  in Carlsbad Caverns and other H2S caves of the Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico, obtaining ages  ranging from
~12  to  3.5 year  (section  7.8).  From  the  perspective  of cave genetic chronology this application is most significant




(a)


Central and western Europe (n = 237)


British Isles (n = 341)

Norway (n = 100)




0	50	100	150	200	250	300
Age (ka)

Figure 8.22 (a) The probability density function of compilations ofa0 spectrometry U series ages from central and western Europe (Hercman 2000), British Isles (Baker et al. 1993a) and Norway (Lauritzen 1995). Reproduced from Richards, D.A. and Dorale, J.A. (2003) Uranium-series chronology and environmental applications of speleothems, in Uranium-series Geochemistry (eds B. Bourdon,
G.M. Henderson, C.C. Lundstrom and S.P. Turner). Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 52, 407–61. (b) Global  sealevel behaviour during the past 240 ka as recorded by corals and drowned vadose speleothems dated by U series.  Reproduced from Antonioli, F., Bard, E., Potter, E.-K., et al. (2004) 215-ka history of sea level oscillations from marine and  continental layers in Argenterola Cave speleothems, Italy. Global and Planetary Change, 43(1–2), 57–78.

because it dates a process occurring during the actual dissolutional excavation of a cavity, rather than its later filling with the clastic or precipitate sediments used by the other methods. Alunite has been reported from  caves in other regions around the world, but we are not aware of 40Ar/39Ar dating of them.
Electron spin resonance decay, thermoluminescence and optically stimulated luminescence
These   methods   rest   on   the   principle   that   electrons released during radioactive decay or by solar or cosmic radiation become trapped at charge defects  (’traps’) in crystals. They accumulate at a rate  proportional to the annual dose rate of radiation until  all  traps  are  filled, when   the   crystals   are   said   to   be  ‘saturated’.  In  an unsaturated sample, electron  spin resonance (ESR) age may be determined from
age ¼ accumulated dose ðADÞ/
     environmental dose rate ðDRÞ	ð8:8Þ
  Because of the natural variation in the response of natural substances,  the accumulated  dose is  determined by an additive technique, i.e. samples are given stepwise additional radiation (usually from a g  source). Their response is measured, extrapolated back  to zero, and thus the pre-irradiation dose (AD) is  determined. In the thermoluminescence (TL) method a sample is heated to 450○C and the luminescent glow   curve produced is measured, whereas in ESR dating microwave absorption

of the additional radiation is determined by spectroscopy. In the optically stimulated luminescence (OSL)  method samples are stimulated by argon laser at a wavelength of 514 nm, which releases only the AD in  light-sensitive traps, allowing for greater precision than the other meth- ods. The environmental dose rate is  estimated from concentrations of radio elements (U,   Th, K) in the environs of the sample and by g-ray  measurements at the site (Hennig and Gru¨n 1983).
  These methods are inherently less reliable than U-series methods because of the assumption that  internal and external (environmental) contributions to  annual doses will be constant. In fact, considerable differences of dose rate have been recorded a few  centimetres apart in cave deposits (Debenham and Aitken 1984). Great uncertainty still exists in the  reliable determination of both AD and DR, with the  consequence  that  meaningful  error  limits cannot  yet  be quoted for estimated ages. In studies of speleothems that compare ESR results with U series ages agreement is sometimes excellent, but too often poor (Smart et al. 1988; Hercman 2000). There have been few TL and ESR studies of speleothems recently.
  The TL and ESR methods have been applied chiefly to shells, teeth, bones (including samples in cave deposits), plus loess, sand and tephra (Schwarcz 2000), and  OSL only to quartz and feldspar grains. There have been only a few dating studies of clastic deposits in caves.  One interesting case is that of Victoria Cave at  Naracoorte in Australia, where sedimentary deposits containing fossil bones and teeth are interbedded with speleothems.  Spe- leothems  were  dated  by  TIMS  from 41 a to > 500 a




(Moriarty et al. 2000) and revealed a pattern of wet and dry  phases.  The  fossil  teeth  were  dated  by  ESR  from 125 a to 500 a (Gru¨n et al. 2001) and all  results agreed within the constraints given by the U series ages.
8.6.2 Comparative dating methods
  
Schmidt (1982) published pioneer studies from the deposits in Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, finding that the earliest silts and clays were older than 1.7 a. With others he used clays in relict caves in river valleys of the Cumberland Plateau, Tennessee, to derive maximum river channel incision rates of ~60 m a—1  (Sasowsky et al. 1995). Auler et al. (2002) obtained incision
1  for the eastern Brazilian craton

Palaeomagnetism
The Earth’s magnetic field displays secular variations in its  polar  declination  and inclination  and  in its  intensity. Most variations are generally small in amount, irregular and only of regional extent. Greater, complete reversals of the field occur at intervals of 105–106 year, termed magnetic epochs or ‘chrons’. The present Brunhes epoch commenced 780 a ago and is defined as ‘normal’. It was preceded by the Matuyama ‘reversed’ epoch, 0.78–2.5 a, which contained some prolonged   normal  episodes, termed ‘events’ or ‘subchrons’.  These were worldwide in their extent. Use of records  of ancient variations or reversals as a dating tool relies on matching the curves of declination and inclination  (and perhaps intensity) in a given deposit with  established curves that have been dated by  independent methods, chiefly lavas dated by the K/Ar method.
  In caves palaeomagnetic studies have been applied principally to deposits of laminated clays and silts in which detrital grains of magnetite or haematite retain the magnetic declination and inclination of their time of deposition (detrital remanent magnetism – DRM). In many long depositional sequences of such fines it is found  that  the  concentration  of  ferromagnetic  minerals (the magnetic susceptibility) also varies over  time, as a presumed consequence of weathering  intensity that is climatically driven. This can permit some local correla- tion of sedimentary sections. Sands  may be used where they have remained moist and  stable (show no obvious deformation structures), and Williams et al. (1986) repor- ted some success with  calcite-cemented clays and even with layers of cemented cave pearls.
  A principal problem with cave clastic sediments is that their deposition was rarely continuous so that, in compar- ison with, for example, lake-bottom deposits, the  mag- netic records are much interrupted. They may also suffer post-depositional alteration of the D and I signals, espe- cially  if  they  have  drained,  and  bioturbation  can be a major problem, e.g. at the Mulu Caves,  Sarawak (Noel and Bull 1982). As a consequence,  cave sediments are now studied chiefly to establish  whether their declina- tions are normal or reversed, the latter implying that they are probably > 780 a in age,  and to correlate any older reversals of subchron or greater magnitude.

rates  of  25–34 m a—
by  the  same  means.  Audra  et  al.  (2001)  studied  frag- mentary records preserved on ledges in a  100-m-deep vadose trench in a cave above the  Ardeche River in the French Alps, correlating them   with bedrock terraces in the river  valley  and   obtaining a Late Pliocene age (2.2–2.5 a) for the beginning of entrench- ment. The most detailed and  comprehensive studies and analysis recently have been  by Bosak and collea- gues in caves of the Czech  Republic, Slovakia and Slovenia, as illustrated in  Figure 8.23 (Bosak et al. 1998, 2004, Bosak 2002).
  Post-depositional  alteration  cannot  occur  if  the  mag- netic grains are cemented inside calcite, and  their pre- served records of magnetic variation then may be dated independently by U series methods, etc.  Latham et al. (1979) recognized this possibility and showed that many stalagmites and flowstones carry natural remanent mag- netism either as a chemical  precipitate (CRM) or as floodwater or filtrate detrital  grains (DRM) or both. Magnetite is the carrier. The  signal is weak, requiring comparatively large amounts of speleothem calcite and a high sensitivity magnetometer to measure it. Full techni- cal details are given in Latham and Ford (1993). Palaeo- magnetism of speleothems has  been used to test for normality or reversal where a  sample is known to be
older than ~500 a (230Th234U method) or older than
~1.5 a (234U/238U method), and also to obtain a few dated, high-resolution curves of recent secular variations of  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field,  e.g.  in  Mexico  (Latham et al. 1986).
Biostratigraphical methods using fauna, flora and pollen

Deposits may be used for approximate dating by correla- tion with external type sections, and also in the  recon- struction of past environments such as   successive ecological assemblages above a cave.
  Troglobitic flora and fauna (i.e. living only in  caves) are too small in number and volume to be significant in most   instances   (although   even   they   can disturb the palaeomagnetic signals in soft   sediments!). Animals that roost or nest in caves but forage outside (trogloxenes)




K-Ar age
[Ma]	1
0
          A

1


2


3


4


5


6



2    3	4      5	1	2     3      4     5    6     7    8    9    10   11   12   13   14
6m
B


0


1m
K-A 
r age
[Ma] 0


1


2


3


4


5


6




Brunhes



Matuyama


Gauss



Gilbert


Figure 8.23 Fourteen magnetostratigraphical profiles of clastic sediments measured in some Slovak and Slovene caves (located by dots). On left the scale shows the global magnetic normal (black) and reversed (white) chrons with their K/Ar radiometric dating; on right, the names of the chrons. Correlations between the cave records and the chrons are suggested by the linking lines. Profile 1 cannot be correlated yet; it is said to be ‘floating’. Slovakia and Slovenia are offset from their correct geographical locations in order to minimize space. Reproduced with permission from Bosak, P, ‘Karst processes from the beginning to the end: how can they be dated? ‘In Grabrovsek, F. (ed.) Evolution of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation. Postojna-Lubljana, ZRC SAZU; 191–223, 2002.

are more important. Rodent nests, bones and faeces  are often found in the furthest interior parts of shallow cave systems. More striking in many caves of middle Europe are remains  of  an extinct  bear, Ursus  spelaeus, that is conventionally dated to the last interglacial and the lower half of the Wu¨rm glacial period. For example, Abel and Kyrle (1931) estimated   that Drachenhohle, Austria, contained the skeletal remains of 3–5 × 105 individuals, accumulated over  approximately 40 a. Little dating use has been made  of other trogloxenes. Extinct fauna are common in  cave entrance facies, where they have been studied intensively.
  Flora carried into cave interiors are generally small in amount and prone to rapid decay. Most attention has focused on pollen and spores. Many clastic deposits are  barren  or  contain  only  degraded  grains  because  of oxidation. There have been recoveries of well-preserved pollen from laminated silts and clays in some Belgian and

French  caves,  in  Kentucky  and  a  few  other   places (Damblon 1974, Peterson 1976).
  Geurts (1976) and Bastin (1979, 1990) pioneered  the extraction of pollen from spring travertines,  stalagmites and flowstones. McGarry and Caseldine  (2004) have reviewed its use and potential value.   Comparatively large volumes (e.g. 100–200 g) of  sample are usually needed to obtain significant pollen counts because pollen is usually preserved at  concentrations of < 1 to ~10 grains per gram of  calcite,  depending  on  the  site  in  the cave.  This  means  that  the  time  resolution  will  be  poor unless  the host deposit grew rapidly. However, this is offset by the ability to date the calcite independently by the  absolute methods. Bastin (1990) reported on 241 pollen spectra from 45 speleothems in nine Belgian caves. They were mostly of Holocene age but some fragmentary records from the previous interglacial were detected. Brook et al. (1990) emphasized that pollen from




dated  speleothems  may  be  particularly  useful  in  desert areas, where palaeovegetational records are sparse on the surface; they were able to recognize wetter past phases in samples  from  the  Chihuahuan,  Kalahari   and  Somali deserts, and also found savannah  grassland pollen in speleothems from a cave now  covered by tropical rain- forest in Zaire. Similarly, in  glaciated regions the con- ventional palynological sources, pond and lake-floor silts and clays, are usually  post-glacial in age; caves may preserve older samplings.
  Caution is needed in interpreting pollen  assemblages from cave deposits because there are  three potential, distinct sources of supply:

1. aeolian, which presumably gives a valid sample of the contemporary regional pollen;
2. speleothem feedwater or other infiltration – pollen grains range 0.5–100 mm in diameter so that  where infiltration is an important source of them,  species represented by larger grains will probably be screened
out;
3. floodwaters, in which much or all of the pollen may be reworked from older deposits.

  Bastin (1990) emphasized that the greatest densities of pollen grains in speleothems are usually found in the detrital layers, which may be of flood origin. Burney and Burney (1993) set air traps for 2 year in two  American caves and showed that the modern aeolian  pollen  was representative  of  the  exterior  spectra;  caves with larger entrances and stronger air flow were the most productive, as would be expected. Genty et al. (2002) carefully samp- led speleothem feedwaters in caves in southwest France and found that they were without pollen. It appears that most is screened out.
Amino acid racemization
Any organic matter transported into caves ultimately decomposes. After death the protein amino acids in organic matter slowly convert from an L to a D config- uration, at a rate controlled chiefly by the ambient tem-
perature. This is the basis of the amino acid racemization
dating technique. The principles and common applications are summarized by Williams and Smith (1977) and Miller (1980). As noted in section 8.3 a  large proportion of vadose speleothems will contain humic and fulvic acids and some larger organic fines. Cave interior temperatures also may be essentially constant over the year, although most will vary over the course of a glacial climatic cycle. Lauritzen  et  al.  (1994) extracted nine different amino acids from a  calcite flowstone in an arctic Norwegian

cave. They investigated the L: D ratio in isoleucine, the chief acid used for dating. A linear correlation with  U series a-spectrometric ages back to 350 a was  obtained and used to calculate amino acid ages of 420 and 505 a for two basal layers of the flowstone. We are  not aware of further applications to cave deposits,  although it has potential value because in principle amino acid racemiza- tion dating can extend for one million years or more.
8.7 PALAEOENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS    OF CALCITE SPELEOTHEMS
8.7.1 ‘Trees of stone’ – stable isotope studies of speleothems
Caves are excellent sites from which to obtain paleo- environmental data because their deep interiors tend to be sheltered, protected repositories with extremely stable climates. Away from entrances and major streams  their temperatures vary by less than 1○C and are close to the mean annual external air temperature; this is the homoth- ermic zone of Figure 5.20. Relative humidity is similarly invariant, often being close to 100% so that evaporation is negligible. Evidence of environmental  changes at the Earth’s surface is recorded in the  speleothems of the homothermic zone. It can be accessed by analysing varia- tions in the record of isotopes, trace elements, lumines- cence, pollen and other larger organic matter noted above (Harmon et al.  2004, McDermott 2004, McGarry and Caseldine 2004, White 2004, Fairchild et al. 2006).
  Analysis of the stable isotopes, chiefly 16O, 18O, 12C and
13C, is the most widely used approach, and its applicability is shown in Figure 8.24. The Devil’s  Hole (Nevada) speleothem is a layered, subaqueous  calcite precipitated from the well-mixed, mildly  thermal waters of a large regional aquifer in a desert setting. It has been precisely dated  by  U  series  methods. It is seen that the O and C isotope behaviour tracks the climatic cycles of most of the past 500 000 year, with a distinct anticorrelation. However, in the lower frame this impressive record of climate change
is shrunk within just one small envelope on a general plot of 18O versus 13C speleothem variations along a transect from the Caribbean to mid-USA.
  Oxygen   is   more   readily   fractionated   than   carbon because C is held at the centres of CO3 groups in calcite and aragonite. As a consequence, most study has focused on the enrichment or depletion of 18O with respect to 16O. Speleothem stable isotope data are expressed in per mil or ‘delta’ (d) notation as explained in section 6.10. Fractio- nations in water are expressed  against standard mean ocean  water  as  defined  by   the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna   (VSMOW), and those in





Figure 8.24 (Upper) The d18Oc and d13Cc records of DH11, a thermal subaqueous calcite deposit 34 cm in thickness on the walls of Devil’s Hole, Nevada. It is precisely dated by TIMS 230Th/234U and 234U/238U methods (from Coplen et al. 1994). This is the longest continuous published speleothem O and C isotopic record at time of writing. (Lower) The d18Oc and d13Cc isotopic range of DH11 (shaded envelope) placed in a broader North American speleothem isotope context. Devil’s Hole and Wind Cave (South Dakota) represent large and medium sized thermal water aquifers, respectively. The Jewel Cave d18Oc and d13Cc envelope is from vadose stalagmites and flowstones in a cave close to Wind Cave; over the many glacial cycles recorded here vegetation oscillated between C3 and C4 types. Most precipitation in South Dakota comes from the Caribbean, where the Cayman Brac envelope is from speleothems beneath C3 vegetation (rainforest) and the Isla de Mona envelope is from speleothems beneath C4 vegetation (xerophytic scrub). NB: the d18Oc values of the Devil’s Hole and Wind Cave calcites have been increased by 2% to compensate the thermal effect in them.


calcite are expressed against a standard based on a fossil belemnite (VPDB). The relationship between the two standards is (Clark and Fritz 1997):

d18OVSMOW  ¼ 1:03091 · d18OVPDB  þ 30:91&	ð8:9Þ
and

d18OVPDB  ¼ 0:97002 · d18OVSMOW  — 29:98&	ð8:10Þ
  Carbon isotopes from calcite (d13C) are also measured against VPDB. Precision of VPDB analysis is about

T 0.05% for d18O and T0.02% for d13C, whereas results relative to VSMOW have an error of T0.2%.
  Sampling  is  conducted  along  the  growth  axis  of  the speleothem. Because of their internal structure and means of growth, stalagmites and flowstones are  preferred to stalactites. X-ray tomography (a  non-destructive techni- que) reveals the best locations  for sampling (Mickler et al. 2004b). Depending  on  the  growth rate,  close sampling with a drill bit  giving ~10 mg of powder can yield resolutions of  about one determination per 10 to 100 year. Laser  ablation (McDermott et al. 2001) may reduce this to  a few years and micromilling at 20 to




100 mm increments or high spatial resolution ion microp- robe  analysis  can  yield  average  resolution  of  less  than 1 year in some instances (Frappier et al. 2002).  Trace element analysis by laser ablation (Treble et al. 2003) and ion microprobe  (Baldini  et  al.  2002)   yields  similar temporal resolution.
  By providing a terrestrial palaeoenvironmental record, speleothem sequences complement the marine and polar records from deep-sea cores and glacier-ice cores. In marine   sediments,   stable   isotopic   data   are   obtained from the calcite tests of Foraminifera. They  provide superb continuous records of environmental  change (as recorded in the oceans) that extend back in time for more than one million years. However,  deep-sea cores have limitations. They are not well   dated; absolute ages between independently dated  horizons  are  subject  to significant  error,  and  resolution is seldom better than 3 a due to  bioturbation. Being marine deposits, they offer only a  limited and uncertain insight into environ- mental   changes on the  continents,  although  this  is enhanced when continental deposits such as pollen  and dust are incorporated in the core sediments.  Records of comparable length have been obtained  from polar ice cores. These yield continuous data of  stable isotopes, gases, dust and trace elements for as long as 650 a (e.g. Petit et al. 1999). They are especially  valuable for the information they provide on  environmental  change  in the  atmosphere.  But  ice  cores also have limitations, because dating errors  increase  with  depth  sometimes  to as  much  as  T15 a  at ~150 a, and their polar location permits only a distant insight into environmental change on land at lower latitudes.
  Many of these shortcomings are overcome by spe- leothems, because they can be closely and precisely dated back to ~0.5 a using Th ages and with the prospect  of millions of years as U/Pb dating improves. Their envir- onmental data relate directly to the land above the cave. They are distributed in carbonate karst over about 10% of the planet (Figure 1.2). Therefore they provide a coverage that neatly complements deep-sea cores and  ice cores. However, speleothems also have limitations because their records are often discontinuous and relatively short and the relationship of speleothem variables to climatic fac- tors is sometimes ambiguous  and difficult to quantify (Fairchild et al. 2006).  Nevertheless, considerable pro- gress has been made  in addressing these problems in recent years.  McDermott (2004) emphasized the impor- tance of  speleothems in providing precise estimates for

preferentially concentrated or retained in the denser phase (gas–liquid–solid). When water evaporates, for example, relatively more 16O moves into the vapour phase and the remaining water becomes preferentially enriched in 18O. The amount of such fractionation when calcite is deposited may be determined by the  ambient temperature alone (termed equilibrium  fractionation) or by a combination of temperature plus  evaporation (kinetic fractionation). Criteria used to  determine if a speleothem was deposited in isotopic equilibrium are: (i) there is no correlation between paired values of d18O and d13C measured along a growth layer and (ii) the value of d18O along a growth layer shows no enrichment from the axis of deposition towards the edges of the growth layer (Hendy 1971, Gascoyne 1992).  However, the growth layers of some speleothems are difficult to differentiate and individual d values may average hundreds of years; thus obtaining unequivocal   results using the second criterion is not always easy  (Harmon et al. 2004). The degree of isotopic  equilibrium can  also  be assessed  by directly comparing the d18O and d13C values of modern speleothems and their corresponding drip waters (Mick- ler et al. 2004a).
  It is now recognized that speleothems often do not grow entirely under equilibrium. This is unlikely if there has been significant evaporation or rapid degassing. Thus samples that have grown in isotopic equilibrium are most likely to be found in recesses or closed chambers where relative humidity is always high, air flow is minimal and drip  waters  fall  only  short  distances.  Speleothems  that have grown continuously over long spans of time some- times display an alternation of equilibrium and  kinetic fractionation conditions. This information has palaeoen- vironmental value because it can be interpreted as repre- senting changes between no evaporation and  effective evaporation that may be correlated with   Pleistocene climatic oscillations. If there is doubt  concerning the suitability of a speleothem’s isotopic  record for palaeo- climatic reconstruction, then the   issue can  often  be resolved  by  comparing  the   record   with   coeval   spe- leothems  from  other  parts  of  the  cave  or  from  another cave nearby. If the isotopic variations displayed in both speleothems are   similar, then they are  likely  to  be reflecting the  same regional environmental signal and so equilibrium deposition is implied.
  The equilibrium  fractionation  factor,  calcite–water,  is expressed as

the  timing  and  duration  of  major   O-isotope-defined climatic events.

1000 ln ac  w  ¼ d18

Oc — d18

Ow	ð8:11Þ

  A basic principle when interpreting palaeoenviron- ments from speleothems is that the heavier isotope is

(O’Neil et al. 1969), and if a speleothem grows in oxygen  isotope  equilibrium  with  drip  waters  then




variations in d18O of the calcite ðd18OcÞ are governed by the equation
18

at the time when a speleothem was deposited) are based on  the  results  by  O’Neil  et  al.  (1969)  and  have  been developed by Hays and Grossman (1991)

d18Oc  ¼

 dac— w T
dT	þ

 dð d   Op Þ 
dT

T þ ðd18OswÞ	ð8:12Þ

Tð○

CÞ¼ 

15:7 —

4:36

ðd18

Oc — d18

OwÞ

(Serefiddin et al. 2004). This relates changes in d18Oc to the  temperature  dependent  changes  in  fractionation

þ 0:12ðd18Oc  — d18OwÞ2	ð8:14Þ

between  calcite  and  water  ðac—wÞ  and   precipitation
ðd18OpÞ and to changes in global ice volume as reflected

and Genty et al. (2002)


3	18

in d18O of seawater ðd18OswÞ. An assumption here is that

.	,.
T K

.1 þ 10—   × d

Oc .

the value of d18Op is approximately the same as the drip

ð   Þ¼ 

2780

ln
1 þ 10—3  × d18Ow

water d18Ow.
The temperature dependence of the calcite–water frac-
1

..—2
þ 0:00289

ð8:15Þ

tionation factor ðdac—w/dtÞ % ○C—

decreases from 0.27

at 5○C to 0.21 at 25○C (Harmon et al. 2004). It is  this
inverse relationship between speleothem O-isotope com-

To determine temperature using these equations it is
18

position and depositional temperature that forms the basis

necessary to measure d
18

Ow   of the formation water

of a palaeothermometer.

as well as d

Oc. This can be achieved for modern
18

The average effect of the temperature during precipita-

conditions by determining the d
18

Ow  of cave seepage

tion on d18Op is positive

water and the d

Oc of actively growing straw tips. It can


dðd18OpÞ
dT	¼ 0:55& ○C—



ð8:13Þ

also be achieved for past conditions, because one of the
great advantages of the dense, crystalline speleothem calcite typical of humid cave interiors is that it may retain the formation water in fluid inclusions (section 8.3). However, the present d18Ow  value of an  inclusion

(Kohn and Welker 2005), although there is considerable
site-specific variability. The positive association is reflected in the relationship of cave drip water d18Ow to cave temperature, although it is non-linear. However, the effect cannot be assumed to have remained stable if climatic boundary conditions changed.
  The  average  glacial–interglacial  change  in  d18Osw   of ocean water was ~1% (Shackleton 2000), but  showed significant spatial variation. Ocean  bottom-water values
were often less than the mean and surface waters (from which precipitation is derived) rather more. From an investigation of isotopic values in the equatorial Pacific (Lea et al. 2000), we may estimate the change from glacial to interglacial conditions in surface waters to be
~1.2%. The importance of this is that for every 1% change in the value of the seawater, there will be an equal change in the d18Op value of precipitation derived from it.
  The net result of the above competing influences  on d18Oc   varies  significantly  between  sites  from   which speleothems are obtained. Nevertheless, in  equilibrium calcite, if the value of d18Oc varies along the growth axis of a speleothem, then change in environmental conditions is indicated that usually involves change of temperature. Expressions used to  estimate the temperature (T) of deposition of speleothem calcite (or of a cave atmosphere

may not be a valid reflection of the original water, because oxygen can exchange with that in the calcite lattice if there is a change of temperature. This  uncer- tainty can be overcome because the 2H: 1H  ratio (D/H ratio) in the inclusion is stable, and thus the d18Ow value of the formation water can be estimated from the meteo- ric water line (equation 6.51) or its local  variants. This approach has been shown to apply in modern karst waters ranging from subarctic to tropical locales (Schwarcz et al. 1976). For a given site, d18Ow  values can be expected to remain relatively constant  provided climatic boundary conditions do not change.
  From the use of fluid inclusions it has been suggested that cave temperatures shifted as much as 8○C  between glacial  and  interglacial  times  at  sites  south  of the ice limits in the interior USA (Harmon et al.  1978). The method  has  seen  comparatively  little   use, however, because of problems in obtaining valid fluid extractions (Yonge 1982). The technical  difficulties are now being overcome (Dennis et al. 2001, Serefiddin et al. 2005), so greater application of  this technique can be anticipated. Fleitmann et al.  (2003), for example, successfully ana- lysed fluid  inclusions in speleothems from a cave in Oman and  were able to identify five pluvial periods
over the past 330 a during which dD and d18O values
were  much  more  negative  than  in  modern  rainfall,




suggesting a southern (Indian Ocean) moisture source at these times. Genty et al. (2002) identified  macroscopic fluid inclusions in speleothems from southern France that were large enough to permit direct injection of the water into the spectrometer, thus  eliminating the problems associated with extraction  from microscopic inclusions. However, in such  macro-inclusions there may be post- depositional exchange of water.
  Before d18Oc and d13Cc records from speleothems can
be  used  reliably  to  interpret  past  environmental  condi- tions, we must understand the processes that  determine these data (Figure 8.25). Meteoric  precipitation is the source of the feedwaters that sustain speleothem growth. Percolation through the soil and  epikarst (section 6.3) results in mixing and storage of  recharge waters. As a result, the wide variation in  isotopic values found in precipitation is suppressed  and drip waters often have
d18Ow values that are close to the mean annual value of
precipitation in the region above the cave, as shown, for example, by investigations in Tasmania (Goede et al. 1982), across North America (Yonge et al.1985) and in New Zealand (Figure 8.26a). However, in warm semi- arid regions evapotranspiration may result in some fractio- nation in the soil and epikarst with the result  that drip waters become isotopically heavier than  rainfall (Bar- Matthews et al. 1996). A tabulation of worldwide exam- ples by Harmon et al. (2004) shows  that the difference between observed seepage water and average precipitation
d18O values can range from at least þ1:1 to —1:9&.
  Because there can be great variability in epikarstic flow routes and storage (Figures 6.10 and 6.12), homogeniza- tion of recharge may not be perfect, and so drip waters in the same cave may have d18O values that vary consider-
ably. Individual drips have been shown in Yorkshire caves to have a monthly range of d18Ow  variation of up  to 4.9%, even though the overall mean of all sites measured is close to that of precipitation (Harmon et al. 2004).  Where  such  variability  exists,  then  the  isotopic composition of calcite precipitated  on   different  spe-
leothems in the same cave will also vary. For example, Serefiddin et al. (2004) measured differences of up to 4% d18OVPDB in coeval speleothems just a few metres apart.
However, although the d18Oc values of such neighbour- ing speleothems that grow in isotopic equilibrium  may differ (because of differences in drip water  residence times and pathways), the changes in d values along their
length can still be responsive to (and record) the  same major environmental changes.
  From equation (8.12) and Figure 8.25a we see that the relationships between regional environmental change and the value of d18O found in equilibrium calcite are com- plex. When a cave interior cools in response to a fall in

the external temperature the d18O value of deposited calcite will increase; i.e. it becomes isotopically ‘hea- vier’. This is the cave temperature effect. However, the
ultimate source of water from which the calcite is  pre- cipitated is the ocean, so if the isotopic characteristics of that source water vary, so should the  d18O value of deposited calcite. Water that evaporates  is relatively enriched in 16O compared with its source. Consequently, when ice sheets accumulated during the Pleistocene, the glaciers had abundant 16O (hence very low d18O values) and the remaining ocean water  became progressively more enriched in 18O. As a result, during glacial phases, precipitation and cave seepage  waters had high d18O values compared with  interglacial intervals – termed the ice volume effect.  However, the isotopic value of precipitation is also   affected by the  temperatures  at which  evaporation   and condensation take place, the average effect of   temperature   on   precipitation   being about  0.55% ○C—1 (equation 8.13). Thus if seawater temperatures change in the source areas of precipitation, so will the d18O values of precipitation. During the Last Glacial  Maximum around 20 kyear BP, cooling of the tropical  oceans  has  been  estimated  as  up  to  4○C  in  the Indian   Ocean   (Barrows   and   Juggins   2005)   and
2.8 T 0.7○C in the equatorial Pacific, with  glacial–inter- glacial differences being as great as 5○C  over the past 450 000 year (Lea et al. 2000). Thus  d18Op and d18Ow values during glacial stages reflected  both 18O-enriched oceans and cooler water temperatures.
  The d18Oc value of speleothems growing under isotopic equilibrium therefore can be determined by two sets  of characteristics: the first represents the  thermodynamic fractionation  between  calcite  and  water, the cave tem-
perature effect, and the second relates to the combination of factors that influence the isotopic composition of  the feed water, termed the drip water function by Lauritzen
and Lundberg (1999b). These characteristics have dif- ferent temperature sensitivities. The former always has a negative response to temperature, whereas the latter may respond negatively or positively, depending on  regional meteorology and the scale of climatic change. The overall net outcome depends on their relative magnitudes.
  Because the cave temperature effect and the drip
water function may oppose each other, the isotopic characteristics in each karst region should be studied carefully before d18Oc trends are interpreted in terms of palaeotemperature changes. It is likely that in many continental sites the cave temperature effect predomi- nates,  i.e.  the  sign  of  dðd18OcÞ/dT  is  negative,  e.g.  in China and Austria (Wang et al. 2001, Yuan et al. 2004, Mangini et al. 2005). But in mid-latitude oceanic settings and some continental sites the resultant can be  positive







Figure 8.25 (a) Factors determining the d18Oc composition of speleothem calcite (assuming equilibrium deposition) and speleothem growth rate. (b) Factors determining the d13Cc composition of speleothem calcite (assuming equilibrium deposition). Reproduced from Williams, P.W., King, D.N.T., Zhao, J.-X. and Collerson, K.D, Speleothem master chronologies: combined Holocene d18O and d13C records from the North Island of New Zealand and their palaeo-environmental interpretation. The Holocene 14(2), 194–208,
Sage, 2004.




(Goede et al. 1986, Dorale et al. 1992, Gascoyne 1992, McDermott et al. 1999, Xia et al. 2001, Paulsen et  al. 2003, Williams et al. 2005), because the cave  tempera- ture effect is dominated by the influence of temperature
on the d18O of precipitation. Different speleothems in
some places have been found to display opposite d(d18Oc)/dT relationships (e.g. in Norway, cf. Lauritzen 1995, Linge et al. 2001, Berstad et al. 2002), and this can even occur in the same cave (e.g. in Reed’s Cave, South Dakota; Serefiddin et al. 2004). Therefore, no  assump-
tions should be made about the direction of a T relation- ship; the polarity of each speleothem should be checked individually. Furthermore, variations in d18Oc cannot always be assumed to be determined by temperature changes, because changes in rainfall source and amount can sometimes be more important (Bar-Matthews and
Ayalon 1997, Cruz et al. 2005a,b, Treble et al. 2005). For example, the d18O of rainfall in low and middle latitudes can be strongly influenced by rainfall amount, the  rela- tionship being negative.
  Factors influencing speleothem d13Cc  values are  illu- strated in Figure 8.25b. Whereas it was once common to interpret d13Cc variations mainly in terms  of vegetation
changes, it is now appreciated that such variations are a result of a complex interplay of several variables.  Five factors  are  especially  important:  the  concentration and isotopic composition of CO2 in the atmosphere; produc- tion of biogenic CO2 by plant and soil processes; carbon sourced from karst bedrock and ageing soil; the ratio of open to closed system dissolution; and degassing of CO2 (Baskaran and Krishnamurthy  1993, Baker et al. 1997, Denniston et al. 2000, Genty et al. 2001, Williams et al. 2004). The latter factor is well illustrated by the effect of dynamic seasonal ventilation changes in a chimney cave in the Austrian Alps (Spo¨tl et al. 2005).
  During glacial–interglacial cycles there are changes in the concentration and isotopic composition of atmo- spheric CO2 (Petit et al. 1999). Concentrations varied from 180 to 200 ppm by volume during the Last Glacial Maximum    (~20 kyear BP)    to    around    260 ppm    by
8 kyear BP (and 375 ppm by AD 2003). The 60–80 ppm pre-industrial glacial-interglacial shift is  the   glacial atmosphere effect, the increase in atmospheric  CO2 being partly responsible for reducing d13Cc  values during
glacial–interglacial transitions. There is a weak antic- orrelation between CO2  concentration and atmospheric

effect on plant d13C values. For every 100 ppm increase in  CO2   there  is  a  —2:0 T 0:1&  change  in  the  d13C  of plants (Feng and Epstein 1995). The photosynthetic path- way  that  plants  follow  affects  the  d13C  values  of their respired CO2, which is in the range of —26 to —20& for C3 plants and —16 to —10& for C4 plants (Cerling 1984) and this in turn affects the d13C value of soil CO2. During
periods of low plant activity soil CO2 has high values of d13C, probably due to a greater admixture of atmospheric CO2. The water balance of the soil also affects d13C of plants with d values becoming higher (less negative) as
aridity increases (Stewart et al. 1995).
  The principal sources of speleothem carbon are the atmosphere, biological activity via the soil and the bed- rock. Carbon-14 dating indicates that there is substantial ‘dead’ carbon in speleothems, up to about 65%  having been measured, although it is usually < 20%. Ageing soil organic matter is responsible for a high proportion of this, but dissolution of limestone bedrock  typically yields
5–15%. This shows that substantial dilution of  modern carbon can occur during carbonate dissolution. Delta 13C values of limestone bedrock are relatively high, usually in the range —5 to þ5% (e.g. —1.72 to —0.98% in the case of Oligocene limestones from New  Zealand). Thus the greater the addition of the old  carbon component from the bedrock, the higher the  resulting d13C  value of  the
seepage water as it approaches the cave. Thermal water calcites are comparatively enriched in 13C due to  high- temperature  leaching  of  limestone  along  the  flow paths (Bakalowicz et al. 1987).
  If carbonate dissolution occurs under open-system con- ditions, resulting d13C values will be considerably  more negative than under closed-system conditions  (Hendy 1971, Salomons and Mook 1980). The relative significance
of the bedrock component also varies with the time that percolating water is in contact with the rock. In  periods when rainfall is relatively high, flushing rate is increased and residence time of water in the epikarst is decreased; so
the  opportunity  for  inorganic  d13C  enrichment  also
decreases (Shopov et al. 1997). The effect on d13Cc values operates in the same direction as the effect of high rainfall on plants, leading to a decrease in d13C. So wet conditions give rise to relatively low d13Cc values, and particularly so should open-system dissolution conditions also prevail.
  When seepage water enriched with soil CO2 percolates through the aerated zone degassing of CO2 occurs. This is

d13C (d13Catm) values. Values of d13Catm appear to have

important in the cave atmosphere, where PCO2

is close to

been around —6:7& during the Last Glacial  Maximum
and about —6:3& by 8 a (Indermu¨hle et al. 1999).
  Photosynthesis preferentially removes 12CO2 from the atmosphere; so the atmosphere becomes enriched in 13CO2  under interglacial conditions. This has a direct

that found in the open atmosphere. It is also sometimes
important in aerated fissures en route to the cave, where it leads to the critical supersaturation that results in calcite deposition on speleothems. This process leads to enrich- ment of the solution in 13C. Dulinski and Rosanski (1990)




modelled the processes that lead to the formation of 13C/12C isotope ratios in speleothems, and identified the importance of time since first deposition of calcite in accounting for variations of d13Cc.
  Where  special  effects  (e.g.  geothermal)  may  be  dis- counted and assuming climatic boundary conditions have remained relatively stable, a change of several parts per thousand over time in an equilibrium speleothem  could be interpreted either as a major change in the type (C3/C4) of vegetation cover or biotic activity at the  feedwater source or as a change in precipitation (or both). In some countries with almost exclusively C3 vegetation (such as
New   Zealand),   changes   in   d13Cc    values   are   mainly
ascribable to changes in vegetation density and water balance conditions.
  Given the foregoing, it is evident that integration  of O and C isotopic information from speleothems  will permit reconstruction of past environmental  conditions.
The usual first step is to establish the polarity of the dd18Oc/dT relationship, as we have stressed above. In many cases, and especially continental areas, the relation- ship will be a negative one. This is the case for caves in Israel (Frumkin et al. 1999, Bar-Matthews et al.  1996)
and is especially well exemplified by the composite 185 a  series  compiled  from  21  overlapping  speleothem records from Soreq Cave shown in Figure 8.26b (Ayalon et  al.  2002),  where  low  values  of  d18Oc are associated with interglacial periods (e.g. at 8 a and 125 a) and high values occur during the glacial   maximum  around
18–25 a. The strong negative polarity in these cases arises from the cave temperature effect being reinforced by the rainfall amount effect and the d18O values of the source waters of the eastern Mediterranean Sea. In sharp contrast  is  the  long  d18Oc   record  with  positive  polarity from the Devil’s Hole calcite from Nevada (Figure 8.24; Coplen et al. 1994). This continuous  60–566 a record was deposited in warm supersaturated  water in a well-
mixed desert aquifer ~400 km from the Pacific coast. It reflects the composition of regional meteoric water  and has been convincingly correlated with sea-surface palaeo- temperatures along the California margin  derived from alkenone palaeothermometry (Herbert et  al.  2001).  The Devil’s  Hole  data  can  be  interpreted  as being in phase with oceanic temperatures, but   leading  oceanic  ice-
volume records  as determined  from  foraminiferal  d18O;
the explanation being that sea-surface temperature changes in the eastern Pacific are transmitted via the moisture carried by westerly winds to the western interior of North America (Lea et al. 2000).
  Once the polarity of records has been established, the issue of representativeness of samples becomes important. Whereas the Devil’s Hole calcite provides  an integrated

but muted isotopic signal from a large groundwater catch- ment, individual vadose zone stalagmites record the signal transmitted via epikarstic flow paths from a limited area immediately above the cave. Consequently, stable isotope records from particular stalagmites can differ in detail from neighbours, even from the same cave (Figure 8.24; Dorale et al. 1998, Denniston et al. 2000, Serefiddin et al. 2004). Thus to obtain an isotopic series that is  robust and representative of the region, records are  needed from several coeval speleothems. The issue is  similar to that faced in dendrochronology, because tree-rings record site factors as well as regional influences.
  Regionally representative stable isotope time series can be obtained by merging the individual records of several speleothems,   having   first   determined   that   they   were
deposited  in  isotopic  equilibrium  and  that  all  have  the same dd18Oc/dT polarity. This yields a composite curve. Williams et al. (2004, 2005) show how this can be done, merging  the  d18Oc and d13Cc records  of  eight  different speleothems from six different caves,  suppressing local effects and highlighting general trends by smoothing the data with a running mean (Figure 8.27a).The main source of error in the process is from  dating, because ages of individual d values are usually estimated by linear inter- polation between dated points.  To minimize errors of interpolated ages, dates should  be close together and consideration should be given to possible advantages of curvilinear interpolation.
  Before an estimate can be made (even qualitatively) of the temperature changes implied by d18Oc variation in a record  that  extends  into  the  Pleistocene,  adjustment  of d18Oc  values will be required to compensate for the ice- volume effect. The enrichment of ocean surface  source waters was ~1.2% at the LGM, with a lowering of sea level by approximately 130 m. Thus ice volume  adjust- ment at a rate of 0.009% m—1 of sea level change is of the correct order. The effect of such adjustment is illustrated in Figure 8.27b. From this we see that the difference in the  average  adjusted  d18Oc   values  between  the  LGM (~20 a)   and   the   Holocene   in   this example is about 0.55%. Most of this probably  can be ascribed to tem- perature change because the rainfall amount effect is not strong in the region concerned.
  Reconstruction of palaeotemperatures can be achieved by estimating d18Ow from dD determined from speleothem fluid inclusions. Thus last interglacial (17–22○C) and LGM (8○C) temperatures in Israel were derived in this way by McGarry et al. (2004). A quite  different approach is to calibrate the d18Oc signal   against other independent records of temperature and then  to  apply  the  calibration curve  to  the  d18Oc    series. This method was used by Lauritzen and  Lundberg  (1999b)  and  Mangini et al.






Figure 8.26   (Upper) Relationship between d18OVSMOW in rainfall above Aranui Cave, New Zealand, and d18OVSMOW in seepage waters in the underlying cave 40 m below the surface. Reproduced from Williams, P.W. and Fowler, A. (2002) Relationship between oxygen  isotopes  in  rainfall,  cave  percolation  waters  and  speleothem  calcite  at  Waitomo,  New  Zealand.  New  Zealand  Journal of Hydrology, 41(1), 53–70. (Lower) A 185 a record of d18Oc from Soreq Cave, Israel, assembled from 21 overlapping speleothem data sets. It involves more than 2000 isotopic analyses and is constrained by 95 TIMS ages, the locations indicated by dots along the top of the graph. Reproduced from Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M. and Kaufman, A. (2002) Climatic conditions  during marine oxygen
isotope stage 6 in the eastern Mediterranean region from the isotopic composition of speleothems of Soreq Cave, Israel. Geology, 30(4), 303–6.


(2005) in the case of speleothems from Norway and the central Alps. However, the success of this approach depends on the availability and reliability of  palaeotem- perature indicators from the past.
  
One of the interesting attributes of speleothem isotope records is the periodicity often shown by the data. It is assumed to reflect cyclic changes in the terrestrial environment.   One   technical   problem   associated   with






Figure 8.27  (Upper) Derivation of a composite regional d18Oc curve from the merger of records from eight different speleothems from six caves in New Zealand. A five-point running mean has been used to smooth the composite curve and reveal its principal features. (Lower) The composite regional curve adjusted for the ice volume effect (lower curve). The adjustment is greatest (1.2%) at the Last Glacial Maxumum and tends to zero when sea level attained its present level about 6.5 a. Reproduced from Williams, P.W., King, D.N.T., Zhao, J.-X. and Collerson, K.D, Late Pleistocene to Holocene composite speleothem chronologies from South Island, New Zealand – did a global Younger Dryas really exist? Earth and Planetary Science Letters 230 (3–4), 301–317 © 2005 Elsevier.

identifying periodicity in records from speleothems is that their time series are unevenly spaced.
  Fortunately this can be overcome by using the programs SPECTRUM  (Schulz  and Statteger 1997)  or  REDFIT (Schultz and Mudelsee (2002) that were  specially created for unevenly spaced palaeoclimatic  time series. Serefiddin et al. (2004) applied the routine to data from speleothems

from Reed’s Cave in South Dakota and demonstrated periodicity at 1000 to 2000 year, which is similar to  the millennial-scale variability seen in North Atlantic  sedi- ments and Greenland ice-cores. In Europe,  McDermott et al. (2001), Spo¨tl and Mangini (2002) and Genty et al. (2003) found centennial to millennial-scale  oscillations
in  d18Oc    in  speleothems  from  Ireland,  Austria  and





Figure 8.28 Relationship between linked d18O records from three speleothems from Hulu Cave in China, the GISP2 ice core from Greenland, and summer insolation at 33○ N. The shaded vertical bars show possible correlations of Heinrich events (H1–H6) and the Younger Dryas (YD) cold reversal in the GISP2 ice core with the Hulu Cave record (two possible correlations are shown for H5.) Reproduced with permission from Wang, Y.J., Chen, H., Edwards, R.L. An, Z.S., Wu, J.Y., Shen, C.-C., and Dorale, J.A,. A high- resolution absolute-dated late Pleistocene monsoon record from Hulu Cave, China. Science 294, 2345–2348. © 2001  American Association for the Advancement of Science.


France, respectively, that they considered coincident with Dansgaard–Oeschger events of the Greenland ice-core records. In China, Wang et al. (2001) found a correspon- dence with Heinrich events (massive iceberg  discharges in the North Atlantic) (Figure 8.28). These  results are important, because TIMS-dated speleothems  define the chronology of palaeolimate episodes, such as D–O events, more accurately than can be achieved  from ice cores. Frappier et al. (2002) also  demonstrated approximate
correspondence of d13Cc  from a stalagmite from  Belize
with the Southern Oscillation Index, and Dykoski et  al. (2005) found indications of solar forcing of d18Oc   in a speleothem record from Dongge Cave, Guizhou, China.
  Wavelet analysis has also been used to identify varia- tions in  d18Oc  and  d13Cc. For  instance,  Paulsen  et  al. (2003) detected cycles of 33, 22, 11, 9.6 and 7.2 year in a 1270 year high-resolution  record  from China;  Holmgren et al. (2003) identified millennial and  centennial scale oscillations in a 24.4 a record from  South Africa; Qian
and Zhu (2002) found quasi-70 year climatic oscillations in  the  East  Asia  monsoon;  and  Cruz  et  al.   (2005) identified  a  23 a  cycle  equivalent  to  the  Earth’s preces- sional cycle in a 116 a speleothem record from Brazil. It

is most intriguing that evidence for solar forcing of climate change can be found in lightless caves; it under- lines their value as sensitive natural archives of  global environmental change.
8.7.2 Trace elements in speleothems
Many different elements are present in trace amounts in calcite and aragonite speleothems. The most abundant are usually Mg and Sr, readily substituting for Ca in the crystal lattice. Also widely detected are Na, K, Ba, Cu, Fe, Mn, P, Pb, U and Zn, and Cd, Co, Cr, Ni, Ti and rare earth elements (REE) have been recorded, all studied for their possible contributions to speleothem colour (James 1997). The potential use of trace abundances  and ratios for   palaeoenvironmental   reconstructions    has  been appreciated and is currently a focus of  much study, both in the field and in the laboratory.
  In early work at McMaster University speleothems with differing U concentrations were irradiated to  map the fission tracks, i.e. the distribution of U atoms in the lattice. Some displayed very sharp periodic  banding, others random or weakly varying distribution  patterns.




Gascoyne (1977) followed up with analysis of the stable trace elements and found wide differences between indi- vidual samples. He turned to the field, instrumenting speleothem drip sites in Vancouver Island caves. The Mg/Ca ratio in calcite should be temperature  dependent (ceteris paribus), while the Sr/Ca ratio is not; comparison of the two thus might yield an index of  temperature changes over the history of a stalagmite,  etc. However, during 12 months of drip sampling little coherent variation could be found.
  Subsequent research by many others has confirmed that  trace-element  behaviour  in  speleothems  is  variable and complex. It may differ between samples,  within samples and over time at a site.
  Where growth banding can be seen either optically or in the luminescence spectra or both, there is usually correlative periodicity in some of the trace-element dis- tributions. There are several reports of Sr enrichment in the lighter bands, while Fe, P and Zn are more abundant in the dark bands (e.g. Huang et al. 2001). Attention has focused on the Mg/Ca and Sr/Ca ratios. Roberts et  al. (1998) found the very strong negative covariance in part of a Holocene stalagmite from a shallow cave in the north of Scotland that is shown in Figure 8.29. That  was an exceptionally  clear result,  however. Fairchild  et al. (2000) studied drip and pool water in four caves between southwest Ireland and northern Italy, and  found much variation in behaviour which they  attributed chiefly to varying feed-water paths between  soil and cave, open versus closed dissolution conditions, and to varying resi- dence times. Where  there was statistically good positive

covariance between the two ratios (R2 >0:8), this was attributed to precipitation of calcite along the path during drought periods, a finding which has important  implica- tions for the stable isotope interpretations discussed above. Similarly, in two eastern Australian caves McDonald et al. (2004) obtained relatively low  average Mg/Ca ratios in drips that responded rapidly to rains compared with higher values in relatively   unresponsive (i.e. long resident) waters. Both Mg/Ca and Sr/Ca ratios showed a systematic increase through  drought conditions, with peak values immediately  before drought was broken by rain. Tooth and Fairchild (2003) have presented a range of fast versus slow, wet versus dry, soil ! drip physical plumbing models to explain such differing patterns of  behaviour. They  are  now  being  intensively  explored  to further our understanding of the complex  environment of vadose speleothem growth.
8.7.3 Optical and luminescent banding in speleothems
When sectioned many vadose and phreatic  speleothems display  banding  in  their  calcite  texture,  or depositional terminations, colour and/or colour  density that is easily visible to the naked eye. Figures 8.9 and 8.21 show good examples. If they are visible,  however, these individual layers usually represent hundreds to thousands of years of accumulation. Under the optical microscope, much band-
ing can be resolved to layers that are only 1–100 mm in
thickness. Causes of such layering where the net deposi- tion is periodic are set out in Table 8.3. Where it is continuous (Condition 1, Table 8.3), layering may be due





Figure 8.29   Comparison of the Mg/Ca and Sr/Ca ratios across 300 mm of calcite growth bands in a 17 cm high stalagmite from Uanh am Tartair Cave, Scotland. Reproduced with permission from Roberts, M.S., Smart, P.L. and Baker, A, Annual trace element variations in a Holocene speleothem. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 154; 237–246, 1998.





Figure 8.30   (Left) (a) Variation of luminescence intensity measured along a stalagmite from Coldwater Cave, Iowa. The sample is
16.4 cm in height and began growing 7000 yr ago (U series TIMS dates). (b) Blow up of a segment from just before AD 1000. Annual variation of luminescence is strongly developed, which permits (c) measurement of the thickness of each annual band of calcite. The range of thickness is ×4, from ~7mm to ~28 mm, reflecting wetter and drier hydrological years. (Right) Periodic microbanding in a stalagmite from the northern USA revealed by photography of the UV luminescence. (Photograph by Y.Y. Shopov.) The true height of the frame is ~1.0 mm. The bands are probably annual.

to abrupt changes in crystal texture, rates of  accumula- tion, or to varying concentrations of trace  elements or organic compounds.
  As described in section 8.3, where optical evidence is lacking, the periodicity in vadose speleothems can often be  detected  by  investigating  variations  in  the  lumines- cence intensity attributable to varying  concentrations of fulvic  and humic acids in the   lattice. For example, Figure 8.30 shows approximately 40 lighter–darker lumi- nescence couplets within ~0.4 mm of calcite from a speleothem in the northeastern USA, i.e. average couplet
thickness is ~10 mm. The line drawing depicts the vary-
ing  luminescence  intensity  measured  along  the  growth axis of a stalagmite from Coldwater Cave,  Iowa. The sample is 16.4 cm in height and began growing 7000 year ago (U series TIMS dates). Frame B is an enlargement of a segment of it from just before  1000 year ago. Annual variation of luminescence is  strongly developed, which permits (Frame C) measurement of the thickness of each

annual band of calcite. The range of thickness is ×4, from
~7 to ~28 mm, over a span of 25 year, reflecting wetter and drier hydrological years at this site, which is close to the boundary between natural forest and tall grass prairie in the American mid-west (Shopov et al. 1994).
  The correlation of much of this fine-scale optical  or luminescence   banding   with   the   hydrological   year  at particular cave sites has been firmly established in recent years by the study of banded calcites  accumulating in mines and other artificial excavations.  Bands can be counted back from the date of  collection to the known date of opening of the hole  or the cessation of work in it, etc. Genty (1992), Genty and Quinif (1996) and Genty et  al.  (1995)  published  the early analyses from both tunnels and natural caves. It should be stressed, however, that not all stalagmites and flowstones will display con- tinuous banding. Baker et al. (1993) reported it in only a few of more than 40  older samples studied with care. Often the banding in  a speleothem is interspersed with




sections that are without it. Other samples (even in  the same cave) may display no detectable banding at all.
  The 25 year record in Figure 8.30 (C) shows that there is scope for multiyear hydrological reconstructions using speleothem periodic banding and so evidence of longer, more   general,   climatic   cycles   is   being   studied.   For example, for speleothems from  northwest   Scotland, Proctor et al. (2002) resolved  50–70 year   and 72– 94 year spectral periodicities in the North  Atlantic cli- mate record and Fleitmann et al. (2004)  identified a 780 year record of the Indian monsoon from speleothems from Southern Oman. However, even   when obvious banding is not present, there can still be scope for hydro- logical reconstructions as shown by Treble et al. (2005) for a modern speleothem from Western Australia. Some- times temperature and irradiance rather than precipitation is recorded. Thus the 11- or 22-year sunspot cycle has been reported (see  Shopov (1987, 1997) for details) in many analyses  around the world. In an interesting case of a stalagmite with a 2650 year record from Beijing,  China, Tan et al. (2004) have correlated annual  banding with warm season temperature and total solar irradiance.
8.7.4 Seismospeleology
In  many  caves  a  proportion  of  the  calcite  speleothems have  been  fractured  by  natural  causes  and have fallen from their growth position. Straw stalactites break under their own weight and larger  carrot stalactites fall when their  weight  overcomes   the   bonding   to   the   ceiling. Stalagmites and flowstone masses built upon unconsoli- dated sediments may topple because the sediment foun- dation fails under the increasing load. However, there are instances where  columnar stalagmites are broken off

above a base that appears not to have shifted. More than  100 year  ago  European  researchers  suggested  that such breakage might be caused by earthquakes  (see Quinif (1996) and Forti (1997) for reviews).  Using U series methods, the date of an earthquake might then be determined: for example, using a-spectrometric  dating Agostini et al. (1994 ) studied a cave near the epicentre of the strongest earthquake recorded in Italy  in modern times and suggested that there had been  distinct older events there at 0.5 a, between 30 and 40, 90 and 100, and
> 350 a.
  Early attention focused on the position and orientation of   the   broken   columns.   A   strong   earthquake   shock propagated from due east might be expected to  place the broken section on the west side of its base,  with  a westerly  orientation.  Directions  to  epicentres  of some past earthquakes have been estimated by this means, and Moser and Geyer (1979) used the  relationship between basal diameter and length of the  broken fragment in an attempt to determine the  magnitude of the vibration in Austrian alpine caves.  However, the orientations of fallen fragments vary chiefly due to compaction irregula- rities in sediments beneath columns or to the topography of the cave floor. More promising is the observation that a stalactite–stalagmite pair function as a recording pendu- lum (Schillat 1977). A slight tilt of the cave due to earthquake activity thus will offset the point of accretion at the tip of the stalagmite (as is seen in Figure  8.21). The same effect can be achieved by compaction irregula- rities at the base (as noted) or by an independent shift of the drip point in  the  ceiling  but,  where   these  two possibilities can be eliminated, the  pendulum  concept is  valid.  Forti  and  Postpischl  (1985) investigated the changes in  long-axis    orientation   of   some   Italian



Table 8.4   Estimated dimensions and mass fluxes through the Friar’s Hole Cave system, West Virginia (Adapted from
computations by Worthington, from data of Worthington 1984)
Physical characteristics

Mass fluxes
Total (103 m3)
In cave now (103 m3)
Contributing drainage basin
85.7 km2
Dissolved host limestone:


(including 2.6 Km2 of

from the input surface
57 300
Trace
Host limestone exposed at

from the known cave
2400
Trace
surface)

Cave breakdown
1000
280
Friars Hole cave system

Authigenic fluvial detritus
400
20
Explored length
68.12 km
(mostly from breakdown)


Total volume of known cave
2700 × 103 m3
Allogenic fluvial detritus
3 000 000
600
Volume now open	1800 × 103 m3	(mostly from siliciclastic rocks)


Aeolian deposits
< 1?
< 0.001
Volume now infilled with
900 × 103 m3
Organic matter – all sources
100
0.001
detritus

Calcite speleothems
~1
0.15
Age of the oldest passages
> 4.0 Ma
Gypsum and other precipitates
0.001
0.001




stalagmites and showed that the directions of shifts fitted the main tectonic trends in the areas. In one example, 21 small shifts of the axis were measured in a specimen only 36 cm in height.
8.8 MASS FLUX THROUGH A CAVE SYSTEM:   THE EXAMPLE OF FRIAR’S HOLE,
WEST VIRGINIA
It is instructive to close this chapter with an estimate of the flux of all matter through a cave system during  its lifetime.  Few  such  estimates  have  been   attempted because of the evident difficulties in  devising them. Many quantities may be in error by at  least one order of magnitude.
  One set of estimates (Table 8.4) has been prepared by Worthington from his 1984 study in one of the  world’s most  extensive  caves,  Friar’s  Hole  (Table  7.2). This is something of an extreme example because only 3% of the surface catchment basin consists of the  host limestones (Figure 7.24). These crop out as inliers in narrow valley floors, into which flow the detritus  from steep slopes of shale, sandstone and argillaceous  limestone, i.e. it is a situation favouring the maximum flux of allogenic debris through a system. Extrapolating from U series, RUBE and palaeomagnetic results, the    earliest   passages   are 4 × 106 year or a little greater  in age. The mean solute

mass flux from the host limestone has approximated 15 000 m3a—1 over that period. Note that only 4% of this flux is represented by dissolution in the known cave. Generous estimates of the additional volume of unknown cave passages in the system will increase this value to 15– 25%, i.e. over 75% of net dissolution has occurred in the epikarst developed in the small windows or inliers.
  Thirty-seven per cent of the volume of the known cave was created by mechanical breakdown. Seventy per cent of the clasts produced have been removed, chiefly in solution.
  Clastic rocks crop out over 97% of the area of the basin and are estimated to have furnished 95-98% of the total mass flux in the system during its history. This compo- nent overwhelms all others. Only 0.2% of the aggregate detrital flux is in transit through the caves at the present time, yet this suffices to infill about 22% of their volume. The  mean  underground  transit  time  of  a  clast  is
~80,000 year. Flow path lengths (sink to spring) will be between 15 and 60 km. Effective hydraulic gradients have been 0.006 or lower.
  Although it has a few grottoes with large and abundant speleothems, Friars Hole is not a well decorated cave by world standards. It is estimated that only the tiny propor- tion of 0.0016% of solutes in transit from the  epikarst have  been  intercepted  and  precipitated  as  cave calcite during its history.


9

Karst Landform Development    in Humid Regions


9.1 COUPLED HYDROLOGICAL AND GEOCHEMICAL SYSTEMS
It  was  explained  in  Chapter  4  that  most  dissolution  is expended near the surface, in the epikarst. We now consider the landforms and assemblages of landforms  that are created there. These vary from small features such as karren to large-scale landforms measured in  kilometres such as poljes. Within the dynamic karst system they can also be classified as input, output or residual features (Figure 1.2). This chapter is organized  to discuss input forms first, proceeding from smaller to larger, and then output and residual features. We also  review the special solution features associated with evaporite and quartzose rocks. The chapter concludes  with discussions of landform sequences in carbonate terrains and considers the extent to which karst landscape evolution can be simulated by computer modelling.
  We introduced karst hydrogeology (Chapters 5 and 6) and cave development (Chapter 7) before discussing surface  landforms  because  the  essence  of  karst  is  that its drainage is subterranean and the initiation of  karst plumbing is an essential pre-condition for the  early development of medium- to large-scale surface landforms. Karst landforms result from processes operating in coupled hydrological and geochemical  systems. Essentially the same processes can operate  over a very wide range of environments, but limiting  conditions are provided by aridity and extreme cold.  Karst is therefore character- istic of humid regions, where water normally occurs in its liquid phase. In this  section we examine ‘normal’ karst development in humid areas, leaving consideration of karstification under extreme climatic conditions until the next chapter.
  
In    endeavouring    to    understand    the    relationship between processes, karst rocks and  resultant landforms the following points are important.

1. Hydrological processes determine the general location of erosion within karst lithologies and hence are usually the principal control on landform development. In particular, the nature of hydrological recharge, whether autogenic, allogenic or mixed, has  considerable morphological significance because of  its influence on the horizontal and vertical distribution of corrosion and corrasion.
2. Lithology and structure can be so important as to domi- nate landform development, although in  general geo- logy influences karst development through its control of
(i) the provision of solute pathways, (ii) rock strength and (iii) susceptibility to corrosion and corrasion.
3. Different amounts of runoff in various humid regions influence annual karst erosion and hence the rate  of landscape evolution, but not necessarily the morpho- logical style of karst topography that is developed.
4. Temperature variation is significant to morphological development mainly through its influence on (i)  the water balance (via evapotranspiration), (ii) the rate of chemical reactions and hence the vertical distribution of dissolution, and (iii) biochemical processes leading to the acidification of infiltrating  water. Depositional landforms are  also  influenced   by temperature via evaporation and biological processes.

9.2 SMALL-SCALE SOLUTION SCULPTURE – MICROKARREN AND KARREN
The German term ‘Karren’ and the French term ‘lapie´s’ are widely used to describe small-scale dissolution  pit,


Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd




groove and channel forms at the surface and underground. Here we anglicize the German and define microkarren as features with a greatest dimension or  characteristic dimension  (length, width, diameter,  depth,  etc.)  that  is normally less than 1 cm. Karren range from 1 cm to 10 m in greatest dimension in most  instances, although kluft- karren and some solution channels can be longer. Assem- blages of many  individual karren, termed Karrenfeld, may cover much larger areas (Figure 9.1).
  Karren develop upon the carbonate and sulphate rocks and dominate all outcrops of salt. They are also the dissolutional landforms encountered most frequently  on other rocks such as sandstone, quartzite and  granite. Lithological  properties  are  of  great  importance; many specific karren forms develop only   where  rocks  are homogeneous and fine grained.
  There   is   a   vast   range   of   karren   features.   Bo¨gli (1980) wrote ‘The multiplicity of possible   karren

forms  makes  a  morphological  system  endless,  while a genetic one allows a meaningful collection’. In  1960 he proposed a classification based  primarily   upon whether the host rock was bare (‘free karren’),  partly covered  (‘half  free’),  or  entirely  covered  by  soil or dense vegetation (‘covered karren’). We   sympathize with the principle that a genetic  classification is to be preferred to a morphological  one, but believe that the genesis of many karren is  not  sufficiently  understood to  support  a  wholly  genetic basis at this time. In parti- cular, much of the variety in karren occurs because two or more differing processes combine to produce a poly- genetic form. The classification adopted here (Table 9.1) is based on morphology, with subdivisions that incorpo- rate genetic  factors. Fornos and Gines (1996), Gines 2005),  Macaluso and Sauro (1996) and Veress (2004) adopt   similar ones. Bo¨gli’s  (1960)  nomenclature  is retained  wherever  possible;  see  Perna  and  Sauro





Figure 9.1   Clint-and-grike topographies or ‘limestone pavement’. (Upper left) Glaciated limestone pavement with drumlin hill in  the background, Co. Clare, Ireland. (Upper right) A pavement staircase (Schichttreppen) on the Burren in western Ireland (see also Figure 6.7 upper). (Lower left) ‘Classic’ clint-and-grike at Malham Cove, Yorkshire, UK. Rundkarren revealed by stripping of soil dominate the foreground, with simpler grike forms at scarp edge in the rear. (Lower right) Staircase pavement on dolomite,  arctic Canada.



Table 9.1   Classification of karren forms A Circular plan forms
Micropits and etched surfaces – wide variety of pitting and differential etching forms commonly less than 1.0 cm in characteristic
dimension.
Pits – circular, oval, irregular plan forms, with rounded or tapering floors, > 1.0 cm in diameter.
Pans – rounded, elliptical, to highly irregular plan forms: planar, usually horizontal floors in bedrock or fill, > 1.0 cm in diameter.
Heelprints or trittkarren – arcuate headwall, flat floor, open in downslope direction. Normally 10–30 cm diameter.
  Shafts or wells – connected at bottom to proto caves/small caves draining into epikarst. Great range of form.
B Linear forms – fracture controlled
Microfissures – microjoint guided, normally tapering with depth. May be several centimetres long but rarely more than 1.0 cm deep. Transitional to
Splitkarren – joint-, stylolite- or vein-guided solution fissures. Taper with depth unless adapted for channel flow. From centimetres to several metres in length, centimetres deep. Closed type terminates on fracture at both ends. Open type terminates in other karren at one or both ends.
Grikes or kluftkarren. Major joint- or fault-guided solutional clefts. Normally 1–10 m in length. Master features in most karren assemblages, segregating clint blocks (Flachkarren) between them. Scale up to karst bogaz, corridors, streets, etc. Subsoil forms are termed cutters.
C Linear forms – hydrodynamically controlled
Microrilis – as on rillenstein. Rill width is ~ 1.0 mm. Flow is controlled by capillary forces and/or gravity and/or wind.
Gravitomorphic solution channels
1 Rillenkarren – packed channels commencing at crest of slope; 1–3 cm wide. Extinguish downslope. Rainfall-generated, no decantation.
2 Solution runnels – Hortonian channels commencing below a belt of no channelled erosion. Sharp-rimmed on bare  rock (Rinnenkarren), rounded if subsoil (Rundkarren). Channels enlarge downslope. Normally, 3–30 cm wide, 1–10 m long. Linear, dendritic or centripetal channel patterns.
3 Decantation runnels. Solvent is released from an upslope, point-located store. Channels reduce in size downslope.  Many varieties and scales up to 100 m in length, e.g. wall karren (Wandkarren), Maanderkarren.
4 Decantation flutings – solvent is released from a diffuse source upslope. Channels are packed; may reduce downslope. 1–     50 cm wide.
5 Fluted scallops or solution ripples – ripple-like flutes oriented normal to direction of flow. A variety of scallop. Prominent as a component of cockling patterns on steep, bare slopes.
D Polygenetic forms
Mixtures of solution channels with pits, pans, wells and splitkarren. Subsequent development of Hohlkarren, Spitzkarren  and subsoil pinnacles. Superimposition of small forms (microrills, Rillenkarren, small pits) upon larger forms.
Assemblages of karren
Karrenfeld – general term for exposed tracts of karren.
Limestone pavement – a type of karrenfeld dominated by regular clints (flachkarren) and grikes (Kluftkarren). Stepped pavements (Schichttreppenkarst) when benched.
Pinnacle karst – pinnacle topography on karst rocks, sometimes exposed by soil erosion. Arete-and pinnacle, stone forest, etc., with pinnacles to 45 m high and 20 m wide at base.
Ruiniform karst – wide grike and degrading clint assemblage exposed by soil erosion. Transitional to tors.
Corridor karst – (or labyrinth karst, giant grikeland); scaled-up clint-and-grike terrains with grikes several metres or more in width and up to 1 km in length.
Coastal karren – distinctive coastal and lucustrine solutional topography on limestone or dolomite. Boring and grazing marine organisms may contribute. Includes intertidal and subtidal notches, and dense development of pits, pains and micropits.


(1978) for the equivalent names in other European languages. It is emphasized that our classification stres- ses the comparatively simple end-member forms. In reality there is a great mixture of forms created by factors of lithological variation and polygenesis combining together.
9.2.1 
Microkarren
All the microforms distinguished in Table 9.1 are  con- sidered together here. Dissolutional topography  can be recognized at a scale of a few microns under the electron microscope, but where the relief is less than 1 mm or so it





Figure 9.2 Small-scale dissolution forms on limestone and marble. (Upper left) Microrills on the walls of a shallow solution pit in micrite. Coin is 2 cm in diameter. (Upper right) Dissolution pan. (Lower left) Meandering microrills from stem flow into rundkarren, freshly deforested. (Lower right) A pattern of multiple trittkarren (heel prints) in marble, with rillenkarren developing upon residual ridges. Can is 12 cm in length.


is convenient to consider the surface to be smooth. Exposed   karst   rock   surfaces   generally   display   relief greater than 1 mm unless they are being  subjected to vigorous scouring or polishing action.  This relief can develop upon limestones within a few decades.
  Many apparently bare carbonate surfaces are partly or entirely covered by bacteria, fungi, green algae, blue- green algae or lichens. These may contribute to the preferential etching of weaker grains and to the develop- ment of micropits (sections 3.8 and 4.4). Most atte- ntion has focused on the activity of blue-green algae (cyanophytes) since Folk et al. (1973) suggested that they produce much of the relief of coastal phytokarst.  Most species are surface dwellers (epilithic), but in  ecologi- cally stressful environments some cyanophytes bore into rocks to depths of ~1.0 mm while others dwell in vacated borings or other microcavities. Borers create pits directly; other species may contribute to their creation or enlarge- ment by way of the organic acids or CO2 that they excrete. Once established, small pits and fissures may be preferen- tially deepened if fungi, lichens or mosses can establish in them and excrete CO2.  Cyanobacteria-induced pits have been measured to 14 mm (Figure 4.13).
  
Microrills are typically 1 mm wide, round-bottomed dissolutional channels that are tightly packed together (Figure 9.2). They are sinuous or anastomosing on gentle slopes, becoming straighter on steep slopes. Lengths are up to a few centimetres. Most reports of them are upon fine grained to aphanitic limestone but they also occur on gypsum. They are known in most climates. Clasts  with microrills are rillensteine (Laudermilk and Woodford 1932). Some microrills are created by waters flowing down sur- faces, e.g. from acid stemflow over clasts. In other instances the rilling takes place when waters move upwards, drawn by capillary tension exerted at an evaporating front. Capillary flow is believed to  explain much of their characteristic sinuosity.
9.2.2 Solution pits, pans, heel-prints (tritt), shafts or wells, cavernous weathering
Solution pits are round-bottomed or tapering forms that are circular, elliptical or irregular in plan view. Diameters greater than 1 or 2 m are rare; the form merges to a pan as that scale is approached. Pits can occur singly,  aligned, clustered or packed. They may drain by evaporation, by




overspill and/or by basal seepage via primary pores  or tight microfissures. Together with shafts, they are  the most widespread karren form globally, both on bare rocks and beneath soil. They are predominant where the rocks are  very  heterogeneous  (e.g.  many  limestone  and most dolomite reefs).
  Many pits are located along small joints, taper  down into them and are transitional to shafts or to fissure karren (below). Others have developed at a cluster of  primary pores or a vug, or where an insoluble fossil has fallen out. Deeper pits are often colonized by moss that appears to have accelerated the deepening by algae, etc. Some pits display raised rims, where water has precipitated calcite upon evaporation, armouring them. At an experimentally cleared limestone site in Yorkshire,  England, Sweeting (1966) noted that pits 3–5 cm deep developed in 10 year. The water was peaty, i.e. enriched by organic acids.
  Solution pans display a flat or nearly flat bottom that is
usually horizontal (Figure 9.2). This may be created by an organic or clastic filling in a round-bottomed pit, but most often it is a dissolutional bevel in the bedrock with an organic or other veneer on the floor below. Walls are steepened   by   undercutting   and   may   display   a   basal corrosion notch. Overflow channels are common. Indivi- dual pans attain diameters of several metres  and depths greater than 1 m. Amalgamation of  adjoining pans is common, creating larger features of cuspate or irregular form. Pans develop well on limestone, dolomite, gypsum, quartzites, granites and well-cemented sandstones. They
are termed solution basins, kamenitze and tinajitas by
other authors.
  Solution pans occur on bare or lightly vegetated rock. They appear to be rare or absent beneath a soil  cover, whereas solution pits are abundant there. This emphasizes that pans develop where a pool may form with a floor that becomes partially armoured by detritus, focusing dissolu- tion  around  the  perimeter.  Pans  cease to function when the floors, lowered by dissolution, intercept a penetrable bedding plane or other fissure.
  Trittkarren or heelprints (Figure 9.2) are compara-
tively rare. They occur on bare limestone and  dolomite surfaces that are gently inclined or shallowly  stepped. Each tritt comprises a planar corrosion bevel  (the heel) open in the downslope direction. The bevel  is usually horizontal, 10 to 30 cm in diameter. Upslope it is enclosed by a steep, cirque-like backwall a few  centimetres in height. This may be indented by rillenkarren. The contact between backwall and bevel is sharp but not undercut. Tritt occur singly, adjoining one  another where they indent a step, or in a sequence down a slope.
  Some trittkarren are modified solution pans but the majority appear to be of different, though related origin.

Bo¨gli (1960) ascribed their development to the  acceler- ated dissolution that might occur where a film of flowing water is thinned upon descending a  pre-existing step. Possibly the early process is a boundary layer detachment as in dissolution scallops, though this cannot be true once rillenkarren are established.
  Trittkarren we have seen have been limited to homo- geneous, fine-grained to aphanitic, limestone, dolomite or marble. They are also limited to surfaces where scouring agencies (chiefly glaciers, but also waves and flood waters) generate microscarps such as chatter marks.
  Karren shafts or wells are very short caves draining
into the epikarst. Most are guided by joints, bedding planes or calcite veins. More sinuous examples in porous rocks follow primary porosity. They may be vertical, horizontal or inclined. Length (depth) ranges from a few centimetres to 2–3 m. Cross-sections tend to be circular or elliptical and up to 1 m in diameter, but there is great variety.
  These features develop from proto-caves as described in section 7.2. In addition, pits and pans are  converted into shafts where their floors intersect  bedding planes. Many grikes are initiated by shaft development down to an underlying bedding plane.  Karren shaft forms and assemblages can be complex  and variable where they develop beneath a deep, periodically saturated soil cover because the dominant condition is epiphreatic; it becomes a ‘boneyard’  morphology that is much favoured for ornamental rockeries throughout the world (Figure 9.3).
  Cavernous weathering refers to this boneyard type of
cave and pit morphology. It can also describe individual pockets (tafoni) or clusters of hollows produced by weathering back into steep faces. The latter are common
on some dolomites, as well as on sandstones, quartzites, conglomerates and granitic rocks where salt  weathering and/or hydrolysis may play a role. In this kind of weath- ering, the water does not pass via the cave  into the epikarst; it is a superficial phenomenon.
9.2.3 Fracture-controlled linear karren
Many linear karren are elongated along minor joints, veins, stylolites or microfractures, such as may develop normal to stylolite seams (Pluhar and Ford 1970). Many such karren range in length from one or a few centimetres to several metres. Length:maximum-width ratios are  greater than
~ 3:1 and depth is usually much less than length. Unless adapted by a channelled flow, the features taper  sharply with depth. Thus they appear to be splitting  the rock. Closed linear karren terminate on the host  fissure, open ones terminate at one or both ends in other karren (e.g. a grike). Linear karren may be transitional  to pits, karren





Figure  9.3   Subsoil  pit  and  shaft  development  in  a  limestone block set up as an ornament in the garden of the Imperial Winter Palace, Beijing, China.

shafts or grikes. On slopes they are often intermingled with the larger, gravity-controlled karren. Where a  rock is densely fractured they can display a  bewildering variety of orientations and intersections;  development of other karren types then is prohibited by their density, with the exception of grikes and some shafts.
  Grikes or Kluftkarren are the master features in most
karren assemblages (Figure 9.1). They are the  principal drains, either to the deeper epikarst, or to  dolines  or  to surface  discharge  such  as  river  channels. They develop along the major joint sets or  systems and thus tend to intersect at angles of 60○, 90○  and 120○ (tension and shear
systems). Blocks isolated between them are termed clints



(flachkarren)  and  host  the  smaller  forms  of  karren.  In bedded rocks most grikes terminate at penetrable bedding planes  at  depths  of  one  half  to  a  few  metres. A small minority may extend down to deeper bedding planes and receive the drainage of the shallower members.
  The length of grikes is inversely proportional to  the density of major joints. In most karsts it ranges  from
0.3 m  to  a  few  tens  of  metres.  At  a  given  site  grikes tend to be longest, widest and deepest near escarpment edges where jointing is expanded by tension unloading. This is where they will develop first. In  many young reef rocks, grikes are the only linear  karren form that develop because the others are prohibited by the textural heterogeneity.
  Grike walls may be parallel or taper with  increasing depth. They are often indented with  cavernous weath- ering, rillenkarren or cockling, or  dissected  by  linear karren,  rinnen  or  rundkarren.  Many grikes have been created by the amalgamation of earlier shafts developed at intervals along the joint,  which creates a pattern of widenings and narrowings.  Beneath a deep soil, grikes become much widened at  the top and taper with depth.
These  forms  are  termed  cutters  (Figure  5.25)  by
American  authors  (e.g. Howard  1963). Intervening  clint tops are reduced in area and sharpened by runnel cutting to form subsoil pinnacles.
9.2.4 Hydraulically controlled linear forms – dissolution channels
Channel karren have received more study than the other types because of their similarities to erosional  channels and, therefore, their supposed amenability to an hydraulic explanation.
  Rillenkarren are perhaps the most striking, because
they appear to be the antithesis of the normal (or Hortonian) erosional rills that are generated by runoff on soil (Figure 9.4). Rillenkarren head at the crest of a bare slope, where they are uniformly packed together and, at a given site, display only one or two character- istic widths. They diminish in depth lower downslope (Figure 9.5) until they are replaced by a planar solution
surface or Ausgleichflache (Bo¨gli 1960). In contrast,
Hortonian dissolutional runnels head below such a belt   of no channelled erosion and, on a simple surface,  are uniformly separated by interfluves.
  Rillenkarren  do  not  develop  on  gentle  slopes  and  on the steepest slopes degenerate into cockling patterns – a mixture of scallops, fluted scallops or ripples (below) and discontinuous rills.  Rillenkarren must  be the  product  of
direct rainfall because there is no other feasible source of water. Channels that also head at crests but are  notably







Figure 9.4   (Left) Typical rillenkarren (fluting) on limestone. (Upper right) Rillenkarren crests on an experimental salt  block. (Lower right) Cross-sections of a few of the rillen shown in the left-hand frame.

wider (> 4–5 cm) are varieties of the decantation flutings discussed below. Admixture of the two types occurs  in nature, so they are readily confused.
  Rillenkarren develop well upon fine-grained, homoge- neous limestones and marbles. On dolomite and other more heterogeneous carbonates rilling is only partial or is absent entirely. They develop well upon gypsum and are the predominant karren form on salt outcrops. In a worldwide study, Mottershead et al. (2000) found median lengths and widths to be 300 mm and 18 mm respectively on  limestone,   120 mm  and   11 mm   on  gypsum,   and 210 mm and 17 mm on salt.
  At many sites it appears that, setting aside textural factors, length of rillenkarren increases with an increase of gradient. Glew and Ford (1980) investigated this question by hardware simulation, exposing texturally uniform plaster of Paris slabs at differing inclinations to constant rainfall at 25○C (Figure 9.6). It was found that rillenkarren propagate from the crest downslope until  a stable length is reached. They are produced by a hydrau- lic ‘rim effect’. At the crest of a slope raindrops penetrate the fluid boundary layer (section 3.10), permitting turbu-

lent  reaction  at  the  mineral  surface.  Depth  of   flow increases downslope to some critical value (0.15 mm in the experiments) where drops cannot impact the surface directly. Uniform mass transfer then creates  the ausgle- ichflache, after which both rillen and ausgleichflache are removed by parallel retreat.  Formation begins as many short, shallow rills that deepen and lengthen, coalescing laterally to achieve the  characteristic width. Short rills appear between 5 and  10○ (depending upon texture). Mean rill lengths   increase  with  slope,  being  250– 300 mm at 60○ in the experiments. The rill cross-section approaches the parabolic, which focuses rain splash into the centre  (Glew and Ford 1980, Crowther 1998). Fiol and Gines (1996) suggested that, on limestone, mechan- ical  processes may also play a role because raindrop impact can remove small particles loosened by algal corrosion of the surface; however, this is not fundamental because it does not apply to gypsum or salt rillen.
  Solution runnels are normal Hortonian channels, head- ing where sheetflow or wash on a slope breaks down into linear threads (Figure 9.5). On steeper slopes the channels are parallel; on gentle slopes there may be dendritic





Figure 9.5   Rillenkarren, Hortonian-type dissolution channels and decantation channels, as defined in Table 9.1. (Drawings by
J. Lundberg.)






Figure 9.6 Relationships between the length of rillenkarren and the angle of slope. Open circles and the linear relation are from the controlled experiments of Glew and Ford (1980) with plaster of Paris and a rain machine. Rocky Mountain data  are from different blocks in a Jasper Park landslide pile. This was an ideal site to study rillenkarren because there is no  inheritance effect; nevertheless, it is seen that correlation  with the experi- mental results is poor.

confluence or centripetal orientation into a karren shaft or grike. Rinnenkarren display sharp rims and flat or rounded bottoms (Figure 9.7). They develop on bare slopes. Rundkarren have more rounded cross-sections because they develop beneath vegetation or soil; with pits, they are the predominant form on soil-covered clint surfaces. However, when exposed they may be sharpened into rinnenkarren (Figure 9.8).
  These   are   conventional   stream   channels   that   gain discharge downstream; thus they normally widen  and deepen downstream. For example, rinnen and rundkarren on 35–40○ dip slopes  on  Vancouver   Island, Canada, increased in mean width from 4 to 8 cm along lengths of 3–5 m and maintained width:depth ratios between 1.5 and
2.5 (Gladysz 1987). After 3 to 5 m all examples amalga- mated with decantation forms (i.e. became composite  or polygenetic) or were intercepted by linears, shafts or grikes. This is the normal pattern elsewhere, as well,  but in the spectacular exception in Patagonia noted below rinnen can be 1–4 m wide and several hundred metres long.
  Rinnenkarren occur on slopes as low as 3○. Their courses  may  be  sinuous  but  full  meandering  (sinuosity ratio > 1.5) is rare. They have been measured on slopes as steep as 60○. Rundkarren can propagate on slopes that are nearly  vertical  because  cavitation   rarely occurs beneath soil. Rinnen and rundkarren  often accumulate moss or excess soil at places along their channels. These
may be widened to create a segment with  overhanging walls  (hohlkarren), or  deepened to  create  a locally

reversed  gradient  or  even  a  flat  pan  bottom.  Overdee- pened segments occur in most rundkarren we have seen, making them more complex forms.  Rinnenkarren and rundkarren develop on most carbonate rocks but are best formed where they are homogeneous and medium to fine grained. They develop well on  gypsum, basalt, granites and sandstones, but are not known on salt.
  Decantation runnels and flutings are classes proposed
by  Ford  and  Lundberg  (1987)  to  differentiate  channels created where water is released steadily from an upslope store, from the rillenkarren and Hortonian  types that are created during episodes of  storm-generated runoff. Decantation runnels occur  principally upon bare and partly covered surfaces, but also beneath continuous soil or vegetation covers if small surfaces are temporarily freed by soil piping or root decay. The diagnostic characteristic of pure decantation  forms is that, because they do not collect additional  acidic water downslope, their cross- sections are largest at or close to the input point and may diminish downstream (Figure 9.8).
  Decantation flutings are adjoining, shallow channels formed where water is released from a linear source such as a bedding plane or a soil mat at the top of a cliff. They develop best where slopes are steep to overhanging, as on grike walls or in vadose shafts in caves (section  7.10). Channel widths typically are 5–25 cm, and lengths are up to 25 m. Depths and depth:width ratios have  not been reported, but the features appear to be shallow in propor- tion to their width when compared with rillen, rinnen and decantation runnels. On steep surfaces  fluting requires that the film flow be thin enough to  be retained on the rock by surface tension rather than detaching as happens when cockling is formed. Such  films develop ‘parting lineations’ oriented in the direction of flow (Allen 1972). These probably establish  the flutings in the rock; their separation (flute width)  is inversely proportional to the velocity of flow.
  Decantation runnels are approximately equivalent to the wandkarren (wall karren) type of Bo¨gli (1960). Each individual is supplied from a point store such as a patch of  moss  or  the  stem  of  a  tree.  The  dimensions  of  the
runnel are in proportion to the volume of water released from storage and its acidity. At the two extremes, tiny pits along the crests of rillenkarren slopes overspill to enlarge particular rills below them, while perennial snow banks may support runnels 50–80 cm wide and deep that are up to 100 m in length. A majority of wandkarren have widths and depths in the range 1–10 cm and are distinguished or have amalgamated with other karren types within 10 m of their source.
  Decantation stores accumulate within earlier linear karren, rinnen and rundkarren to produce composite  or







Figure 9.7   (Upper) Rinnenkarren on steep limestone face in the Pyrenees. Note the figure for scale on rock to left of  center. (Lower) Rinnenkarren showing a tendency to meander on a steep marble slope, Mount Owen, New Zealand.







Figure 9.8 (Upper left) Rundkarren exposed by modern deforestation, Vancouver Island. (Upper right) Long denuded rundkarren are sharpened into rinnenkarren, Pyrenees. (Lower) A meandering decantation runnel with its source in a broad solution pan that supports blue-green algae, Burren, western Ireland.


polygenetic forms. These are more abundant than the pure forms at many sites; e.g. at a Vancouver Island site, Gladysz  (1987)  measured  66  rinnenkerren,  27  decanta- tion runnels and 423 composite runnels.
  The  slow  release  of  water  from  storage  may  permit meandering, creating striking meander incisions into bare rock surfaces (ma¨anderkarren). Veress (2000a,b,c) and Veress and Nacsa (2000) have analysed complex exam-
ples from the Austrian Alps, finding that many are polycyclic and polygenetic. ‘True’ meanders in the bed- rock have asymmetric cross-sections (cutbank and  slip- off slopes), as they do in alluvial river channels; they are initiated from the head. ‘False’ meanders have symmetric cross-sections  and  are  created  by  knickpoint recession. This is the same behaviour as is  seen  in  many  vadose channels  in  caves  (section  7.10). Cut-off is sometimes seen in true karren meanders. Larger troughs may exhibit multiple sinuous entrenchments.
  Fluted scallops resemble transverse ripples in sand.
They are oriented normal to the direction of flow and may

have an asymmetric cross-section, being slightly steeper on the upstream side. Where fully developed they adjoin one another and extend across a wall or a cave roof. Curl (1966) defined them as an ideal end-member of the class of dissolutional scallops (section 7.10) and termed them ‘flutes’. Jennings (1985) termed them ‘solution ripples’. They develop only partially on many steep walls such as grikes, to form a prominent element in cockling patterns.
  The foremost modelling of hydraulically controlled karren in recent times has been by Szunyogh (2000), Veress (2000c), Veress and Zentai (2004) and colleagues in   Hungary.   Their   combination   of   formal   geometric analysis, direct simulation and careful field measurement set the stage for future karren computer modelling studies of the type presented for large-scale karst at the close of this chapter.
  The ‘glaciers de marbre’ of Patagonia (Chile) are the most spectacular example of hydraulically controlled karrenfeld yet reported  (Figure 9.9). They occur  on




Figure 9.9   Hydraulically controlled karren from the ‘glaciers de marbre’ of Patagonia. (Photographs by R.Maire and L.Pernette,  with permission.) (Left) Large-scale picture. Note the figure for scale. (Right) Megawandkarren.


steeply sloping surfaces of resistant marble scoured  by glacial action. The region has ~5000–7000 mm a—1   of precipitation, and strong winds. There are few penetrable joints or bedding planes to abstract the  water under- ground and little vegetation, so that  surface dissolution by intense runoff predominates. Rinnen and wall karren of giant size, tritt, pans, flachkarren and cockling are the
principal forms. Maire (1999), Hoblea et al. (2001) and Veress et al. (2003) give details and many illustrations.
9.2.5 The composite nature of karren
We re-emphasize that there is an immense variety of karren forms. Simple or monogenetic end-members  have been stressed but many karren are composite, being both poly- genetic and also varying with lithology. Chief among the lithological factors are chemical purity, grain size, textural homogeneity (including pores), bedding thickness and joint frequency. Greatest density of karren occur where strata are

thin, closely jointed and heterogeneous in composition but types will be limited largely to grikes, linear karren, pits and shafts. The greatest variety of karren and their best- developed form is associated with massively bedded, fine- grained and homogeneous limestones and marbles.
  Some authors have sought to relate particular  karren types or scale of development to specific climatic condi- tions, but this encounters many problems. The  rate of their development is greatest where it is wettest (section
4.1) and types that are limited to bare rock  (principally tritt and rillenkarren) are less common where the climate can support forest. For the other types it appears to us that variations in lithology, hydraulic  gradient and the dura- tion of the karst denudation outweigh climatic control.
9.2.6 Assemblages of karren and giant karren
Great areas of karren evolve beneath complete soil  and vegetation   cover.    They    are    sometimes     termed





Figure 9.10 Scatter plot of clint widths versus clint length for limestone pavements in Ireland, Britain and Switzerland. Reproduced from Goldie, H.S. and Cox, N.J., Comparative morphometry of limestone pavements in Switzerland, Britain and Ireland. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, N.F. Supplement-Band, 122, 85–112.E.© 2000 Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers.


cryptokarst, e.g. Salomon et al. (1995) and Knez et al. (2003). By contrast, bare or partly bare exposures of karren are widespread above the treeline in alpine areas, on desert slopes, or where there has been  deforestation and soil erosion. There are contiguous  areas of many square kilometres of karrenfeld in the Adriatic karst and elsewhere. Subaerial dissolution of newly emerged coral reefs leaves the surfaces sharply serrated and extremely
pitted. They are eogenetic karren, known as makatea in
the tropical Pacific (Taborosˇi et al. 2004).
  Where strata are flat-lying or gently dipping, karrenfeld are termed limestone pavements (Williams 1966a, Vin- cent 2004) if they are dominated by patterns of  regular
clints and grikes so that they appear like artificial paving (Figure 9.1). These are the most studied type of  karren assemblage. Figure 9.10 shows the range of clint lengths and widths from a sample of nine areas in Britain, Ireland and Switzerland (Goldie and Cox 2000); median lengths and widths were 235 cm and 99 cm respectively, but the largest dimensions (from the Burren in western Ireland) were 88 m and 25 m. Where bare or lightly vegetated the clints are indented by pits, pans with decantation runnels, shafts and linear karren. Beneath dense vegetation or an acidic soil rundkarren tend to  become predominant. In addition to limestone, they develop well on dolomite and on some well-bedded sandstones and quartzites.
  Pavements   develop   best   upon   thick   to   massively bedded strata. Variations in rock strength  associated with cyclothemic deposition with limestones  and dolo- mites (section 2.6) favours stripping at particular horizons

(e.g. Vincent 2004), which explains the terraced nature of many pavements (Schichttreppenkarst of Bo¨gli 1980). But where beds are thinner, clints are readily broken up by mechanical processes such as frost wedging, root
wedging and fire. Massive beds eventually break up along subsidiary (previously impenetrable) sedimentation planes also, degrading the clint surfaces to rubble (or shillow). As
a consequence,  optimum  pavement development  occurs where an agency periodically can scour off the shillow and dissected upper beds to restore pristine surfaces. Globally, the chief scouring agents have been Quaternary glaciers. Extensive pavements are most common in areas subject to  the  last  (Wisconsin–Wu¨rm) glaciation and so have developed largely during the 10 000–15 000 year of post- glacial time. However, they also occur where the scour is by wave action, river floods or sheetfloods on pediments; the Katherine pavements of the Northern Territory, Australia (Karp 2002), are an outstanding instance of stripping  by sheetflood action.
  Where soils are deep but acidic, dissolution occurs on the limestone surface beneath. Unless they are very wide, clints then become tapered by rundkarren entrenchment. This creates subsoil pinnacles. If their tops are then exposed by soil erosion, they become sharpened (depend- ing on the extent of vegetation cover) by rillen,  rinnen, wandkarren and decantation flutings, especially the latter. As they begin to emerge they have the appearance of teeth (‘dragons’ teeth’ in China),  transforming to a pinnacle karst when the tops are several metres or more above the soil (e.g. Knez et al. 2003).






Figure 9.11   The Stone Forest of Yunnan, China. (Upper left) Rounded stone teeth emerging from beneath eroding soil. (Upper  right) Stone teeth sharpened by exposure into pinnacled terrain. (Lower left) Fully developed stone forest. (Lower right) Stone forest landscape with isolated pinnacles in an advanced stage of development. See also Figure 6.6b.


  The most celebrated pinnacle karst of this type is the Shilin (‘Stone Forest’) in Yunnan, China (e.g. Chen et al. 1986, Ford et al. 1996, Song et al. 1997). This is a rugged tor-and-pediment topography that is the  product
of  a  long  and  complex  history,  involving  mid-Permian burial   of   karren   by   continental   basalts;  exhumation, re-karstification and then reburial by Eocene continental deposits;  and  finally  late  Tertiary and Quaternary re- exhumation and  re-karstification. Pinnacle development occurred   beneath these clastic deposits  and  the  old topography  is  being  exhumed  and  sharpened,  exposing tracts of pinnacles in large patches over an  area of 30 000 ha  (Figure  9.11).  Characteristic   heights  range
1 to 35 m and diameters, 1 to 20 m.
  However,  even  more  spectacular,  but  with  a   less complex geomorphological history, are the tsingy  ter- rains of Madagascar (Figure 9.12a), which in the Bemar- aha region alone cover an almost continuous  area of

152 000 ha (Rossi 1986, Middleton 2004). The bare tsingy blocks are dissected by joint-aligned canyons up to 80 m deep and are surmounted by razor-sharp pinnacles.
  Spectacular areˆte-and-pinnacle terrains also occur  on Mount Kaijende in Papua New Guinea (Figure  6.6a) (Williams 1971, 2004) and on Mount Api in  Sarawak (Osmaston and Sweeting 1982). Although covering rela- tively  small  areas,  they  have  spire  forms in excess of 45 m high, penetrating and rising  well above tropical rain forests (Figure 9.12b). The  pinnacle karsts from Madagascar, Papua New Guinea  and Sarawak appear to have developed directly from dissolution of the lime- stone without previous burial  and  exhumation  phases. Similar   features   occur   in   the semi-arid karsts of northern Australia (Jennings  and Sweeting 1963) and Minas Gerais, Brazil.    Essential prerequisites are dense rocks, massive  bedding and widely spaced major joints.






Figure 9.12   (a) Oblique aerial view of the tsingy of Bemaraha, Madagascar. Plateau tops, which are dissected by great  joint corridors up to 80 m deep, are sharpened by rillen and rinnen karren into inaccessible spires. Forest trees occupy the joint corridors. (Photograph by A. Clarke.) (b) Spire-like pinnacle karren of Gunung Api in the Gunung Mulu World Heritage Park, Sarawak. The spires are of the order of 45 m high and penetrate through humid tropical rain forest.


  Ruiniform (Perna and Sauro 1978) describes terrains where  soil  has  been  removed  from  exceptionally  deep and wide grikes, but where the clints are not sharpened into pinnacles (Figure 9.1). Instead, they  stand out like

miniature city blocks in a ruined townscape; Lessini (Italy) and Torcal de Antequera (Spain) are well-known examples. Ruiniform tracts are common on gentle hillslopes that have suffered deforestation and substantial





Figure 9.13 Model for the development of the Nahanni labyrinth karst or giant grikeland, Mackenzie Mountains, NWT, Canada. Grikes are created by shaft formation and elision along master joints (A, B). A combination of further dissolution and frost shattering widens them into ‘streets’ (C, D), reducing clints to residual towers (E) and, finally, creates large closed depressions or ‘platea’ (F). Grikes are up to 1000 m in length and 50 m deep. Reproduced with permission from Brook, G.A. and D.C. Ford, The origin of labyrinth and tower karst and the climatic conditions necessary for their development. Nature 275, 493–496.© 1978 Nature Publishing Group.

soil erosion. On hill crests they are transitional to  tors, which develop particularly well on massive,  coarsely crystalline dolomites.
  Grikes may be expanded to larger scales to create aligned or intersecting corridor topographies (Figure 9.12). Types of large grikes were termed bogaz by Cvijic´ (1893), corridors (Jennings and Sweeting 1963),   zanjones (Monroe 1968) and streets (Brook and Ford 1978). Squared valleys or closed depressions  formed   by grike-wall recession are box valleys and platea,  respectively. The assemblages have been termed giant grikelands, corridor karst or labyrinth karst. Examples are known in tropical and temperate rain forests, and desert and semi-desert areas (section 10.2). Grikelands develop on sandstone crests in dry mountain ranges of the Australian and USA deserts, also. Small grikelands are common in limestones, dolo- mites and sandstones  along crestlines in the subpolar, periglacial Mackenzie  Mountains of Canada and are expanded to a  spectacular  labyrinth  with  individual streets  longer  than 1 km and deeper than 50 m in the

Nahanni limestone karst in that region (Figure 9.13). The prime requirements for such assemblages appear to be very major joint sets (often, small faults with lateral displace- ments), massive strata, climatic or  topographic condi- tions that permit a deep water table, and a long duration of sustained dissolution.
9.2.7 Littoral karren
A variety of karren forms and assemblages occur on limestone and dolomite sea coasts and around lakes. The coasts may be sculpted by wave action, wetting and drying, salt weathering and hydration, but in addition to physico-chemical dissolution and bioerosion, there can also be bioconstruction (Figure 9.14). The relative effec- tiveness of these competing processes is determined  by many  different  factors,  chief  of  which  appear  to  be
(i)  wave  energy,  (ii)  tidal  range  and  (iii)  variations  of lithology and structure. Combining the range of processes and   factors,   two   extreme   (or   end-member)  types  of



Figure 9.14   Zonation of bioerosive and bioconstructive activity on carbonate shorelines. (From Spencer and Viles 2002.)



Figure 9.15 (Left) Karst tower being undercut by intertidal zone solution notches, Bay of Halong, Vietnam. (Upper right) Coastal dissolution pans on northwest coast of South Island, New Zealand. (Lower right) Freshwater micropitting, Lough Mask, western Ireland.





Figure 9.16  (a) Zonal features of tropical limestone coasts; generalized models to display the contrasts between sheltered  and exposed, micro- and macrotidal settings. (b) Transect of an exposed limestone coast on Inishmore in Galway Bay, Ireland. Latin names indicate principal colonizing species. Circled numbers are local relief in centimetres.


eroding carbonate coasts can be recognized. The first is that dominated by mechanical erosion; dissolution forms are few or absent. This will tend to be a high wave energy (or exposed) coast with low tidal range and weak strata. At the other extreme is the low wave energy coast where a high  tidal  range  exposes  wide  intertidal  flats   upon mechanically resistant rocks. Karst studies have favoured this latter type for obvious reasons; even there, structural factors such as dipping strata often blur other karst zonation (Ley 1979).
  Karst   sea   coasts   display   two   distinctive   features, notches (or nips) and a high density of pits  and pans (Figure 9.15). On protected coasts gypsum  cliffs also
display  sharp  intertidal  notching.  Notches  in  limestone or dolomite are most prominent in the tropical and warm temperate regions, but are known along the cold shores of Newfoundland and Patagonia. A  prominent  notch develops  in  the  intertidal  zone  around mean sea level. It is cut partly by boring organisms (algae and sponges) and molluscs that graze upon them, rasping the limestone to obtain their prey (Neumann 1968). On Aldabra Atoll, Trudgill (1976) measured notch recession rates as high
as 1.0–1.25 mm a—1, with grazing contributing 0.45–
0.60 mm.   The   sharpest   notches   occur   on   the   most

protected, microtidal coasts, where the depth of the under- cut may be 2 m or more. On exposed coasts the intertidal notch is usually replaced by an eroding ramp (Figure 9.16). Pitting attributable to boring and  grazing organisms may be densely packed or coalescing (Figure 9.17) and can reduce divides  between pits to a lacework of sharp crests and  pinnacles. Pit depths range from < 1 cm to
~1 m, and diameters can be as great as several  metres. Width:depth ratios tend to fall between 1:2 and 6:1.
  The interaction of marine, biological and chemical processes may produce a karren zonation on  limestone shores that varies with climate and  exposure. It is best displayed where unbroken beds  dip gently towards the sea in areas of high tidal range, e.g. on the Aran Islands, western Ireland (Figure 9.16b). In contrast, the west coast of Newfoundland has many steep dip sites, is microtidal and has sea-ice fast to the shore for three or more months per year; bioerosion is much reduced but there is a clear trend to progressively larger pitting inshore between the mean low-water mark  and the inland limit of swash (Malis 1997).
  There  has  been  little  study  of  the  freshwater  littoral karren. Usually development appears to be  restricted to formation of small pits and pans (Figure 9.15) in a narrow




Figure 9.17   (Left) Carboniferous limestone surface exposed at low tide with tightly packed echinoids (sea urchins, Paracentrotus sp.) in pits surrounded by white calcareous encrustation deposited by calcareous algae (Lithothamnion sp.), Aran Islands, western Ireland. (Right) Surface similar to that illustrated on the left but scoured of biota, showing pits of 7–10 cm diameter that had been incised by echinoids.

zone about the waterline (e.g. Perna (1990) at Lago  di Loppio, Italy). They may develop to high densities, and coalesce. Many are occupied by blue-green algae, which possibly initiate them. Narrow cylinder-like bell holes
(section 7.11) extend vertically upwards from opened
bedding planes in a zone of seasonal lake-level oscillation round Lough Mask and some other Irish lakes. On dolomite shores of Georgian Bay, Canada, Vajocki  and Ford (2000) undertook sample traverses between the swash zone and —25 m. There was a strong positive relationship between pit depth and water depth (r2 ¼ 0:93), which was considered to be due to greater exposure age in the deeper water. Lithological factors  obscured any other correlations (e.g. with pit width)  and there was no evidence of bioerosion.
9.3 DOLINES – THE ‘DIAGNOSTIC’ KARST LANDFORM?
Karst geomorphologists have always accorded special importance  to  dolines  since  Cvijic´  (1893)   identified them as giving karst topography its particular character. The term is derived from dolina, an everyday Slovenian expression for a valley (Gams 1994);  Cvijic´ also intro-
duced the term vrtacˇa (Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ 1994) which is widely
used locally for medium-sized enclosed depressions (e.g. Gams 2003). Sweeting (1972) discussed other local terms and Roglic´ (1972) reviewed early ideas on their  origin. Dolines are called sinkholes in engineering and  North
American   literature   (e.g.   Sowers   1996,   Beck   2003, Fookes 2003, Waltham et al. 2005), but in this  chapter we use doline for any small to intermediate  enclosed karst depression regardless of genesis or climatic context.
Karst is always developed when dolines are found and so

they can be considered index landforms of karst; indeed Grund  (1914)  considered  their  place  in  the  karst  land- scape to be similar to that of valleys in fluvial  terrain. However, we emphasize that their absence in carbonate terrain should not be taken to mean that  karst is not developed, because karst groundwater   systems can evolve without doline formation at the surface.
  Dolines are usually circular to subcircular in plan form, and vary in diameter from a few metres to ~1 km. Their sides range from gently sloping to vertical and they vary from a few to several hundred metres deep. They form by various   processes   including   dissolution,   collapse   and subsidence (Table 9.2). This yields a spectrum of features from saucer-shaped hollows, to funnels to  cylindrical pits. In the landscape they may occur as isolated indivi- duals or as densely packed groups that  totally pock the terrain (Figure 9.18).
  Cvijic´ (1893) recognized that dissolution and collapse account for the formation of most dolines, although  he considered the majority to have a predominantly  solu- tional origin. He was one of the first geomorphologists to apply morphometry to landform description when, on the basis of depth:diameter ratios from numerous field mea- surements, he distinguished  (i) shallow trough or bowl- shaped basins with flattish floors from (ii) steeper, deeper funnel shaped dolines and (iii) shaft-like dolines in which the breadth is usually less than the depth.
  Thus early ideas on the nature of dolines were  drawn mainly from  field experience  in Europe,  although Danesˇ (1908, 1910) also investigated humid  tropical karsts in Jamaica and Java. He and Grund (1914) were of the opinion
that tropical dolines, or cockpits as they are known
in Jamaica, develop mainly by solution in much the same way as dolines in the temperate zone. Later work by



Table 9.2   Doline/sinkhole English language nomenclature as used by various authors (Reproduced from Williams, P.W., Dolines, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), pp. 304–10. © 2004, Fitzroy Dearborn, Taylor and Francis)



Doline-forming

Ford and Williams


White


Jennings


Bogli


Sweeting

Culshaw and Waltham


Beck and


Other terms
processes
1989
1988
1985
1980
1972
1987
Sinclair 1986
in use
Dissolution
Solution
Solution
Solution
Solution
Solution
Solution
Solution

Collapse
Collapse
Collapse
Collapse
Collapse
Collapse
Collapse
Collapse

(fast) or
subsidence (slow)
Caprock	—	Subjacent	Solution	—	Interstratal collapse			collapse	subsidence		collapse
Dropout		Cover	Subsidence	Subsidence	Cover Subsidence		collapse			collapse
Suffosion	Suffosion	Cover	Alluvial	Alluvial	Cover	Ravelled,

subsidence
—	subsidence
shakehole
Burial
—	—
—	—	—	—
Filled, palaeo




Figure 9.18   Examples of solution dolines in limestone (Upper left) An isolated solution doline, Causses Mejean, France. The floor  of the basin has been infilled by slopewash and periglacial debris and levelled for agriculture. (Upper right) Cross-section of a solution doline in Verd quarry, Slovenia. (Photograph by A. Mihevc.) (Lower left) Solution dolines in the Waitomo karst, North Island, New Zealand. (Lower right) Aerial view of polygonal karst depressions around 2000 m altitude on Treskavica Mountain, Hercegovina. (Photograph by I. Gams.)





Figure 9.19   (Left) Delimitation of a doline on a plain (conventional temperate doline). (Right) Delimitation of a doline in hilly terrain (conventional humid tropical cockpit). Reproduced from Williams, P.W, The geomorphic effects of groundwater. In R. J. Chorley (ed.) Water, Earth and Man, Methuen, London, 269–284, 1969.


Figure 9.20 Six main types of dolines. Reproduced from Williams, P.W. (ed.), Karst Terrains; Environmental Changes and Human Impacts. Catena Supplement, 25 © 1993 Elsevier; modified from Waltham, A.C. and Fookes, P.G. (2003) Engineering classification of karst ground conditions. Quaterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 36, 101–18.




Lehmann (1936) indicated tropical cockpits to be morpho- logically distinct from most temperate dolines (Figure 9.19), although he supported an origin by solution processes.
  The basic genetic distinction between solution and collapse dolines was elaborated by Cramer (1941) in an extremely thorough paper on their development  and morphology. He examined topographic maps of  karst regions from many parts of the  world  and   made  a comprehensive morphometric description of  the doline terrains concerned. His study revealed a picture of varia- tions in the density of doline fields in different areas.
  From this early work emerged an awareness that there are several types of dolines developed in different ways and in different materials, but with a convergence of form. The end-members are illustrated in Figure 9.20. We
distinguish collapse, which involves fracturing and rup-
ture of rock and soil, from subsidence, which is a more gradual process involving sagging or settling of the sur- face without  any obvious  breaking  of the  soil.  Natural dolines  of  a  purely  subsidence  origin  are  rare,  being found  where  there  is  interstratal  solution  of evaporite rocks at shallow depth (artificial  subsidence dolines are often created during salt  mining). The actual form of most dolines is of  polygenetic origin, plotting within a ternary diagram of end-members, but it is strongly biased towards one or another of the end-points; thus we discuss them under those headings.
9.4 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT    OF SOLUTION DOLINES
The bowl-shaped form of dolines indicates that a greater mass of rock has been removed from their centres  than from around their sides. This implies there to be  a common natural process that focuses dissolution.  Since mass transport in solution is the product of  solute con- centration and runoff, variations in either or both factors could  explain  the  focused  corrosion  within dolines. If local variability in solute concentration alone were suffi- cient to explain them, then they would be found on every type of limestone in a given climatic zone, but this is not the case, as is illustrated by comparison of the Cretaceous, Jurassic, Carboniferous and Devonian limestones of Eng- land, for example. If  the  solute  concentration  factor is  eliminated,  it  follows that sufficient inequalities in corrosion to form dolines must be created principally by local spatial variations in water flow, but by what mechan- ism can  the flow of water through the rock be focused? Here we must refer back to our discussion of the initiation of proto-conduits in Chapter 7, specifically to Figures 7.4,
7.5 and 7.9, and to our explanation of epikarstic processes in Chapter 5.
9.4.1 
Initiation of dolines by point recharge
In an essentially horizontal sequence of limestones inter- bedded between clastic rocks, fluvial incision of the cover beds  will  eventually  reveal  inliers  of  limestone.  These provide an input boundary for a developing   karst; whereas the valley of a main stream cut deeply into the limestones will provide an output boundary at a  lower elevation. Subterranean connections from input to output are established as explained in section 7.2.  Dolines  can only  commence  to  form  when  proto-caves extending from recharge points breakthrough to a spring or earlier cave conduit. Until such links are established, resistance to flow through the rock is too high to permit removal of enough limestone to create a doline-sized depression, but once connected the focus of drainage and solute removal is a surface funnel and the karst pipe that drains it.
  Dolines formed in this way can be termed point-
recharge depressions in recognition of the process res- ponsible for focusing corrosional attack (Figure 5.16(1)). In the early stages of the removal of a caprock, only the bottom of the enclosed basin is composed of limestone, the flanks being relatively impermeable cover beds. These dolines act as centripetal drainage points for allogenic runoff and, clearly, the larger their contributing catchments the bigger these depressions may become.
  As more clastic rocks are eroded, so more  limestone inliers are exposed. A second generation of point-recharge sites may be envisaged, not necessarily  in the stylized ranks of Figure 7.9, but nevertheless  with the same implications for subsurface conduit  development and its feed-back  effects  permitting  doline growth. Contin- ued caprock erosion and more  doline initiation further increase the frequency of   point-recharge sites. The drainage areas of individual  dolines are reduced as a result. Where caprock has long been entirely removed and soils are thin or discontinuous, the high density fissuring of weathered bedrock,  sometimes exposed as karren fields, may begin to  substitute for dolines as drainage routes. Under such  circumstances recharge has moved to the diffuse end of the spectrum (section 5.3) and accompany- ing corrosion is also spatially diffuse; thus unless flow is focused lower down in the epikarst the form of any dolines that have been initiated may not be maintained.
9.4.2 Initiation of dolines by drawdown
Some karst landscapes have been developed in lime- stones without caprocks, either because none were deposited or because morphological development fol- lowed the uplift of a baselevelled erosion surface. Solu- tion  dolines  are  often  found  in  such  terrains,  although




corrosion is unlikely to have been focused by point recharge.  In   other   karsts  where   caprocks   have   long gone, there are apparently active, rather than degenerate, doline landscapes.
  Any uplifted erosion surface subjected to renewed karstic attack will possess a vestigial conduit network developed beneath it by dissolution in the phreatic zone in the previous phase. It can be assumed that some input to  output  connections  already  exist,  although  they  will certainly develop further. Recharge from rainfall will be relatively diffuse, depending on soil cover, and percolat- ing water will accomplish 50–80% of its solutional work within about 10 m of the surface  (Chapter 4). Hence fissures that are considerably   widened by corrosion beneath the soil close rapidly  with depth (Figure 5.24). As a result, infiltration into the top of this highly corroded subcutaneous zone is much easier than drainage out of it (Williams 1983). The bottleneck effect results in signifi- cant storage of water in this zone after heavy rain, and the stored water  constitutes a suspended epikarstic aquifer with a base  that is essentially a leaky capillary barrier (Figure  5.28). Because of initial spatial variability in fissure frequency and permeability arising from tectonic and lithological influences, preferred (i.e. low resistance) vertical leakage paths develop down connected pipes at the base of this suspended aquifer. These paths are enlarged by dissolution with the result that a depression develops in the overlying subcutaneous water table similar to the cone of depression around a pumped well. Flow paths then adjust in the epikarstic aquifer to  converge on the dominant leakage route. The extra  flow encourages more solution and with it the enhancement of vertical permeability. The zone of influence of the leakage route(s) widens according to the radius of the cone of depression in the subcutaneous water table. The dimension of this radius depends on the hydraulic conductivity of the epikarst and the rate of water loss down the leakage path at its base.
  These processes, then, can explain the focusing of corrosion where caprock point recharge is not important. As the surface lowers the more intensely corroded zones begin to obtain topographic expression as solution dolines,  their  diameters  being  controlled  by  the  radius of the subcutaneous drawdown cone. The  theoretical relationships between surface doline topography, under- lying relief on the subcutaneous water table and vertical hydraulic conductivity near the base  of the epikarstic aquifer are illustrated in Figure 5.16.
  Klimchouk (1995, 2000) and Klimchouk et al. (1996) have pointed out that flow concentration at the base of the epikarst can sometimes lead to the development of vertical shafts that have no open entrance to the surface, and that a karren field may develop at the surface with a diameter

corresponding to the cone of depression of the epikarstic water table. The progressive lowering of the surface and widening of the shaft eventually leads to collapse and an open entrance at the surface. Degradation of its slopes leads to the development of a cone-shaped depression.  Such features  are  especially  evident  in  the  alpine  zone where they are not masked by vegetation and thick soils.
From this discussion we see the need to distinguish
(i) between doline initiation where there has been no proto-cave development from that where a  ready-made, permeable, vadose zone is inherited from an earlier phase of  karstification,  and  (ii)  between   doline  corrosion focused  by  point  recharge  as  opposed to that focused by epikarstic drawdown.  Although dissolution is the initiating and dominant  process, other factors such as collapse may also contribute to doline form. We can also appreciate that   different generations of dolines can develop either   from   successive   caprock   stripping   or from  secondary drawdown within a major drawdown cone (Drake and Ford 1972, Kemmerly 1982).
9.4.3 The occurrence and enlargement of solution dolines
Once  a  solution  doline  is  established, positive  feed- back will encourage its further development  because of the centripetal focusing of flow and hence  corrosion (Figure 4.16 and 9.21). The aggressiveness  of the water may be enhanced by greater biogenic CO2  production in the thick soils that tend to accumulate in the bottoms of depressions. Such soils may also be damper longer because of drainage accumulation and lingering snow melt; thus the duration of active corrosion may  also increase (Figure 4.16; Za´mbo´  and Ford 1997).  Further, with efficient vertical drainage encouraged by the corrosional enlarge- ment of shafts, the increasing  average velocity of water flow leads to a corresponding growth in mechanical trans- port of downwashed soil  and rock, evacuating them underground. The freer  vertical drainage permits much greater leakage from the basin and so steepens the epikars- tic hydraulic gradient, stimulating further drawdown in the subcutaneous water table, and encouraging expansion of the radius of influence of the centripetal drainage system. Although the general tendency during solution doline development  is   for  self-reinforcement  (Figure  9.21), some effects  have negative feed-back influences. For instance,  some soils covering karst may have a lower saturated   hydraulic  conductivity  than  the  underlying
rock. Depending on its composition it could range from 10—2   to  10—5 m day—1,  whereas  in  karstified  limestone conductivity may be 10—1 to 103 m day—1 or more. The soil therefore commonly acts as an infiltration regulator





Figure 9.21   Positive feed-back loops in the development of solution dolines. Modified from Williams, P.W. (1985) Subcutaneous hydrology and the development of doline and cockpit karst. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 29(4), 463–82.




Figure 9.22   Flow regimes, saturation levels and pressure head changes Dhp within the epikarst of a solution doline. Reproduced from Williams, P.W. (ed.), Karst Terrains; Environmental Changes and Human Impacts. Catena Supplement, 25 © 1993 Elsevier.





Figure 9.23   Morphological map of Zece Hotare karst plateau in Romania, showing the alignment of numerous dolines  along dry valleys: a, karrenfeld; b, doline; c, doline-valley; d, uvala; e, cave; f, pothole shaft; g, plateau limits. Reproduced from Racovit¸aˇ, G., Moldovan, O and Onac. B, Monografia carstului din Munt¸tii Paˇdurea Craiului. Cluj-Napoc, 264 p. © 2002 Cluj University Press.




and, where it has a high proportion of clay, it may even be an infiltration inhibitor. Hence a thick clayey soil mantling  a  doline  bottom  can  result  in  the  ponding  of runoff and in the reduction of peak throughput following storms. It can even create semi-permanent  ponds – doline ponds – that reduce storm surcharges  of flow underground  to  zero.  However,  even   without thick soils stormwater will still be stored within the epikarstic zone  of  a  solution  doline,  because  of  the permeability contrast between the epikarst and the  underlying rock. This gives rise to hydraulic head variation in the epikarst (Figure 9.22) and to  head-driven surges of percolation throughput into the vadose zone.
  Solution dolines are a common feature of karst in humid areas, yet not all carbonate rocks support  them. Williams (1985) suggested that they will not develop if:

1. if vertical hydraulic conductivity is so great through- out the vadose zone that little or only short-lived subcutaneous storage occurs, as is the case in  rocks with high primary permeability such as many aeolian calcarenites (Jennings 1968);
2. vertical permeability is always so spatially uniform and sufficiently dense that no drawdown depressions develop in the subcutaneous water table, as may be the case within Cretaceous Chalk terrain of England and northern France as well as on some raised coral atolls;
3. on   steep   hillsides,   sloping   more   than   about   20○, where the dominant subcutaneous hydraulic  gradient is subparallel to the topographic slope – in dry valleys on the Mendip Hills, UK, Ford (1964) found dolines to be absent when the valley gradient  is greater than about 0.04 (~2○).

  Factors 1 and 2 that exclude dolines are products  of primary rock control on hydraulic variables (Figure 5.15). With respect to factor 3, Williams (1972a)  noted that closed depressions incised into moderately  sloping hill- sides in Papua New Guinea are  asymmetrical, being elongated downslope and having their deepest point off- centre close to the downslope  margin. Salomon (2000) illustrates asymmetrical  dolines as found down slopes and along dry valleys  in  France.  It  is  interesting  that the  shape  of  drawdown cones around pumped wells in sloping (phreatic) groundwater surfaces have an identical asymmetry; and so it is to be expected that rapid leakage beneath a sloping epikarstic aquifer would produce a similar drawdown effect and create the observed  doline asymmetry. Dolines in dry valleys can sometimes be so
closely spaced as to justify the term doline valleys.
Racovit¸a˘ et al. (2002) provide an informative illustration of this from the Zece Hotare karst plateau  in Romania

(Figure 9.23), where many dolines are aligned along dry valleys and doline clusters on the plateau surface are set within larger enclosed basins (thus constituting uvalas,
i.e. compound enclosed depressions).
  The development of solution dolines leads both to increased permeability (and hydraulic conductivity)  and to increased spatial variation in permeability in the upper vadose zone. In the vertical plane there is a difference of several orders of magnitude between  hydraulic conduc- tivity in the epikarstic aquifer and that in the remaining underlying part of the vadose zone  (see Figure 5.3 and 5.15). In the horizontal plane, major variations occur in hydraulic conductivity near the base of the subcutaneous zone, and it is these that determine  the relief on the epikarstic water table. It is probable that the subcutaneous processes responsible for the genesis of solution dolines become less relevant as the topography develops, because of positive feed-back mechanisms strongly enhancing the topography. The  sharp contrast that sometimes exists between shallow  temperate-zone dolines and tropical cockpits with larger relief may be a direct consequence of the variable strength of those feed-back factors under the differing environmental conditions.
9.5 THE ORIGIN OF COLLAPSE   AND SUBSIDENCE DEPRESSIONS
9.5.1 Collapse dolines
Collapse dolines are usually steeper sided than  solution dolines and of smaller plan area. But as their side slopes degrade and bottoms infill with slopewash or other detri- tus, their surface form may assume the bowl  shape of solution dolines, with which they can then be confused. Only  excavation  will  reveal  their  true  origin. Neverthe- less, when newly collapsed or still  actively developing,
there is no mistaking some collapse dolines. Collectively the most impressive are the tiankeng (‘large collapse dolines’)   of   the   Dashiwei   group   in   Leye,   Guangxi, China. About 50 tiangkeng are known in  China, of
which three are more than 500 m deep and over 500 m in entrance diameter. The deepest reported is  Xiaozhai Tiankeng in Chongqing Province (Chen et  al. 2003). From its lowest rim at 1180 m, it is 511 m  deep (Figure 9.24) and it is about 600 m across  (Senior 2004). Other large collapses of similar order  are found in Sarawak (Garden of Eden at Mulu) and in the Nakanai Mountains in New Britain, Papua New  Guinea (Maire 1981a). All are in polygonal karst terrain and overlie large underground rivers.  Another  immensely impressive collapse contains Crveno Jezero  (Red Lake) in Croatia. It is 528 m deep from its lowest rim, the bottom of the collapse extending






Figure 9.24   (Upper) Oblique aerial view from the northwest of Xiaozhai tiankeng, Chongqing, China. This great collapse doline is  in fencong karst terrain. At the rim, the collapse is over 0.5 km wide. The location of the winding footpath is shown on the plan below (Photograph by Chen Lixin.) (Lower) Plan and profile of Xiaozhai tiankeng. Reproduced from Chen, W., Zhu D. and Zhu X. (2003) Study on Karst Landscape and World Natural Heritage Value of Tiankeng-Difeng Tourist Site, Fengjie, Chongqing.  Geological Printing House, Beijing, 133 pp.





Figure 9.25   Development of collapse doline by removal of buoyant support.


10 m below modern sea level (Bonacci and Roje-Bonacci 2000). The lake averages ~285 m deep, but fluctuates by T35 m in level. The collapse diameter at the surface  is about 350 m and at lake level is about 200 m. Some filled breccia pipes above deep evaporites may be larger still, but lack prominent topographic expression (section 9.13).
  Collapse can occur in compact bedrock, in caprock over karstified beds, and in superficial unconsolidated sediment cover. It can occur suddenly or progress gradu- ally. Three main mechanisms are responsible for collapse dolines (section 7.12 and Figure 9.20 and 9.25):

1. solution from above that weakens the span of a cave roof;
2. collapse from below that widens and progressively weakens the span of a cave roof (in rock or unconso- lidated sediments);
3. removal of buoyant support by water table lowering, which increases the effective weight on the span  so that its strength is exceeded.

In practice these mechanisms often interact. For example, corrosion by water percolating down a fissure may com- bine with upwards stoping of a cave roof along the same plane of weakness. Failure then occurs because of weak- ening both from above and below. Illustrations of depres- sions formed in this way are the tiankeng dolines of China and the huge collapses of the Nakanai Mountains in New Britain, mentioned above. They are in  polygonal karst terrain and overlie large underground rivers with low flow discharges of many cubic metres  per second. Numerous examples of this kind of  polygenetic doline  are  found above  river caves  running through cockpit karsts. They are frequently encountered just upstream of spring heads and just downstream of stream-sinks.
  The nature of rock strength and the stresses to which it is subjected when associated with underground openings

such as caves are discussed in sections 2.8 and 7.12.  It suffices to note here that no single criterion defines rock mass strength, but unconfined compressive   strength, shearing resistance and tensile strength are  important elements (Selby and Hodder 1993), with  compressive stresses being the most significant in underground envir- onments. If stress exceeds the  rock’s strength then the cave roof will fail. This will be by fracturing in the case of competent brittle rock or by deforming in the case of incompetent lithologies. The  first gives rise to collapse depressions and the second  to subsidence depressions.
When consolidated non-karst caprocks are breached (Figure 9.20), the depressions formed are termed caprock collapse or subjacent collapse dolines (Table 9.2). Exam- ples of this type in gritstones above carbonate rocks are described from South Wales by Thomas (1974) and Bull (1977). They frequently occur in clastic beds above evaporite rocks (see Figure 9.56).
  As karstification  proceeds,  the regional  water  table is gradually lowered and phreatic conduits are  dewatered. Oscillating water tables between wet and dry seasons and temporary  backing  up  of  water  in  conduits due to flash floods also produce rapid changes in stress patterns in a karstified massif. Seasonal water-table fluctuations of up to 100 m or more are  known, so large volumes of rock can be affected.  Groundwater  withdrawal can be as abrupt where  water resources are heavily exploited by pumping. In a fully saturated medium, the buoyant force
of water is 1 t m—3 and if the water table is lowered 30 m,
the increase in effective stress on the rocks is 30 t m—3 (Hunt 1984).  If unconsolidated overlying  materials are affected by such dewatering, compression occurs and the surface subsides. Compression in sands  is  essentially immediate,  but  cohesive  materials  exhibit a time delay as they drain. Thus the amount of subsidence is a function of the magnitude of the  decrease in the water table, which determines the increase in overburden pressures,





Figure 9.26 (a) Drowned collapse dolines in Florida formed by a combination of undermining from below and periodic loss of buoyant support. Reproduced with permission from, Davies, W.E., and LeGrand, H, Karst of the United States. In Herak, M. & V.T. Stringfield, (eds.), 1972. Karst: Important Karst Regions of the Northern Hemisphere. Elsevier, Amsterdam © 1972 Elsevier. (b) Flooded, cenote-style collapse doline in southeast Australia formed by a combination of undermining from below and periodic loss of buoyant support. Reproduced from Lewis, I. and Stace, P. (1980) Cave Diving in Australia, I. Lewis. Adelaide.


and  the  strength  and  compressibility  of  the  strata.  The abruptness of the process is a function of the rapidity of dewatering and the nature of the materials (e.g. Zolushka Cave, Ukraine, in section 7.12). The   propagation  of
dropout (or cover collapse or soil arch) sinkholes/dolines
(Figure 9.26a) by rapid dewatering following ground- water  pumping  is  discussed  in  section  13.3.  However, rapid doline formation can also arise from natural pro- cesses such as flooding. At least 312  cover-collapse depressions in alluvium developed within 48 h following flooding by a tropical storm in the  Flint River valley, Georgia, USA (Hyatt and Jacobs 1996), and even more quickly in terrace alluvium over  gypsiferous beds in northeast Spain (Benito et al. 1995), many being exacer-

bated by human activity. However, even without human intervention, the rapid rate of dissolution of gypsum can still yield major problems. For example, natural ground collapse  over  gypsum  in  northeast  England  resulted  in about $1.5M worth of damage in the interval 1984–1994 (Cooper 1995).
  Water-table fluctuations have also occurred more gra- dually as a result of repeated glacio-eustatic sea-level changes during the Quaternary Period. This has  caused numerous major fluctuations as much as 130 m in the level of the water table. Consequently cover  beds have been penetrated by collapse in many locations. The present high stand of sea level results in most of the depressions being water filled, giving a landscape of  doline ponds.




Many of these in Florida have been successfully investi- gated using high-resolution single-channel seismic profiling (Kindinger et al. 1999). Glacio-eustatic  oscilla- tions probably also made a major contribution  to the development of flooded collapse depressions in  Yucata´n (Salomon 2003a, Beddows 2004), where they are known
as  cenotes,  and  southeast  Australia  (Marker  1976,
Grimes 1994). Diving and sounding has shown them to be steep-walled with large chambers extending below the water table. Some are the top of enormous flooded bell-shaped cavities with disconcertingly thin roofs (Figure 9.26b). Shaft-like depressions deeply flooded
by seawater in low-lying coral islands are known as blue
holes. They are common features in the Caribbean and  are also  found  on the  Great  Barrier  Reef  (Backshall  et al. 1979, Gascoyne et al. 1979, Hopley 1982,  Smart 1983, Mylroie et al. 1995). They resemble cenotes at the surface because of their usually circular opening. How- ever, some are produced along massive shear  fractures formed by steep-reef-edge foundering    following removal of buoyant ocean support during  low  glacial sea  levels.  Thus  not  all  blue  holes  are  the product of karst processes, although the cavities are highly decorated with drowned speleothems (Palmer  and  Heath  1985). When  a  thick  microbial  layer  occurs near the surface, the upper part of the water column is coloured black and
the features have been termed black holes (Schwabe
and Herbert 2004).
9.5.2 
Subsidence and suffosion depressions
In the ideal subsidence depression the ground and under- lying beds gradually sag downwards with no significant faulting of the rocks, although folding always occurs. This may be contrasted with the collapse depression where rupture is a characteristic feature. In practice there is a continuum in nature, many predominantly subsidence  depressions  having  an  element  of  fault  dis- placement in them, depending largely on the competence of the lithologies involved.
  Trough subsidence above underground cavities can take place at different scales. At a small scale and at shallow depth it can create subsidence dolines where the cavity is at  the rock–soil  interface. Artificial  subsidence depres- sions up to a few hundred hectares in extent have been created by injection mining of  shallow salt deposits. At much larger scales and sometimes involving considerable depths are processes  leading to development of depres- sions by solution sag. These are limited to the evaporite rocks and are discussed separately in section 9.13.
  Seepage through thick unconsolidated regolith or allo- genic detritus over karst rocks can generate suffosion depressions. Suffosion is the process whereby fines  are
evacuated  through  underlying  pipes   in  the   karstified bedrock by a combination of physical  downwashing and chemical solution. Infiltrating water beneath regolith creates subsoil karren and widened joints connected with





Figure 9.27   A field of partly snow-filled suffosion dolines in glacial moraine on Mount Owen, New Zealand.




deeper cavities. Suffosion then causes a dimpling of the surface with a multitude of small dolines (Figure 9.27). Very often inheritance plays a part, the veneer of  allu- vium, loess or glacial till, etc. having been deposited onto a well-developed karst. Dolines formed in the  thick alluvial veneer that commonly floors blind  valleys and poljes were termed ‘alluvial dolines’ by Cvijic´ (1893).
  Kemmerly and Towe (1978) studied change in suffo- sional/cover-collapse dolines with time, based on growth of 18 dolines over 35 year. The dolines were mainly  of suffosional origin, being developed in drift deposits up to about 10 m thick, with no carbonate rock outcrops show- ing. They used sets of aerial photographs flown in 1937 and 1972, supplemented by field survey. Their  conclu- sions were that:

1. depression  length  and  width  axes  enlarged  over  the 35 year period, length usually growing more  rapidly than width;
2. doline growth is a function of surficial geological setting,   areal   growth   rates   averaging   40,   70   and 100 m2   100 a—1   for  loessic,  clayey  residual  and silty colluvial surface material respectively;
3. estimates of doline age on the three surficial materials, based on linear growth rates, varied from 25 a  (silty colluvium),  through  38 a  (clayey  residuum)  to 65 a (loess) – these ages were found compatible  with independent biological evidence.

Magdalene and Alexander (1995) re-examined sinkholes mapped in 1984 with those found 10 year later. The area studied   was   a   till-   and   loess-mantled   fluviokarst   in Minnesota, where dolines are mainly formed by  cover subsidence  and  cover  collapse.  They  found   34 new dolines to have been formed in the interval,  all within high probability sinkhole zones as defined in the earlier survey. The dolines were strongly clustered,  with the majority of the new dolines clustered around other freshly developed sinkholes. This conclusion was  confirmed by Gao et al. (2002).
9.6 POLYGONAL KARST
Dolines can occur as scattered isolated individuals, as scattered   clusters   of   individuals,   as   densely   packed groups, or as irregularly spaced chains along  allogenic recharge  margins  and  dry-valley  systems.   In humid tropical and temperate zones dolines  sometimes totally pock the land surface, occupying all the available space. Viewed from  the  air  the   landscape resembles an egg-box-like topography with  the divides between adj- oining  depressions  forming   a  cellular  mesh  pattern

(Figure 9.18 (bottom right)). This style of karst landscape was first recognized in Papua New Guinea where it was called polygonal karst (Williams 1971, 1972), but it occurs in many other carbonate karsts including parts of the
Caribbean, USA, New Zealand, Tasmania, China, Herze- govina and Turkey. It is also found in evaporite terrains, where it displays its greatest density and uniformity.
  Polygonal karst mainly comprises solutional depres- sions  in  bedrock,  as  in  the  ‘cockpit’  karst  of  Jamaica, although polygenetic depressions also feature  when the surface collapses into underlying caves.  When the sur- face is thickly blanketed in superficial deposits, many of the depressions involve cover subsidence and are in the process of exhuming buried depressions.
  The  polygonal  pattern  is  interesting,  because  it  con- stitutes a geometrically efficient way of   subdividing space, minimizing the distance from the  divide to the centre of the cell. Rainfall is rapidly transmitted from the surface down to the bottom of  individual depressions (mainly as throughflow in the  epikarst). Consequently polygonal karst is one of nature’s most efficient drainage systems – possibly the most efficient.
  Limestone polygonal karsts have different mesh sizes (Figure 9.28). For example, in the Guilin region of China polygons have an average area of 0.51 km2, which is almost 30 times larger than the 0.018 km2 mesh size  in the Waitomo region of New Zealand (Williams  1993). Average depression radii vary from 400 m to   80 m, respectively, and internal depression relief from 200 m to 64 m in the two cases. The ‘egg-boxes’ are of very different dimensions! This is significant, because  the contrast in polygonal karst geometry is almost  certainly a reflection of the marked difference in  hydraulic conductivity of the epikarsts in the two regions (high in New Zealand, low in China), as well as a reflection of past and present rainfall regimes (currently around 2000 mm a—1 in both areas, although with much stronger seasonal distribution (62% from April to July)  near Guilin). The geometry of the surface karst  reflects the balance between the
recharge   rate   and   the   throughput   regime,   the   latter being controlled by the vertical hydraulic  conductivity of the bedrock. In the Chinese case this  is relatively low because of the massive nature of the bedrock with low joint frequency and widely spaced drainage shafts, but in the New Zealand case it is  very high because of thin bedding and closely spaced  joints (Williams 2004c), although thick volcanic soils make direct com- parison difficult.
  The divides between the inosculating basins of poly- gonal karst are surmounted by residual hills that assume  a variety of shapes  across the range  of  hemispherical– conical–pyramidal (Balazs 1973, Day  1978) that  in



Figure 9.28  Comparison of polygonal karst textures from different karst landscapes. Reproduced from Williams, P.W.  (2004a) Polygonal karst and palaeokarst of the King Country, North Island, New Zealand. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Suppl.-Vol 136, 45–67.




particular reflect the structural attributes of the bedrock. The differing styles and sizes of dolines and residual hills impart a unique character to the terrains in which they are found. It has been claimed that morphologically distinct assemblages develop in different climatic zones (Lehmann 1954, Jakucs 1977), but it is also evident that there is a considerable range of karst landscapes even within individual climatic zones (see section 10.1). Therefore questions arise as to whether the perceived topographic styles can be verified objectively, and whether the landscape differences between climatic  zones are greater than those within them.
  Morphometry is a technique that has been used to help to  resolve  such  questions.  Its  aim  is  the  objective  and quantitative description of landforms. The application of morphometry to karst in fact commenced long before it became widely used in geomorphology as a whole. Cvijic´ (1893) and Cramer (1941) in particular were pioneers in this field. Their work and later  contributions by many others is discussed by Williams (1972b), Jennings (1985), Ford and Williams (1989),  Bondesan et al. (1992) and Day (2004).
9.7 MORPHOMETRIC ANALYSIS  OF SOLUTION DOLINES
9.7.1 Objective description of doline styles and patterns
The  most  accurate  data  for  morphometric  analysis  are obtained from field survey (e.g. Jennings 1975, Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ 1994). However, this is time consuming  and permits
coverage of only a small area. The most practical medium for morphometric analysis of karst is generally found to be large scale (say 1:15 000) aerial photographs viewed stereoscopically  under  magnification.  These  are  prefer- able to topographic maps, because even when maps are of large scale and small contour interval, significant terrain information is lost, especially when dolines are shallow. In Barbados, Day (1983) used maps as large as 1:10 000, but found their representation of dolines to be arbitrary, underestimating depression numbers by up to 54% when compared with field  surveys. The major problem with maps is their variable quality and density of information,
e.g. Troester et al. (1984) endeavoured to compare results from 1:50 000 maps of 20 m contour interval with those of 1:24 000 with ~1.5 m interval. Problems are not entirely absent when using aerial photographs either, because heavy forest or shadows mask hydrographic and topographic detail. However, handling large quantities of morphometric information from maps has become easier with the advent of geographical information systems (GIS) and digital elevation models (DEM),

e.g. Gao et al. (2002, 2005a), Florea et al. (2002)  and Denizman (2003).
  On detailed maps, the contour pattern of deep and large dolines (cockpits) in the humid tropics is often star shaped (Figure 9.19). This arises from the small and usually dry gullies that incise the depression slopes and focus on the bottom. Aerial photographs reveal this even more clearly and also show that a similar internal  dissection often characterizes the commonly smaller dolines of the tempe- rate zone. The spatial location of  a doline is therefore usually represented by its  drainage focus, which is the lowest point and not  necessarily  coincident  with  the geometric  centre  of  the depression (Figure 9.29a). The basin is normally  delimited by its topographic drainage divide, which is the surrounding high land in the case of polygonal karst or the break of slope at the basin perimeter in the case of isolated depressions. The plan geometry of the individual features thus defined can be expressed by various  length:width ratios and basins can be ranked hierarchically according to the order of channel networks draining   their   sides   (Williams   1971),   although   other ranking systems (e.g. basin size) are possible.
  Relief attributes of dolines have received less attention than plan form because sufficiently detailed height  data are not readily obtainable from maps and field measure- ment is time consuming, although the  increasing avail- ability of digital terrain data is making this easier. Doline depth is usually taken to be the  difference in elevation between the lowest point in the depression and the lowest point on the basin rim or  divide. Depth information is important because as Troester et al. (1984) remarked, the most obvious difference between temperate and tropical karst is often the amount of relief in the landforms. From map analysis they found an average depth of the order of 20 m in  Caribbean examples compared with < 10 m in the Appalachians, Kentucky and Missouri.
  Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ (2006) has considerably advanced methodol-
ogy for analysing solution doline form by using Fourier techniques to consider doline geometry in its entirety. He investigated  which  rotated  power  function  best  fits  the geometry of 38 dolines in the ‘classic’ karst of Slovenia and examined how geometry changes with  volume. He concluded that the doline radius:depth ratio increases as doline volume increases. Doline volumes are very close to those of regular cones of the same  dimensions, and grow relatively deeper as the volume increase.
  Terrain  roughness  is  an  associated  attribute  of  inter- est, because it also can be used to help  discriminate between karst landscape styles (Day  1977a). ‘Smooth’ and ‘rough’ topography (Figure  9.29b) can be defined by vector orientation, strength   and dispersion (Day 1979b). Mathematical models  simulating tropical karst





Figure 9.29   (a) Measurements made to estimate the two-dimensional geometry of karst depressions. Reproduced from Williams,
P.W. (1971) Illustrating morphometric analysis of karst with examples from New Guinea. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 15, 40–61.
(b) Definition of ‘smooth’ and ‘rough’ topography using the criteria of vector dispersion and strength. Reproduced from Day, M.J, Surface roughness as a discriminator of tropical karst styles. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplement-band, 32, 1–8 © 1979 E. Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung,  Science  Publishers.  (c)  Dispersion  patterns  with  different  intensities  and   grains. Reproduced from Jarvis, R.S. (1981) Specific geomorphometry, in Geomorphological Techniques (ed. A. Goudie), Allen & Unwin, London, pp. 42–6; after Pielou, E.C. (1969) An Introduction to Mathematical Ecology, J. Wiley & Sons, New York.


terrain with different degrees of roughness have been developed by Brook (1981). The analysis by Brook and Hanson (1991) was particularly successful in showing the strong structural control of cockpit karst relief in Jamaica and explaining its ‘grain’.
  The spatial patterns of dolines can have two  distinct aspects, termed ‘intensity’ and ‘grain’.  Intensity is the extent to which density varies from  place to place,

whereas grain is independent of intensity and  concerns the spacing and areas of high- and low-density patches in a dispersion pattern (Figure 9.29c). Most  geomorpholo- gical interest in pattern analysis focuses on intensity, and the question of particular interest in the investigation of doline fields is whether the pattern is  best described as random, clustered or regular. Two  methods have been used to assess this, quadrat   analysis  and  nearest




neighbour analysis, e.g. Drake and Ford (1972), McConnell  and  Horn  (1972),  Williams  (1972a,  b)  and Gao et al. (2002, 2005b).
  Quadrat   analysis   compares   the   number   of   dolines occurring   per   cell   with   expectation   according to  a model  distribution.  Thus,  for   example,  if  the  actual occurrence  is  not   significantly different from that described by the  negative binomial frequency distribu- tion, then the pattern can be described as clustered.
  Nearest neighbour analysis has frequently used  Clark and Evans’ (1954) test in which pattern is assessed with a nearest neighbour index that compares the average actual distance (La) between points in a spatial distribution with the average expected distance (Le) if  the points were randomly disposed:

Le  ¼ 1=2 D—1	ð9:1Þ

where D is the doline density. The nearest neighbour index R ¼ La/Le varies from 0 for a dispersion with maximum aggregation or clustering, through 1 for a random  case,  to  2.149  for  a  regular  pattern  that  is  as evenly and widely spaced as possible. A summary  of nearest neighbour statistics for various karsts is provided in Table 9.3. Vincent (1987) pointed out that reliance on a single measure based on nearest neighbour distance is a rather superficial way of investigating   spatial dispe- rsion, and showed that an improvement  is obtained by

calculating an empirical distribution function of  nearest neighbour distances. Complete spatial  randomness can then be tested for by using the  Poisson distribution. He illustrated the method using  Williams’ (1972a) data from New Guinea, broadly  confirming previous conclu- sions for seven of the eight sites.
9.7.2 Evolution of spatial patterns
Morphometric techniques have been used to address the question of karstic evolution. Three approaches have been adopted: one analyses growth patterns, the  second compares change over time and the third substitutes space for time.
  By means of quadrat analysis Drake and Ford (1972) showed  that  in  the  Mendip  Hills  there  was  a  constant cluster consisting of (on average) four smaller, younger ‘daughter’ dolines about one ‘mother’ doline, the mothers themselves being distributed in random clusters. We may thus think in terms of two ‘generations’ of dolines. There is a definite spatial and causal relationship between them; the daughters grow in the drawdown cones of their mothers.
  Substitution of space for time to obtain information on landform evolution is a well-known strategy in geomor- phology. Its validity rests on the assumption that evolu- tion has followed a similar pattern in the places  being compared; hence a weakness is that process  rates  and combinations   may   have   varied   significantly  through


Table 9.3   Depression density and nearest neighbour statistics for various polygonal karsts (Reproduced from Ford, D.C.  and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology)



Area
Number of depressions
Depression density (km—2)
Nearest neighbour index


Pattern


Author
Papua New Guinea (8 areas)
1228
10–22.1
1.091–1.404
Near random*
Williams 1972a

Waitomo, New Zealand

1930

55.3

1.1236
to approaching uniform
Near random*

Pringle 1973
Yucatan (Carrillo Puerto Fm)
100
3.52
1.362
Approaching uniform
Day 1978
Yucatan (Chichen Itza Fm)
25
3.15
0.987
Near random
Day 1978
Barbados
360
3.5–13.9
0.874
Tending to cluster
Day 1978
Antigua
45
0.39
0.533
Clustered
Day 1978
Guatemala
524
13.1
1.217
Approaching uniform
Day 1978
Belize
203
9.7
1.193
Approaching uniform
Day 1978
Guadelope
123
11.2
1.154
Near random*
Day 1978
Jamaica (Browns
301
12.5
1.246
Approaching uniform
Day 1978
Town-Walderston Fm)





Puerto Rico (Lares Fm)
459
15.3
1.141
Near random*
Day 1978
Puerto Rico (Aguada Fm)
122
8.7
1.124
Near random*
Day 1978
Guangxi, China (3 areas)
566
1.96–6.51
1.60–1.67
Approaching uniform
Fang 1984
Spain, Sierra de Segura
817
18–80
1.66–2.14
Near uniform
Lopez Lima 1986
*Significantly different from random expectation at the 0.05 level, i.e. although near random there is a tendency to uniform distribution.




Pleistocene  climatic  changes.  Yet  despite  this  problem useful results have been obtained. For  example, Day (1983) studied solution dolines on a  series of raised reef terraces in Barbados, the purpose being to measure how doline  morphology  changes   with duration of evolution, i.e. on surfaces of  successively greater age. Doline densities were found to increase on terraces up to an elevation of 150 m, but to decline above that, whereas doline  dimensions  reached  a maximum at about 225 m
a.s.l. On a suite of rock-cut fluvial terraces in  northern Italy, Ferrarese et al. (1998) found the volume of solution dolines to increase with terrace height (and relative age). Similarly, Strecker et al.  (1986)   described a time sequence of karst landform development on coral terraces of increasing age in   Vanuatu, with cone karst first appearing on surfaces about 500 a.
  The  karstification  of  drainage  as  a  normal  dendritic stream pattern is lowered from cover beds onto limestone has also been studied morphometrically using this space– time substitution approach. Williams  (1982a) described results  from Waitomo, New  Zealand, where karst is developed in limestones that  rest unconformably on an impervious basement and  are overlain by relatively im- permeable clastic beds. Every degree of stripping of the caprock and limestone is represented. The doline pattern progresses from a clustered dispersion when karstification of surface  drainage commences to a distribution on the regular side of random when the polygonal karst is at its maximum development (Figure 9.30). Coarse-grained clusters of dolines mark the end stages of the evolution- ary sequence as blocks of karst are isolated and reduced by denudation and as surface drainage resumes and expands across the growing exposure of basement rocks. Comparison of this model with that of the devel- opment  of  cave  systems  with  multiple  ranks  of  inputs (Figure 7.9) shows how results of independent investiga- tions of surface morphometry and  speleogenesis can converge.
  The incision of dolines and valleys often leaves  resi- dual hills around their perimeters or along  interfluves. Sometimes the hills become isolated and  of conical or tower-like form. The morphometric  characteristics of areas of cone karst with depressions  and cone karst with dry valleys (Figure 9.31) were examined in Guizhou Province, China, by  Xiong   (1992) and Tan (1992) respectively, using a combination of field measurement, map analysis and  photogrammetry. Residual hills were found to be of pyramidal form and to have symmetrical slopes of 45○   to 47○. The morphometric evidence sug- gested that  when the deeper depressions reached base- level, depression bottoms widened horizontally and cone slopes  retreat parallel to themselves, because the slopes

remained the same angle as the residual hills became smaller. Further information on the morphometric  char- ateristics of karst in China can be found in Zhu (1988), who synthesized findings concerning peak–cluster–depres- sion and peak–forest landscapes around Guilin.
9.7.3 Principal conclusions from karst morphometry
One of the great values of morphometry is that detailed scrutiny of a landscape throws up unexpected  observa- tions and stimulates fresh hypotheses. For example, until the 1960s it was supposed that karsts  are  chaotic,  their landforms  being  a  random  jumble  of collapse and dis- solution features. Morphometric research since then has shown this not to be so. Many karsts in widely separated parts of the world have  similar spatial organization, especially the polygonal karsts. Furthermore, their dolines are dispersed in patterns that are significantly different from random, tending  towards uniformity of distribution. This has been explained as being a result of spatial competition, attainment of perfectly uniform distribution being hindered by distorting factors such as general  topographic slope, regional dip and fissure patterns which orient corrosion by directing runoff and  infiltration (Williams 1972a) and giving a grain to the relief (Brook and Hanson 1991).
  Reviewing several published data sets, White and White  (1995)  found  that  the  number  of  closed  depres- sions of given depth or diameter falls off  exponentially with increasing size, suggesting that  beyond a certain threshold size (different for each   region because of variation in structural and climatic  conditions) depres- sions subdivide into smaller basins because of the avail- ability of alternative drainage  paths. This may help to explain the development of  ‘daughter’ dolines in the epikarst drawdown cone.
  Ever since Penck’s (1900) views were expressed on the importance of a fluvial phase before karstification  com- menced, there has been interest in the effect of lowering a normal drainage pattern from impermeable  cover beds onto underlying karst rocks. The results of morphometry
show that such karstification does not disorganize the
stream pattern, as was commonly assumed; it reorga- nizes  it  (Figure  9.30).  Lehmann  (1936)  postulated a fluvial phase in Java prior to the development of Kegelkarst, although at that site it was not lowered from cover beds but developed from consequent streams
on an uplifted erosion surface. Lassere (1954),  Monroe (1974) and Miller (1982)  kept  this  idea   alive from karsts in Central America and the  Caribbean. Miller’s morphometric work enabled reconstruction of palaeodrai- nage lines in Belize and  Guatemala,  and  convincingly showed   their   imprint   on  polygonal  karst  terrains.





Figure 9.30   A model of the reorganization of drainage by karstification. Reproduced from Williams, P.W. (1982a) Karst landforms in New Zealand, in Landforms of New Zealand (eds J. Soons and M.J. Selby), Longman Paul, Auckland, pp. 105–25.





Figure 9.31 Morphological map showing the association of karst cones with interfluves of dry valleys along the floors of which arekarst depressions. This is a case of fengcong–valley karst. Development of cones occurred in association with a fluvial network, which dried up as a consequence of incision of the  trunk stream. Reproduced from Tan, M. (1992) Mathematical  modelling of catchment morphology in the karst of Guizhou, China. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, N.F., 36(1), 37–51.


However, the palaeodrainage (fluvio-karst) impression across polygonal karst in Papua New Guinea is  almost certainly ascribable to lowering from a caprock (Williams 1972a).
9.8 
LANDFORMS ASSOCIATED WITH ALLOGENIC INPUTS: CONTACT KARST
Section 5.2 discussed input controls on the development of karst aquifers. The landforms associated with allogenic




inputs depend upon seven factors:

● input discharge
● hydraulic conductivity
● hydraulic gradient
● location of input (lateral or vertical)
● geological context
● process environment
● time.

9.8.1 Through valleys and gorges
When allogenic discharge into a karst is considerable it may exceed the capacity of the karst to absorb it under- ground. Such rivers maintain their flow at the surface and may entirely cross the karst to the output boundary. Whether they do so also depends partly upon the hydrau- lic gradient; the steeper this is, the greater the tendency for drainage loss underground. This is because for a given hydraulic conductivity throughput discharge can increase if hydraulic gradient steepens (section 5.1). The mor- phological consequence of a large allogenic river enter- ing a karst region with little elevation difference between input and output boundaries is normally that a through valley will be incised across the karst. Where the height difference is greater, a through gorge will still form if discharge remains sufficient to maintain compe- tent surface flow or if uplift occurs at a rate that does not exceed the river’s capacity to incise (an antecedent gorge in this case). Gorges formed in either of these two ways should not be confused with those developed  by cavern collapse.
  Such perennial effluent allogenic rivers traversing a
karst have an important morphological function, because they act as the regional baselevel. The Green River  in Kentucky and the Krka River in Yugoslavia are  exam- ples. They gain discharge from tributary karst  springs emerging along their banks. Therefore they contrast with
influent allogenic rivers that gradually lose flow, in part
or totally, but still maintain a continuous channel down- stream. The upper River Danube in Germany and the Takaka River in New Zealand are good examples. In these cases, their valley floors display no obvious  karst morphology,  but  karst  drainage  is  well  developed and spread along many kilometres of channel.
  An  interesting  general  review  of  the  styles,  contexts and rates of development of gorges in karst was provided by Nicod (1997). The significant points   include  the following.

1. Gorges that drain karst as effluent water courses should be distinguished from gorges that lose  flow

into the karst, even though their canyon form  con- tinues downstream.
2. The beds of some gorges are close to or have reached an impermeable basement, so they act as effluent systems  draining  the  karst  (such  as  the  Tarn   in France), whereas gorges entirely in limestone  may become influent if there is uplift or baselevel lowering (as in the case of the Reka-Timavo in Slovenia).
3. Some gorges contain large deposits of tufa that dam water flow, produce lakes and so block further  inci- sion of the canyon. The Krka and Plitvice  lakes in Croatia and Huanglong valley in Sichuan, China, are examples. At the extreme, at Huanguosho, China, the waterfall is now prograding, its vertical  face of tufa advancing into the earlier gorge.
4. Sometimes cavern collapse has clearly been the prin- cipal process producing a gorge (e.g. the Rak and Skocjan gorges in Slovenia, the Marble Arch gorge of Ulster,  the  Da  Xiao  Cao  Kou  gorge  of  the  Yijiehe River in Guizhou, and the Rio Peruac¸u´ gorge in Minas Gerais, Brazil), but probably the majority of gorges – and especially the larger ones – are  attributable to antecedent drainage, where river flow has been main- tained at the surface as uplift continued (such as the Three Gorges of the Yangtze  River and numerous other cases in China).

  Although simple cavern collapse gorges are important features  of  karst  (Figure  9.32),  most  gorges  traversing limestone  terrains  are  fluviokarstic  landforms and poly- genetic in origin. They often have a complex morphocli- matic heritage that is a   consequence of  their  long evolution, especially through the changing climatic condi- tions of the Quaternary Period, when discharge conditions also varied widely. Some evolved as pro-glacial meltwater canyons.  Nicod (1997) assembled evidence for the ages and  rates of incision of numerous gorges in karst up to 40 km long and 1.2 km deep. There is evidence that some commenced their evolution in the late Miocene or  Plio- cene, whereas others are mainly of Quaternary  origin.
Average rates of incision range from 0.1 to 4.3 m ka—1,
the faster rates normally involving shorter timespans.
9.8.2 Blind valleys
As hydraulic gradient steepens and/or the average flows of incoming allogenic streams reduce, sink points  become more localized and morphologically more distinct. Such valleys  are  characterized  by  one  or  more permanent stream-sink depressions that  sometimes overflow, the channel downstream being  interrupted by further sink- holes. Given time, and especially where drainage has been




Figure 9.32 (Left) A natural bridge in a gorge produced by cavern collapse, Guizhou, China (Photograph by A. Milhevc.) (Right) View through a natural arch in the Rio Peruac¸u valley, Brazil, to a gorge of cavern collapse upstream. The figure standing left of centre on the rock pile beneath the arch provides scale. During floods, water level rises to the figure.

lowered from above, stream-sinks can incise to the extent that all overflow ceases and the former channel  down- stream becomes dissected by dolines. We then  have a blind valley with an abandoned higher level valley con- tinuing downstream. There are many instances in Appa- lachian America, e.g. Friar’s Hole  dry valley (Figure 9.33), which overlies the cave of Figure 7.24. A modifica- tion of this kind of situation is encountered as an ‘island’ of caprock is stripped back.  Upstream retreat of a sink point may leave a line of abandoned stream-sinks along a normally dry valley downstream, some of which may be periodically reactivated during floods.
  Karstification of drainage lowered from above can lead to the development of innumerable small stream- engulfments. Flow is directed into the karst either laterally or vertically, depending largely on whether runoff is from an inlier or a caprock (Figure 5.16). Blind valleys conse- quently vary in form from normal elongate valleys with a

cliff-foot sink point at the downstream ‘blind’ end to those which are circular in plan with drainage focused centripe- tally into a stream-sink where the underlying karst rock is exposed. The latter features are often scattered in clusters across a surface, whereas the elongate forms, the conven- tional blind valleys, line up along a lithological contact as
contact karst features (Gams 1994).
  As caprock is eroded, centripetal blind valleys subdivide into smaller features best regarded as point-recharge dolines (section 9.4). Eventually all the  caprock is removed and only the dolines remain. In  contrast, contact-karst blind valleys may be deepened, widened or both. Incision is most likely when the hydraulic gradient is steep, otherwise lateral enlargement occurs. This may lead to the coalescence of neighbouring blind valleys and so to the production of a larger enclosed depression. If this develops an alluviated
floor (the coalesced floodplains of allogenic streams), it can then be termed a border polje (see section 9.9).





Figure 9.33 Dissected valley above Friars Hole cave system, West Virginia. The multiple blind valley has developed by headwater stripping of the caprock. Wind gaps and caprock residuals mark the level of the former active valley. Numerous stream-sink points pock the valley floor. Modified from Worthington, The paleodrainage of an Appalachian Fluviokarst: Friars Hole, West Virginia. McMaster Univ. MSc. Thesis, 1984.


  Sometimes aggradation buries stream-sinks and reduces their absorbance capacity. More frequent  overflow then occurs and the valley is considered semi-blind. The semi- blind condition can therefore arise both in the early stages of evolution before subterranean conduits are fully devel- oped and at a later stage if  aggradation and fill reduces conduit throughput capacity.
9.8.3 Recharge response
Recharge is  a  process, valley  development  is the  mor- phological response. Other things being equal, the greater the lateral point recharge the larger is the valley penetra- tion into the karst, to the extent that very large recharge permits complete traversing of the karst by the allogenic river. This general principle is illustrated in Figure 9.34, where  rivers  in  Belize  flow  from  an  inlier of resistant insoluble rocks across a faulted  boundary into a poly- gonal karst in brecciated  limestones. Lubul Ha blind valley drains 3.3 km2 of impervious rocks and penetrates merely 0.5 km into the  karst; Actun Chek catchment covers 20 km2 and  penetrates  2 km;  Caves  Branch  has an 88 km2  allogenic basin and penetrates 9.2 km when in flood; whereas the Sibun River draws its large discharge

from 250 km2 of metasediments and completely traverses the karst in a through valley.
9.8.4 Response to volcanism
An interesting case of allogenic inputs and contact karst arises  from  the  intrusion  of  volcanic  features  into  and onto karst rocks. Salomon (2003b) reviewed  volcanic influences on karst and showed that the  response of karst systems to volcanism is mainly determined by the consequences for water movement.  Volcanism distorts surface strata, with associated   swelling,  folding  and fracturing, and this guides erosion processes through its direction of karstification  (Figure 9.35). However, very large lava flows and  deposition of welded ignimbrite can totally overwhelm  karst and disconnect it from the existing hydrological system (Williams 2004c).
9.9 KARST POLJES
9.9.1 Definition
Poljes are large, flat-floored, enclosed depressions in karst   terrains   (Figure   6.27).   They   are    landforms





Figure 9.34 Variation in penetration distance of allogenic streams according to catchment size, Belize, central America. Modified from Miller, T.E. (1982) Hydrochemistry, hydrology and morphology of the Caves Branch karst, Belize. Mcmaster Univ. PhD thesis, 280 pp.

associated with the input and throughput of water and in many respects can be considered inliers of a normal fluvial landscape (Figure 6.30). The word polje signifies  a field or a large plain, and it is still widely used in Slav languages without particular reference to karstic  terrain (Sweeting 1972, Roglic´ 1974), although poljes  in the karst of Slovenia are usually called dolina or dol (Gams 1994). Nevertheless, in technical karst literature ‘‘polje’’ has acquired a special usage, particularly since the writ- ings of Cvijic´ (1893, 1901) and Grund  (1903). Similar landforms are termed plans in France, campo in Italy and Spain,  wangs  in  Malaysia  and  hojos in Cuba. Although they are written about  mainly in tropical and temperate contexts, poljes are  also reported in the subarctic zone (Fig. 10.14; Brook and Ford 1980). The most thoroughly studied are in the  Dinaric karst, where about 130 have been recognized  (Gams 1978, 1994; Mijatovic´ 1984b; Bonacci 2004; Milanovic´ 2004). The hydrological beha- viour of poljes is discussed in section 6.6.
  
Gams  (1978)  considered  the  many  geomorphological definitions of polje that have been  published and found several elements to be common  to  most  definitions.  He identified three criteria that must be met for a depression to be classified as a polje:

1. flat floor in rock (which can also be terraced) or  in unconsolidated sediments such as alluvium;
2. a closed basin with a steeply rising marginal slope at least on one side;
3. karstic drainage.

He also suggested that the flat floor should be at least 400 m wide, but this is arbitrary because Cvijic´ (1893) took 1 km as a lower limit. In fact, poljes vary considerably in size. The floors of reported poljes range from ~1 to > 470 km2 in area (Lika Polje is the largest at 474 km2), but even in the Dinaric karst most are less than 50 km2, and elsewhere in the world a majority are less than 10 km2.





Figure  9.35   Influence  of  volcanic  cone  on  karstification. Reproduced from Salomon, J.-N., Pre´cis de karstologie. p. 250
© 2000 Bordeaux, Presses Universitaires.
  Regardless of individual particularities, all poljes have a common hydrological factor in their history: their development occurred close to the local water table, even though it may be perched in some cases and even though subsequent events (such as uplift and  karstifica- tion) may since have separated the polje  floor from the contemporary position of the water table. Where a low- gradient water table is close to the surface, lateral fluvial planation (corrosion and corrasion) and  deposition pro- cesses are more important than incision; hence plains are created rather than deep valleys. The relative importance for polje development of tectonic processes and planation by karst dissolution varies, but  in most poljes there is evidence for both being important. An interesting case is that of Jiloca polje in Spain, which has developed in an active half-graben (Gracia et al. 2003). Although having clear tectonic origins, a sequence of eight stepped corro- sion terraces  truncating  limestones  in  the  basin  gives clear  evidence of the importance of dissolution in the evolution of its morphology. Cerknisˇko Polje, Slovenia, is being deformed by movement along a transverse fault. There has been > 120 m displacement since the last inte-
rglacial stage, and outlet drainage has been rerouted into a previously infilled cave (Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ and Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ 2003).
  Five types of polje were recognized by Gams (1973b, 1978) and examples were mapped in the vicinity of Postojna (Gams 1994). These are: (i) border polje located at a geological contact across which it receives allogenic surface runoff; (ii) piedmont polje in an alluviated valley



usually    located    downslope    of    a    glaciated    terrain;
(iii) peripheral polje that receives surface runoff from a large  (often  downfaulted)  internal  area  of  impermeable rock; (iv) overflow polje which is a depression underlain by relatively impermeable rock that acts as a dam and forces groundwater to flow on the surface to stream-sinks on the other side of the basin; and (v) baselevel polje in which the floor is cut entirely across karst rock and is located in the epiphreatic zone.
  We consider that the above categories of polje can be reduced to the three basic types illustrated in Figure 9.36.
9.9.2 Border poljes
Border poljes (German Randpolje) are dominated by allogenic input controls. They develop where the zone of water table fluctuation in non-karst rocks extends onto the limestone. This ensures that allogenic fluvial activity  is kept at the surface and that lateral planation and alluvia- tion dominate valley incision; otherwise blind  valleys will form. Floodplain deposits may partly seal the under- lying limestone and encourage water to stay  near the surface, although leakage may be widespread upstream of the final point of engulfment. This kind of polje is very common along contacts with highlands  that can supply abundant clastic load to rivers.
9.9.3 Structural poljes
Structural poljes are dominated by bedrock geological controls. They are often associated with graben or fault- angle depressions and with inliers of impervious rocks or even of relatively less permeable rocks such as dolomite. Their depression form is elongated with the structural grain, although their tectonic boundaries may be modified by extensive planation across karst rocks. Structural poljes are very important features, giving rise to the largest karst depressions in the world. They are the dominant class of polje in the Dinaric karst (Figure  6.30) and other active tectonic regions such as the Taurus Mountains of Turkey. They are inliers of a normal fluvial landscape (a floodplain, often with terraces) within an otherwise karstic terrain, the local water table being near the surface because of the low permeability of the enclave. Water escapes from the basin where the hydraulic gradient steepens, usually on the karst rock side of a bounding fault, where there may be literally hundreds of ponors (stream-sinks). For example, the total sinking capacity of ponors in Popovo Polje is more than
300 m3  s—1       (Milanovic´    2004).    Numerous    boreholes
through poljes of this type have shown their flat floors to be mainly the result of aggradation of Neogene terrestrial and lacustrine deposits that frequently bury an  irregular





Figure 9.36   Basic types of polje.

topography  (Mijatovic  1984b).  In  Duvanjsko  Polje,  for example, such sediments reach 2500 m in thickness.
9.9.4 Baselevel poljes
These  are  water-table  dominated,  occurring  where  dis- solution has lowered the karst surface to the  regional epiphreatic zone; i.e. they are windows on  the water table. Typically, they develop within or on  the outflow side of karst systems. Because they do  not depend on allogenic inputs or geological control,  they can be con- sidered the purest kind of polje. They can develop in an entirely  autogenic  setting.  Water-table control extends inland from the output  boundary, where the sea or an impermeable formation  may act as a dam or threshold.

Where  long-term  denudation  finally  erodes  part  of  the terrain down to the  piezometric  level,   subterranean streams  must  be  exposed  and  flow  across the surface. Their lateral rather than vertical  activity expands the window on the water table,  creating an interior fluvial plain that is cut entirely across carbonate rocks, although often veneered with alluvium.
  Seasonal or major storm inundation of the floor is characteristic of many poljes; in certain respects this tendency to flood has defined them classically. In many tropical poljes and in most temperate poljes there is evidence of effects of Quaternary climatic change. It takes the form of episodes of accelerated filling, detrital fan formation (e.g. Cerknisko), or channel entrenchment, rerouting of surface flow and/or sink-points underground.



Both  alluvial  and  corrosion  terraces  are  common  as  a consequence. In the temperate zone, many poljes that are dry or only seasonally inundated today had  permanent lakes occupying part or all of their floors  during cold wet phases of the Pleistocene. A spectacular example is Zafarraya Polje, Andalucia, Spain (Duran  Valsero and Lopez Martinez 1999). This is a highland tectonic polje with 60 m of clastic fill on a marl  bottom. It has a polycyclic overflow outlet in which more than 100 m of travertine  has  accumulated,  most  of which was eroded during the latest overspill episode. This polje has only a small area of seasonal flooding today.
9.10 CORROSIONAL PLAINS AND SHIFTS     IN BASELEVEL
9.10.1 Steepheads and pocket valleys
Springs occur on the output margin of karst regions. They are controlled in elevation by the regional or local water  table  which  may  be  determined  by  lakes  or  the
sea,  by  an  impermeable  rock  threshold  on  the  outflow side (German Vorfluter) or by aggradation.   Some springhead sapping occurs where water issues  from a major penetrable bedding plane or contact  within car-
bonate rocks that may be a little above the true allogenic baselevel, i.e. it is not strictly baselevel, but the next penetrable level above the base.
  Headwards retreat of the spring produces an amphithea- tre-like steephead or pocket valley. Springs can retreat either by gravitational undermining and  slumping of a slope, a process termed ‘spring sapping’, or by irregular
collapse of a cave roof above a subterranean river,  the collapse depressions ultimately coalescing to yield a gorge with a spring at  its upstream end. A  particularly good example of a pocket valley is Malham Cove in England (Sweeting 1972). Salomon (2000)  provides interesting examples from France,  where   these  landforms  are
known as recule´es (Figure 9.37). Sapping canyons of
similar length and length:width proportions are well developed in the massive, resistant sandstones of the Colorado Plateau, where dissolution is considered only a minor contributor (Howard et al. 1988), but perhaps is a critical  one.  Still  larger  features,  ascribed  to  the  emer- gence of groundwaters and measuring kilometres across,
are termed makhteshim (erosion cirques) in the Negev
and Sinai deserts of Israel and Egypt (Issar 1983). Long- term  denudation  results  in  the  merger  of  neighbouring valleys and in the production of a corrosion plain at the level of the water table. Such features are known as karst margin plains (German Karstrandebene).  However, karst margin plains also include those created by exterior





Figure 9.37    Steephead valleys  on  the  outflow  side  of  a  karst plateau in France. Reproduced from Salomon, J.-N.,  Pre´cis de karstologie. p250 © 2000 Bordeaux, Presses Universitaires.


river overbank flooding, the water being partly allogenic and (perhaps) partly from karst springs.
9.10.2 Baselevelled corrosion plains
Corrosion plains have been described in many parts of the world, e.g. by Blanc (1992), Pfeffer (1993), Sunartadirdja and Lehmann (1960), Sweeting (1995) and Williams (1970). Although most often associated with the output side of a karst terrain and (on a smaller scale) as corrosion terraces within poljes, they can also  be  produced  after  a  long  period  of  denudation  on  the input margin. When a border polje at the input boundary becomes connected at the surface to a corrosion plain on the outflow side, very extensive corrosion  surfaces of low relief are formed. The Gort Lowland  in western Ireland is an especially good example (Figure 9.38) of a corrosion plain that extends continuously from input to output margins.
  Because  of  their  low  elevation,  corrosion  plains  are commonly  veneered  with  alluvium.  Beneath  this  is a surface cut across the karst rock regardless of structure. When  uplifted,  glaciated  or  strip  mined   for placer deposits (as in the Kinta valley in  Malaysia), removal of the clastic veneer reveals an impressively planar rock floor that in the tropics, in particular, can sometimes be very rugged in detail because of etching down joints, but has little or no  perceptible slope and can extend across many square  kilometres. Corrosional plains of this type





Figure 9.38 The Gort lowland, an extensive baselevelled corrosion plain cutting across folded Carboniferous limestones in western Ireland. The lowland is the product of Tertiary solution planation followed by scouring by Pleistocene glaciers. The view is to the northwest with the Burren Plateau about 10 km away in the distance.

develop by solutional removal of irregularities down to a surface controlled by the water table. Since  mechanical work is not involved, except where there are significant insoluble  residues,  slopes  can  be  very   low  indeed (< 0.1○). Once the topography is corroded  down to the level of frequent inundation (the  epiphreatic zone), the plain  expands  by  gradual   retreat  of  adjoining  karst uplands and by elimination  of residual hills. Even on a perfect plain corrosion can be expected to occur near the water table because of the continuous supply of aggres- sive water from rain, but most activity will be restricted to a shallow depth because of the low hydraulic gradient.
  The   complex   of   processes   producing   baselevelled plains in karst has been called lateral solution planation, but in fact corrosion planation is a better term because it involves a combination of (i) vertical  dissolution of upstanding remnants by direct rainfall, (ii) lateral under- cutting of hillsides by accelerated  corrosion in swampy zones at their base, and (iii)  spring head sapping. The
relative   importance   of   these   three   activities   depends upon hydrogeological and biogeographical circumstances, which control the aggressiveness of water as discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, and the deposition of alluvium, which influences (im)permeability of the surface. Warm climates are not essential for corrosion  plain development. More important is a long stable   period under conditions sufficiently humid to permit  denudation of the  relief down to the epiphreatic zone.

Corrosion plains are not peneplains in the sense of
W.M. Davis (1899), because first they are not undulating surfaces of low relief and second, they are not  roughly the same age everywhere across the surface,  as is the assumption with peneplains. Corrosion plains  are as near perfectly flat as can be produced by natural denu- dation processes (Figure 9.38) and, having   reached the water table, are worn back rather than worn down. Thus they are youngest at the foot of the  retreating
uplands which they replace. In this respect they resem- ble pediplains.
9.10.3 Baselevel control
In  all  the  schemes  of  karst  denudation  that  have  been proposed, the ultimate baselevel of erosion recognized is either sea level or underlying impermeable rocks, if they occur above sea level. However, it is well established that karst springs can resurge well below sea level and we saw in   section   5.4   that   that   groundwater circulation can extend to considerable  depths. Since the karst hydro- chemical system can operate well below sea level and can corrode deep phreatic caves, sea level is clearly not the ultimate basis for karst dissolution. The question of note then is: what is the depth of the lowest active conduit?
  The baselevel issue is best understood by referring to the explanations of controls on aquifer  development (Chapter 5) and cave evolution (Chapter 7), which point




out that a karst circulation system undergoes a continuous process of self-adjustment, depending in detail on fissure frequency and hydraulic potential. Where fissuring supports a State 3 or 4 conduit system, a corrosion plain will develop near the level of the water table with  only shallow groundwater circulation beneath it.   Should the fissure frequency initially have been low, the increase of fissuring with age that appears to occur in a majority of States 1 and 2 systems also tends to  favour generally shallower circulation, as will the declining hydraulic gra- dient. However, there will be exceptions, and deep phreatic loops once formed may  maintain their flow unless they are sealed by clastic detritus.
Therefore:

1. the baselevel for corrosion plain development is  the water table;
2. the base of active corrosion varies (i) with the system, being deepest in States 1 and 2, (ii) with age (if fissure frequency increases it will tend to be shallower) and
   (iii) with the extent of any clastic infilling.

Freshwater:saltwater interface effects are ignored for the purpose of this discussion, but it should nevertheless be recognized that considerable corrosion is likely in the mixing zone.
  The   most   dramatic   known   eustatic   shift   to   have affected karst was the Late Miocene Messinian  fall  of sea  level  in  the  Mediterranean  around  6  to  5.3 a, when sea level dropped about 2000 m. Most of the Mediterra- nean Sea dried up and the Black Sea also fell consider- ably (Hsu¨ et al. 1973, Gargani 2004). Water subsequently poured in through the Strait of Gibraltar in the Pliocene and refilled these basins. All karst systems active in the Mio-Pliocene with these seas as their  baselevel would have been affected by these dramatic  eustatic changes, except perhaps those in the  headwaters of the longest drainage  basins.  Thus   karsts  between   the  Cevennes Mountains  and  the  Gulf of Lions in southern France drained towards the deep canyon that was incised along the course of the River Rhoˆne. With the Black Sea 200 m lower than at  present, water was captured underground from the  lower Danube River and discharged through deep  subterranean passages that seem to be still active (Lascu 2004). Other seas such as the Persian Gulf  and Red Sea have been similarly affected, as were the karsts that drained to them.
9.10.4 Rejuvenation
A negative shift in baselevel resulting from tectonic uplift or sea level fall is a common cause of rejuvenation  of

erosional  activity.  Uplift  of  a  well-developed  karst  has three principal effects: (i) major allogenic through-rivers entrench to produce deep valleys; (ii)  the vadose zone expands but may be perched above valley bottoms, depend- ing on the rate of valley entrenchment; and (iii) the phreatic zone moves downwards into less karstified rock. Once the water table  drops beneath an uplifted corrosion plain, percolating rainwater can escape vertically again instead of running off laterally. Solution dolines can incise, and suffosion  and collapse dolines appear on the alluvial plains.  Any residual hills become incorporated into divides  between developing dolines. Figure 9.39 sche- matically represents rejuvenation of a tower karst that had reached water-table level. A wave of morphogenesis of this sort could be expected to progress inland from the coast or from an incised river. Rejuvenation underground (i.e. development of a multiphase cave) is a prerequisite for rejuvenation of the surface topography.
  Figure 9.40 shows an uplifted corrosion plain with residual hills in the Guizhou Plateau, in an area still unaffected by the current wave of rejuvenation which is working   headwards   up   neighbouring   gorges.   Superb examples of uplifted, stripped karst margin  corrosion plains are found along the Hongshui River  (Guizhou, China), which drains the Dahua and Qibailong areas, the most intensely rugged karst topography we  have seen; Song and Junshu (2004) give details. The lower courses of  the  Cetina  and  Krka  rivers  in  Croatia have similar entrenched plains (Figure 9.41).
9.10.5 Submergence
Quaternary sea-level  history  reveals  that  the  level of  the  ocean  has  been  well  beneath  its  present  height for most of the past several hundred thousand  years (Chappell 2004; Figure 10.17). Karsts near the sea have therefore generally evolved in response to lower  base- levels than at present. Consequently, the positive shifts of baselevel  during  the  post-glacial  transgressions of the multiple glaciations have given rise to:

1. contracting vadose zones;
2. expanding phreatic zones, possibly with deeper stag- nant sections being removed from the layer of active groundwater circulation;
3. upward displacement of the saltwater–freshwater interface on the coast and hence of the associated zone of enhanced corrosion;
4. drowned  coastal  springs,  some  of  which  are   too deeply submerged to operate;
5. aggradation of coastal lowlands and infilling of caves by waterborne sediments.





Figure 9.39   Redevelopment of polygonal karst from rejuvenation of tower karst. Note that in (C) the isolated hills of the previous phase may become the tops of the highest tier of cones in the modern phase.




Figure 9.40   An ancient corrosion plain with residual hills on the Guizhou plateau, China, at 1200 m above sea level.





Figure 9.41   An uplifted corrosion plain in the Krka valley, Croatia. The plain truncates the structure and has been incised to form a rock terrace above the river.


In addition, tectonic subsidence has also contributed  to the submergence of some karsts. The Florida (Land and Paull 2000) and Yucatan (Beddows 2004) peninsulas and the Bay of Halong in Vietnam (Khang 1991,  Waltham and Hamilton-Smith 2004) provide outstanding examples of drowned karsts (Figure 9.42). A detailed  survey of drowned reefs and antecedent karst topography has been

undertaken   in   the   southeast   Hawaiian   Islands   using multibeam high-resolution bathymetric survey  coupled with videotransects and observations from  submersibles (Grigg et al. 2002). Flat-floored enclosed  depressions with steep walls and cliffs undercut by  notches provide evidence for the operation of subaerial karstic processes when sea levels were at least 120 m lower.





Figure 9.42   Partly submerged tower karst topography, Bay of Halong, Vietnam.




9.11 RESIDUAL HILLS ON KARST PLAINS
9.11.1 Tower karst landscapes
A  landscape  of  residual  carbonate  hills  scattered across a plain is referred to as tower karst. The residual

hills display a variety of shapes from tall sheer-sided towers (Figure 9.43) to cones or even hemispheres (Figure 9.44). Some are symmetrical in form, while others are asymmetric, reflecting the influence of dip or erosional processes. Although some residual hills rise




Figure 9.43   The sheer-sided karst tower in Guilin, Guangxi, at the base of which are the swamp notches shown in Figure 9.48.





Figure 9.44   Isolated cones in the Thousand Hills area of Bohol Island, Philippines. (Photograph by R. Wasson.)


directly from the plain, many surmount pedestals. Some towers are isolated and others are in groups rising from a common  base.  The  word  ‘tower’  therefore  subsumes  a myriad  of  forms,  and  a  variety  of  terms  in  different languages has been used to describe them,  including turm, mogote, cone, piton, hum and pepino.
  Tower karst can be visually spectacular. That of south- ern China must be said to be one of the world’s  great natural landscapes (Figure 9.45). Its evolution in  the Guilin region of Guangxi Province has been  explained by  Lu  (1986),  Zhu  (1988),  Yuan  (1991)  and Sweeting (1995). For Guizhou Province, Song et  al. (1993) and Chen et al. (1998) have published  substantial interna- tional collaborative studies.
  Chinese geomorphologists distinguish between isolated towers on a plain (termed fenglin or ‘peak forest’) and groups of residual hills that emerge from a common
bedrock   base   above   the   plain   (termed   fengcong   or ‘peak cluster’). Fengcong may develop as an accentuated
cockpit karst, the towers being residuals around large and deep  dolines  (¼ fengcong–depression  karst).  Or   the towers  may  be  separated  by  dry  valley   networks (¼ fengcong–valley karst), in which the valley floors are often incised by closed depressions separated by low cols.
  The international literature suggests four main genetic types of tower karst (Figure 9.46):

1. residual hills protruding from a planed carbonate surface veneered by alluvium;
2. 
residual hills emerging from carbonate inliers in a planed surface cut mainly across non-carbonate rock;
3. carbonate  hills  protruding  through  an  aggraded  sur- face of clastic sediments that buries the  underlying karst topography;
4. isolated carbonate towers rising from steeply sloping pedestal bases of various lithologies.

  The plains between the towers thus need not be  cut entirely across carbonate lithologies, even though  this often appears to be the case. Tower karsts  sometimes incorporate planed surfaces in other rocks, those in the Sierra de los Organos in Cuba (Panosˇ and  Stelcl 1968) and at Chillagoe, Queensland, Australia (Jennings 1982) being examples. Where deep residual  deposits cover the plain between the towers, as is  found at the coast in the Bay of Halong, Vietnam (Pham 1985), or in the
blanket sand plains between the towers (locally  known as  mogotes)  of  Puerto  Rico  (Monroe  1968),  the third type of terrain may exist or perhaps  aggraded versions
of  types  1  or  2.  An  added  complexity  in  all  of  these cases is that the intervening plain is frequently terraced. The terraces are often developed in the veneer of super- ficial deposits, although they can also be in  bedrock. Zhu (1988) commented that the bedrock  surface of the peak-forest plain near Guilin, which in many respects could be regarded as the global type-site of tower karst, is generally quite smooth, gently sloping towards the centre or towards one side. The overburden of sediment on the







Figure 9.45 (Upper) Tower karst (fenglin) along the River Li in Guangxi, China. Note that the shape of ‘towers’ varies from sheer- sided to conical. (Middle) Peak forest plain landscape beside the Lijiang, Guangxi. (Photograph by A. Waltham.) (Lower) Cone karst (fengcong) along the skyline transitional to tower karst in a valley in the Guilin region of Guangxi.





Figure 9.46   Types of tower karst. Reproduced with permission from Williams, P.W., Geomorphic inheritance and the development of tower karst. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 12(5), 453–465 © 1987 John Wiley and Sons.


plain is generally quite thin, although in places can attain 20–30 m thickness. Annual water-table fluctuation is of the order of 3–5 m.
9.11.2 History of a karst tower
Williams et al. (1986) investigated the evolution of  an individual tower at the edge of a fengcong group  at Guilin. The hill rises abruptly from the floodplain  of

the   River   Li.   A   reconnaissance   examination   of   the palaeomagnetism of deposits from caves at  different levels in the tower suggested that sediments up to 23 m above the floodplain possess normal geomagnetic polar- ity, but that some deposits above this have a  reversed magnetism. Alluvial sediments within lower caves in the tower   indicated   that   its   base   was   buried by fluvial aggradation and then re-exposed  following floodplain incision. The combined information indicated the tower





Figure 9.47   Model of karst tower evolution near Guilin, illustrating episodes of burial and exhumation that occur simultaneously with tower reduction by dissolution. Abandoned caves from earlier phases penetrate the tower and newer swamp notches and foot caves mark present and previous floodplain levels. Reproduced with permission from Williams, P.W., Geomorphic inheritance and the development of tower karst. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 12(5), 453–466, © 1987 John Wiley and Sons.


to have grown by the lowering of its base at a net rate not exceeding 23 mm ka—1 during the past 1 Myear. This evidence  reinforced  that  already  long  established  from the fossil record in other towers in southern China, where Pliocene to mid-Pleistocene vertebrates of the Stegodon– Ailuropoda faunal complex had been  recovered from high-level caves  (Kowalski  1965).   The  inescapable conclusion  is  that  karst  towers  in  this region are time-
transgressive landforms, being considerably older near their  summits  than  at  their  base,  although  showing  an oscillatory  age  pattern  in  detail  because  of  episodes of partial burial and re-excavation as morphological evolu- tion progressed (Figure 9.47).
  In Belize, McDonald (1979) demonstrated that the morphogenesis of towers located on low interfluves  is

governed by the progressive lowering of the alluvial plains by erosion caused by overland runoff. As the interfluvial plains are lowered bedrock slopes are formed around the towers, with angles between 20○ and 60○. Undermining of towers only seems to occur where rivers actually flow against their base or foot-caves receive water. Field observation points  towards similar  conclu- sions around Guilin.
  Evidence often cited for the effectiveness of lateral undercutting is the occurrence of swamp slots or notches (Figure 9.48) and cliff-foot caves. Jennings (1976)  and McDonald (1976a) mapped distributions of  foot-caves and swamp slots around isolated limestone  towers  in Selangor,  Malaysia,  and  Sulawesi,  Indonesia, respec- tively. Jennings  concluded  that   their  frequency  of





Figure 9.48   Swamp notches near the base of the karst tower illustrated in Figure 9.43. The different notches reflect changes in local water-table level.

occurrence was compatible with the supposed importance of lateral solution undercutting. McDonald measured 12 km of hill bases and found 31% to be composed  of foot-caves, some being relict, and 59% to be  character- ized by footslopes that owe their origin to processes other than solutional undermining. He  concluded (p. 89) that the ‘erosion of hillslope support and the retreat of lime- stone hillslopes appears not to  take place uniformly ... but takes place in scattered locations along hillsides.’ Our observations elsewhere  indicate that the relative sig- nificance of lateral  solution planation depends on the location of the  residual hill: if beside a river or on a floodplain, swamp-slot corrosion is very important, but if on a terrace above the reach of contemporary inundation then other  slope processes become comparatively more significant.
9.11.3 Hypotheses concerning tower karst evolution
Some  controversy  exists  concerning  the  way  in  which tower karst evolves. There are two main hypotheses:
1. tower   karst   (fenglin)   evolves   sequentially   from   a previous   cockpit-style   polygonal   karst   landscape (fengcong–depression);
2. it evolves directly.

These alternatives were examined by Williams (1987, 1988) and Zhu (1988), who reached similar conclusions. Williams found that both styles of evolution can  occur (Figure 9.49), but that the former appears to be the more common case. Zhu concluded that peak-cluster  depres- sion and peak-forest plain styles are two patterns of karst that can develop synchronously, the condition favouring peak-cluster depression development being   relatively high relief and a great depth to the water  table (see Figure 9.65). The transition from cockpit to tower karst is forced when the water table is reached; it is an important hydrological threshold that controls the  operation of solution processes. A major fall in the  water table as a consequence of uplift and rejuvenation causes tower karst to revert to cockpit karst, but a minor or gradual lowering of the water table promotes the  vertical extension of towers by incision around their  base and planation of a lower corrosion plain (Figure 9.39b).
  The sequential and direct modes of evolution can occur simultaneously in neighbouring regions, hence giving rise to the two synchronous patterns of karst that Zhu noted, because the course that is followed depends on the depth to the water table (Figure 9.49). In the sequential  case karst development starts on an upland with the water table deep beneath the surface. As a polygonal karst dissolves downwards  through  a  thick  carbonate   mass,  minor





Figure 9.49 Autogenic and mixed autogenic–allogenic settings associated with the development of cockpit and tower karsts. Reproduced with permission from Williams, P.W., Geomorphic inheritance and the development of tower karst. Earth  Surface Processes and Landforms 12(5), 453–465 © 1987 John Wiley and Sons.


adjustments to the doline (or cockpit) pattern will occur as beds or zones of different permeability are encountered, but otherwise the network geometry will remain until the water table is reached. When this  occurs, the epikarst merges with the phreatic zone and free vertical drainage is no longer possible.  Consequently, vertical deepening of depressions ceases and their floors begin to widen in the epiphreatic zone. The location and form of residual hills is inherited from the position and shape of hills around the enclosed basins of the earlier stage. Rainfall reduces these residual hills by corrosion, so that they become isolated on an  expanding corrosion plain. Where allogenic rivers cross the karst, they substantially aid the planation process by periodically introducing large volumes of  aggressive floodwaters. The tower forms can then be steepened-up at their base by swamp-notch and  foot-cave undercutting, resulting in a lower cliffed or  concave slope element.

Flooding can also lead to floodplain aggradation that may bury the base of some towers (Figure 9.47).
  The usual starting point for direct evolution of  tower karst is the slight uplift of a corrosion plain. If uplift is gradual and the water table is at a shallow  depth, then surface streams will be maintained during  uplift. The streams gradually incise and cones may develop on their interfluves. When uplift ceases or decelerates, floodplain widening then isolates these  cones. However, if uplift accelerates the drainage will  be  captured  underground and  valleys  will  become  dry, resulting in a fengcong– valley landscape (Figure 9.31), where cones are reduced by parallel slope retreat (Xiong 1992) in the absence of swamp or fluvial   processes.   Even   without   surface streams,  if  the  water table is at a shallow depth, as on the flanks of  a fold along an inflow or outflow margin, limestone  blocks can be isolated by intersecting joint




corridors. If these widen at the level of the water table, the residual blocks will become isolated as towers or tower groups on a plain. As in the first case, the influence of allogenic rivers is to accelerate the rate of tower development.
  The direct style of tower evolution is also known in the semi-arid zone. For example, in the limestone ranges of northwest Australia, karst towers are isolated on a lime- stone pediment that evolved by replacement of an upland erosion surface (section 10.2). No previous cockpit-style of evolution was involved (Jennings and Sweeting 1963). This karst also has some similarity to the giant grikeland or labyrinth karst in the Nahanni region of northern Canada  (Figure  9.13)  described  by  Brook  and   Ford (1978). As the labyrinth of widened grikes,   closed depressions and small poljes is expanded, steep residual towers to 50 m high are left emerging from uneven karst margin plains.
  Both courses of tower karst evolution probably occurred simultaneously in the Guilin karst, although case 1 could be dominant. Two lines of evidence support this. First, where hillslope angles of fengcong–depression karst are similar to slope angles on fenglin karst, the first case of evolution is possible because it supports the inheritance of tower form from an earlier stage. In Guilin, Tang and Day (2000) found mean slope angles of towers to range from 60○ to 75○ (mean 62.4○), there being  no significant difference in the mean slope angle and slope- angle distribution between towers in fenglin or fengcong. Second, as polygonal karst evolves, the   water table lowers and multilevel caves form. The  occurrence of large-diameter cave remnants  at   different  heights  in towers indicates dismemberment  of large cave systems and so favours case 1  evolution. However, in case 2 evolution, multilevel  foot-caves would also be found if periodic uplift occurred. The well-defined tiers of tower summits in the  Guilin–Yangshuo area indicate episodes of uplift and stability. In fact, the entire karst landscape around Guilin has had a long period of evolution invol- ving   considerable  tectonic  and  palaeoenvironmental change, as indicated amongst other things by Cretaceous clastic red beds, which are found unconformably on Palaeozoic  limestones  at  many  altitudes  around  Guilin, including  on  the  sides  of  karst  towers  (Drogue and Bidaux 1996). Although there was  undoubtedly a pre- Cretaceous palaeokarst in the region (Yuan 1991), most of the landforms found in the area  today were probably developed during the stripping of these red beds follow- ing uplift and  climatic  change   in the Tertiary and Quaternary. Therefore, both in southern China and else- where in the world, we must  admit different histories and styles of evolution of tower karst, not all of which

are associated with the humid tropics or subtropics. Computer modelling of karst has more to contribute to the issue of how tower karst evolves (section 9.16).
9.12 DEPOSITIONAL AND CONSTRUCTIONAL KARST FEATURES
9.12.1 Case-hardening of residual hills and limestone surfaces
Weathering crusts are often observed on limestone  out- crops in tropical to warm temperate environments. When carbonate-rich waters infuse soil, alluvium or weathered rock  in   regions  where   potential  evaporation exceeds rainfall, chemical precipitation may occur in the profile.
The surface itself may become indurated, a process known as case-hardening that significantly increases its strength (as discussed briefly in sections 5.5 and 7.9). Or there is dissolution of carbonate clasts near the top of the
deposit succeeded by aragonite and calcite precipitation lower down, to produce a calcium carbonate layer termed calcrete (or caliche or kunkur). Its nature, origin and
distribution has been explained by Goudie (1983), Wright and Tucker (1991) and Nash (2004). There are three principal modes;  as  dispersed  intergranular cements,  as nodules and as consolidated sheets that amount to  the insertion of a new calcareous conglomerate bed within, for example, a soil or a terrace gravel. Gradations between these modes are common. Sheets up to 1 m  thick are reported and, like laterites, are usually resistant.
  The significance of case-hardening for karst was  first appreciated in the Caribbean region by Monroe (1964) in Puerto   Rico   and   Panosˇ   and   Stelcl   (1968)  in  Cuba. Induration of the rock produces an outer shell of greater strength than the interior material, and so is particularly important in the development of  karst landforms on highly porous, mechanically weak  and  diagenetically immature  lithologies.  Case-hardening invests  the  rock with increased  strength and resistance to erosion and collapse. It also  renders the surface much less perme- able, with porosity being reduced by a factor of ten or more. Thus it is a type of vadose diagenesis (section 2.3). The zone  of induration closely follows the topography (Figure 9.50) and on average is 1 to 2 m thick, but it can vary from 0.5 to 10 m (Ireland 1979).
  In Cuba, Panosˇ and Stelcl (1968) found case-hardening on practically all bare limestone  surfaces, the thickest crusts developing on the most  porous rocks, especially where the surfaces are relatively old (pre-Pleistocene). In Puerto Rico, Monroe (1964, 1966, 1968) considered case- hardening to be   thickest on the windward sides of mogotes,  encouraged by their more frequent wetting





Figure 9.50 Variation in thickness of case-hardening on mogotes from north-central Puerto Rico. Note the extension of casehardening beneath the Blanket Sands, indicating that the sands were deposited after case-hardening had already  occurred. Reproduced form Ireland, P., Geomorphological variations of ‘case hardening’ in Puerto Rico. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geomorphologie, Suplement-Band, 32, 9–20, © 1979 E. Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers.


and  drying.  This  was  offered  as  an  explanation  of  the apparent asymmetry of mogotes first observed by Thorp (1934), but work by Day (1978) showed that the asym- metry does not have a simple windward–leeward pattern. Ivanovich and Ireland (1984) proposed a model for case- hardening with two main diagenetic  processes. In lime- stones composed of more than 50% fossils, the dominant process is precipitation into  solution cavities. In rocks with less than about 20%  fossils, the main process is aggrading neomorphism, a  wet recrystallization process resulting in the progressive increase of microspar. During these processes total carbonate porosity is reduced from about 30% to 5% or less. They suggested that formation of an indurated layer 1 m thick could occur within 10 000 to 20 000 year,  assuming a constant denudation rate of
between 50 and 100 mm ka—1.
  A  more  subtle  form  of  case-hardening  occurs   on emerged coral reefs. These rocks are mechanically much stronger than dune sands or the chalky  limestones of Puerto Rico, but can also be extremely porous, depending on the facies. Primary pore spaces within coral tend to be very large, typically centimetres  or decimetres across. Dissolution near the surface leads to carbonate precipita- tion in the voids a few metres  down the profile, banded flowstone and silt (from soil) being common deposits. In this way the reef rock in the upper vadose zone is rendered

less permeable as the terrain is denuded. The relief  of uplifted atoll reef crests can be accentuated into ‘limestone walls’ when dissolution is greater beneath a soil-covered former lagoon floor in the interior than  around the encircling, exposed, case-hardened main  reef. Santo and Minamidaito islands provide good  examples (Strecker et al. 1986, Urushibara-Yoshino 2003).
  Case-hardening is particularly well developed on aeolianites (calcareous dune limestones) as discussed in section 7.9. Jennings (1968) recognized that lithification and karstification are likely to occur simultaneously, for
the same agents are responsible for both. Therefore  he proposed the concept of syngenetic karst  development. Rain  falling  directly  onto  the  dune  sands is responsible for their case-hardening, but point recharge by allogenic
streams on the inland side of the dune fields is res- ponsible  for  the  numerous  caves  and  collapse  dolines. Water flow channelled by the topography of underlying impermeable rocks can direct caves and  ‘underprint’ alignment of collapse dolines at the  surface (Twidale and Bourne 2000).
  Induration in calcareous aeolianites is often charac- terized by vertical piping because dissolution and any re-precipitation occurs where percolation is guided by tree roots. The pipes formed are typically 0.3 to 0.6 m diameter and up to 20 m deep in Australian dune  calcarenites




(Grimes 2002); similar ‘pit caves’ are found on  young carbonate  islands  in  the  Caribbean  (Mylroie  and Carew 1995). A notable feature of the pipes in dune sands is that they are lined with an indurated skin.  When they are truncated and stand in relief, they can  be mistaken for petrified forests. Should the soil profile be deeply eroded, intervening solution residuals between the pipes can stand proud and give rise to impressively pinnacled ‘tombstone’ terrains (Figure 9.51); note the analogy with the thermal water sheaths shown in Figure 7.29b.
9.12.2 Tufa deposits, dams, terraces, waterfalls and mound springs
Springs, waterfalls and outflowing rivers in karst  often display the precipitates known as tufa and  travertine (sections 2.2 and 8.3). Overhanging cliffs  may also be draped with tufa stalactites of diverse   morphology
(Figure 9.52). Many of the deposits and forms that are found arise partly through the intervention of biological activity, as do some erosional forms. Such features were termed biokarst by Viles (1984) whose suggested typol-
ogy is presented in Table 9.4. T.D.Ford (1989), Ford and Pedley (1996) and Pentecost (1995) have reviewed  the occurrence of travertine deposits in Europe, North America and Asia Minor.
  Calcareous tufa is mixed with organic remains and so the relative importance of organic and inorganic pro- cesses in its formation is not immediately obvious. The roles of a range of cyanobacteria, algae and higher plants in the accumulation of tufa have been investigated by the Association Francaise de Karstologie (1981), Chafetz and Folk (1984), Viles and Pentecost (1999) and Carthew et al. (2006). Drysdale et al. (2002) examined hydrochemi- cal factors influencing deposition. These studies demon- strated that both inorganic and organic deposition occur, but that organic processes are much more important than previously assumed. Chafetz and Folk provided convin- cing evidence that bacterially precipitated calcite forms a large percentage of the carbonate in many tufa and travertine accumulations in Italy and the USA, exceeding 90% of the framework grains comprising some  lake-fill deposits. Their investigations found individual accumula- tions to range up to 85 m thick and to cover hundreds of square kilometres. They concluded that  harsh  environ- mental   situations   (e.g.   hot   geothermal water) favour inorganic deposits, while  increasingly more moderate conditions favour    organically precipitated  material. Many other researchers have since confirmed these find- ings. Chafetz and Folk also recognized five morphologi- cal  variations of surface tufa deposition: (i) waterfall,
(ii) lake-fill, (iii) sloping mound or fan, (iv) terraced

mound and (v) fissure ridge. Waterfall or cascade depos- its accumulate at the loci of both increased agitation and a place where algae and mosses can readily attach and grow. Tufa accumulation at such sites can produce dams and pond substantial lakes. The 100-m-thick  travertines of Zafarraya Polje (section 9.9) are the remains of a great fan downstream of a dam.
  The world’s best known modern impoundment of water by tufa dams are the Plitvice lakes in Croatia (Bozicevic and Biondic 1999, Bonacci and Roje-Bonacci  2004), a World Heritage site. Sixteen lakes have formed along a
6.5 km reach of the upper Korana valley (Figure 9.53). They lie in a gorge immediately downstream of the confluence of two main tributaries, one flowing from dolomite and already containing tufa, and the other from limestone and without calcareous deposition. The satura- tion index is over 3 and pH between 8.2 and 8.4. An increase in Mg in already saturated carbonate waters is known to induce  supersaturation  when  its  concentration exceeds about 7%, because of the common ion effect (Chapter 3). Thus the mixing of the water  from these two streams could be responsible for much of the deposition, although an ecosystem in which bacteria, algae and mosses play an important part is also significant (Chafetz et al. 1994). The tufa  barriers  are  up to 30 m high, with compound dams holding back  lakes as deep as 46 m. In the largest lake
(Kozjak, 0.815 km2), a  drowned dam  is found 4.6 m
beneath the water surface; presumably a consequence of a downstream tufa dam growing upwards at a greater rate.
  An outstanding example of dominantly inorganic deposition of calcite from geothermal water is found  at the travertine terraces of Pamukkale (Figure 9.54),  a World Heritage site in Turkey (Simsek 1999, Nicod 2002, Dilsiz and Gu˝nay 2004). In addition,  impressive tufa-dammed lakes also occur in China at  the World heritage sites of Jiuzhaigou and Huanglong  in Sichuan
Province (Sweeting 1995). The tufa deposition rate at Huanglong is estimated to be 0.1 cm a—1 (Yoshimura et al. 2004). Similar lakes with barriers up to 20 m high extend 15 km down a canyon at Band-i-Amir in Afghanistan (Brooks and Gebauer 2004).
  Springs can produce stepped mound deposits, the water flowing through radially disposed pools dammed by tufa barriers similar to rimstone pools in caves. Sulphate and carbonate deposits often occur around artesian springs in arid regions, the spring water emerging at the top of  a
mound of its own construction; hence the term mound
spring. The largest known is Solomon’s Prison in Iran, which rises 69 m, and other examples occur in Australia. Elongate fissure ridges form where spring waters upwell through fissures running along mound crests. By contrast, tufaceous waterfall deposits can have a tapered dome





Figure 9.51 (Upper) Soil pipes dissolved in aeolian calcarenite (dune limestone), probably closely associated with former tree roots (that exude CO2). (Lower) The ‘Pinnacles’ north of Perth, Western Australia. These are calcite cemented residuals developed between vertical soil pipes in indurated dune limestone, the overlying soil having been stripped off (mainly by wind) in the seasonally arid coastal environment.







Figure 9.52 (Upper) Bulbous tufa stalactites on the overhan- ging edge of a seasonally flooded enclosed depression, Northern Territory, Australia. Water submerges the face by 2–4 m in the wet season.  (Photograph  by  D. Karp.) (Lower)  Eccentric  tufa stalactites suspended from overhanging cliff in Minas  Gerais, Brazil.


Table 9.4 A tentative typology of biokarst forms (Repro- duced from  Viles, H.  (1984) Biokarst:  review and  prospect. Progress in Physical Geography, 8(4), 523–42).





Coastal biokarst Root grooves ‘Zookarst’

form acquired from the trajectory of cascading water, up to 40 m high in the case of the Aquidaban Falls in  the Bodoquena Plateau in Brazil.
  Tufa  and  travertine  deposits  are  often  datable  radio- metrically (chiefly, by U series methods) or by means of their fossil fauna and flora assemblages. Their occurrence at palaeospring sites in dry regions is important in studies of early humans, because stone tools are quite frequently found within them (e.g. Schwarcz 1993). On terraces they can provide lengthy  chronological and palaeoclimatolo- gical records, e.g. in central Spain (Martin-Algarra et al. 2003; Ordonez et al. 2005). Particularly notable is a case near Malaga, Spain, where Delannoy et al. (1997) have identified six large phases of travertine accumulation that they consider to  represent episodes from the Messinian to the Holocene. Carthew et al. (2006) discuss fossil tufa facies in  monsoonal Australia and emphasize their sig- nificance for palaeoclimatic reconstruction.
9.13 SPECIAL FEATURES OF EVAPORITE TERRAINS
Evaporite deposits are widespread (Figure 1.3) and sup- port a wide range of karst features in all climates. Because of their great solubility (section 4.3) salt rocks are exposed only in the most arid or cold regions such as Death   Valley,   the   Dead   Sea,   the   Qinghai   (Tibetan) plateau and the high Arctic islands of  Canada. Even there, individual outcrops are limited to  a few square kilometres at most. Gypsum is much  more stable in outcrop than salt, but its karst is still  best  expressed where  mean  annual  precipitation  is  low. Gypsum karst is widespread in the dry midwest–southwest of the USA, in the northern interior  of Canada, the Arkhangel’sk, Bashkir and Perm regions of Russia and Ukraine, across





Figure 9.53 The Plitvice Lakes in the Korana valley, Croatia, are impounded by tufa dams. Reproduced from Bonacci, O. and Roje- Bonacci, T. (2004) Plitvice Lakes, Croatia, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp 597–598.


Figure 9.54   Calcite travertine (or sinter) terraces deposited by geothermal waters at Pamukkale, Turkey. Springs with temperatures up to  59○C emerge  along a  fault line  and yield  a flow  of 0.39 m3 s—1. Calcite  deposition occurs by  CO2 degassing  enhanced by turbulent flow.






Figure 9.55 Typical gypsum karst doline landscape in the Iren River basin, Pre-Urals, Russia. The area mapped is less than 0.2 km2. Reproduced with permission from Klimchouk, A. and Andrejchuk, V., Sulphate rocks as an arena for karst  develop- ment. International Journal of Speleology 25 (3-4), 9–20 © 1996 International Congress of Speleology.
the Middle East and in northeastern China. Outcrops may amount to thousands of square kilometres.
  Many classic gypsum karst studies were conducted in Russia and the Ukraine (Gorbunova 1979, Pechorkin and   Bolotov   1983,   Pechorkin   1986).   Nicod   (1976), Forti and Grimandi (1986), Cooper (1996) and Gutie˙rrez and  Gutie˙rrez 1998)  have presented  western European work. Quinlan et al. (1986) and Johnson (1996) reviewed gypsum karst in the USA, and Ford (1997) in Canada. A global review has been edited by Klimchouk et al. (1996).
  
Evaporite   terrains   display   many   of   the   landforms typical of carbonate karst, including varieties  of karren, dolines, blind valleys  and  poljes.   Gorbunova (1979) asserted that dolines are the most  widespread features in the gypsum karsts of the former Soviet Republic, and this is true elsewhere (Figure 9.55). Collapse and suffo- sion processes are more prominent in doline development than in most carbonate karsts  (Figure  9.56),  the  former because interstratal dissolution is of much greater extent and the latter  because, in Russia, Ukraine and Canada, great tracts  are veneered with glacial debris or loess. Nevertheless, wholly solutional dolines are also common. In parts of the Pecos Valley of Texas and New Mexico and in the Pinega valley of northern Russia they are packed  to  form  a  high-density  polygonal  karst  (Figure 9.57). Sauro (1996) provided an excellent aerial illustra- tion of a doline landscape with a honeycomb structure in the Baisun-Tau mountain area between  Uzbekistan and Tagikistan; and Dogan and Yesilyurt (2004), Klimchouk (2004) and Waltham et al. (2005)  illustrated polygonal karst in Turkey. Gu¨nay (2002) described associated lakes and springs.
  In the gypsum karsts of Perm and Bashkir, Gorbu- nova (1979) reported doline densities of 32 and 10 km—2 respectively, although densities up to 1000 km—2 some- times  occur  at  the  crown  of  folds  or  at  contacts  with other lithologies. Densities of 1100–1500 km—2  occur in the Italian Alps where hydraulic gradients are  high (Belloni et al. 1972). Dolines there  have  a   mean diameter of only 5 m. The densely packed  schlotten type of doline or large karren shaft have mean diameters of 0.5–1.5 m and depths of 0.3–3.3 m in Newfoundland and Nova Scotia. Nearest-neighbour R  values for 21




Figure 9.56 (Left) Doline ponds in Wood Buffalo National Park, northern Alberta, Canada. These are collapse dolines propagated through dolomite cover beds as a consequence of interstratal dissolution of gypsum. (Parks Canada photograph) (Right) Vermilion Creek doline, near Norman Wells, Northwest Territories, Canada; Latitude 65○N. This spectacular feature measures 180 × 100 m and is approximately 40 m deep to the waterline. It is a collapse of Holocene age through calcareous shales overlying gypsum. (Photograph by R.O. van Everdingen.)






Figure 9.57 (Upper) Intensely dissected solution forms in gypsum that are transitional between karren field and polygonal karst. For scale, the trees in the background are 5–7 m in height. Pinega River valley, east of Arkhangel’sk, Russia. (Photograph by V.Nikolaev.) (Lower) Gypsum tent produced by expansion following hydration of anhydrite to gypsum, Sorbas, Spain. (Photograph by J. Calafora.)

different sites there mostly fall between 1.5 and 2.0, i.e. there  is  regular  packing  of  sink-points  (Stenson  1990). Hypothetical densities extrapolate to 10 000 km—2, but here (and in the Pinega gypsum karst near Arkhangel’sk, Russia) they are confined to escarpment  edges where hydraulic gradients are greatest (Figure  9.58). Elongated

closed   depressions   along   escarpment   edges   are   also referred to as karst trenches (Klimchouk and Andrejchuk 1996).
  Breccia pipes are common features of gypsum karst that are created by progressive stoping above sites of
interstratal  dissolution  (Figure  9.59).  Although  well





Figure 9.58   Model for the progressive development of schlotten topography in massive gypsum near Windsor, Nova  Scotia, Canada. The features are of Holocene age.

developed in carbonate rocks, they are most abundant and largest  above  gypsum/anhydrite  and  salt.  Breccia  pipes may exhibit one of four dynamic/topographic states:

1. active, and propagating upwards towards the  surface but not yet expressed there;
2. active or inactive, expressed at the surface as a closed depression or a depression with a surface outflow channel;
3. inactive, and buried by later strata (¼ palaeokarst);
4. inactive and  standing up  as a  positive relief  feature because   the  breccia   (probably   cemented)   is more resistant than the upper cover strata.

Quinlan (1978) reviewed the nature and distribution  of an estimated 5000 breccia pipes over salt or gypsum in

the USA. They range in diameter from 1 to 1000 m and  in depth up to 500 m. Similar features interrupt the potash mine workings of Saskatchewan (Figure 9.60) where  they  may  propagate  from  depths  as  great   as 1200 m (i.e. beneath 1000 m or more of cover  strata). Numerous examples of deep breccia pipes are also known from China.
  Solution subsidence troughs (Olive 1957) are elon-
gated depressions created by interstratal solution. The largest solution-induced depositional basins tend to occur along the margins of the great interstratal halite deposits, creating  a  solution  form  that  may  be  represented  by  a
shallow salt slope at the surface (Figure 9.59). Dissolu-
tion can begin as soon as the salt is buried, and the immediately overlying strata (usually, dolomites, gypsum/anhydrite  or  redbeds)  may  be  comprehensively





Figure 9.59   Model for the development of breccia pipes and residuals, subsidence troughs and solution-induced subsidence basins.





Figure 9.60 Features of the interstratal dissolution of the Elk Point (Devonian) salt deposits beneath the Prairie Provinces of Canada.

brecciated. Figure 9.60 shows the Elk Point Formation of Canada, a sequence of salts with lesser gypsum and redbeds that accumulated to thicknesses of 50–500 m in  a lagoon barred by the Presqu’ile Reef (Figure 2.12) during the Devonian Period. It is now at a depth of 200– 2400 m beneath later carbonate and clastic rocks. Where the burial is shallow along the eastern edge, the dissolu- tion front has receded an average of 130 km along a distance of 1600 km. The Hummingbird Trough is a re-entrant in the deeply buried southwest side, where
200–300 m of salt has been entirely removed over an area of 25 000 km2 (De Mille et al. 1964). The Trough is now inert,  a  palaeokarst  feature,  but  the  eastern  dissolution front continues to recede. Its mean rate of  recession, averaged over the 365 Myear since Late Devonian times, is 36 cm a—1.
  Many small examples of solution subsidence  troughs occur in the gypsum plain south of Carlsbad  Caverns, being 0.7–15 km in length, 100–1500 m wide but no more than 5–10 m deep (Quinlan et al. 1986). Larger troughs tend to be infilled by terrigeneous or  other sediments
and so lack topographic expression in most instances. Quinlan (1978) termed them solution-induced deposi- tional basins. They are noted in the palaeokarst reports of



many  nations.  Many  continue  to  be  active  but  do  not appear as strong topographic depressions, because  the rate  of  sedimentation  approximately  equals  the  rate of subsidence. Intermediate-scale samples (5–100 km long, 5–250 km wide and with 100–500 m of  subsidence and sedimentation) are reported in Canada (Tsui and Cruden 1984), New Mexico and Texas  (Bachman 1976, 1984), and Spain (Gutie´rrez et al. 2001). Pleistocene and Holo- cene rates of subsidence  in active examples in these
regions are estimated at 5–10 cm ka—1.
9.13.1 Positive relief features created by diapiric or hydration processes
Salt has a low density (2.16 g cm—3). Consequently, when considerable deposits of it are buried by denser strata it deforms in a cellular manner and flows   upwards into them (section 2.3; Jackson et al. 1995, Alsop et al. 1996). The displaced salt approaches or  emerges  at  the surface  in  the  form  of  stocks  (diapirs), dikes and sills (canopies). Diapirs are also   known in gypsum  and have been described in the Andes (Salomon and Bustos 1992) and Spain (Calaforra  and Pulido-Bosch 1999). These are not karst  landforms, but they support solution features that are.
  Diapirs are initiated beneath 2000 and 10 000 m of cover strata and rise episodically. Calculated rates range from  0.1  to   1.0 mm a—1    in  the   Gulf  of   Mexico   to
4.6 mm a—1   in   northwest   Yemen   and   6–7 mm a—1    in Israel. Some of the most active modern diapir formation occurs in the Zagros Mountains of Iran,  where conver-
gence of European and Arabian crustal plates is squeez- ing deep salt and extruding it more rapidly. The crests of diapirs in the Great Kavir Province of Iran rise 1.5 km above the desert surface.
  Emerged salt diapirs generally range from 2 to 20 km in diameter. In wetter climates they are decapitated  by groundwater dissolution, but may still create  fractured dome-shaped hills up to 100 m in height because of the displacement of insoluble superficial  rocks. In dry and cold regions relief of 500 m or more can be created, with an exposed core of salt (Figure 9.61).
  Where the extrusion is slow the salt displays rillenkar- ren, wallkarren, schlotten and pinnacle karst. Where it is more rapid it flows like macrocrystalline ice to create salt glaciers or namakiers (from namak, the Farsi for salt).
These display standard glacier features such as crevasses, icefalls and ogives (overthrust ridges). Salt-glacier flow rates in the Zagros Mountains average a few metres per year, i.e. one or two orders of magnitude slower than in conventional mountain glaciers formed of ice. The salt flow is episodic, resulting from recrystallization





Figure 9.61   Surface expression of salt domes in the Laristan Desert, Iran. Reproduced from Jennings, J.N., Karst Geomorphology ©
1985 Blackwell Publishing.




following the addition of water (Urai et al. 1986). Water content as low as 0.1% by weight can induce the process; thus it may operate sporadically in the driest climates.
  Anhydrite is hydrated to gypsum by a sequence of dissolution and reprecipitation (section 2.4), increasing the volume by about 63% under open-system conditions at  shallow  depths  where  water  may  enter  or  leave  the system (James 1972). Hydration expansion and/or  the viscous (diapiric) flow of the newly formed gypsum can create many landforms. Features such as gypsum  tents (below) appear to be attributable to hydration  alone, probably also involving weathering crust  formation by recrystallization, while undoubted gypsum intrusions are commonplace in highly deformed redbed  and dolomite sections. Weathering crust features on  gypsum surfaces are described by Macaluso and Sauro (1996).
  Gypsum tumuli (bubbles or tents) are hollow domes
of freshly formed gypsum that are round or elliptical in plan  (Breish  and  Wefer  1981,  Pulido-Bosch  1986, Macaluso and Sauro 1996). Small examples are a  few tens of centimetres in diameter, but most described in the literature are 2–10 m in diameter and up to 2.5 m  in height (Figure 9.57). These are hydration features created by  compressive  and  shear  stresses  that   separate  the gypsum crust from underlying gypsum  or anhydrite. Stenson (1990) studied their fresh  development in the floor of a gypsum quarry in  Nova Scotia that had been abandoned only 35 year  earlier. In an area of a few hectare there were 69 new tents, ranging 0.8 to 8.2 m in diameter. Crustal hydration  was apparent, but here the process may have been aided by mechanical ‘pop-up’ due to lithostatic pressure release in an artificial excavation.
  Karst domes in the New Mexico gypsum karst are
larger features, up to 200 m in diameter and 10 m in height. The cores are of gypsum and insoluble  residue, with disturbed dolomite or clastic beds or   calcrete crusts draped around their annular rims.   Bachman (1987) suggested that they are the surficial  remnants  of pervasive  near-surface  salt  dissolution  that has caused general subsidence with projections  remaining above insoluble  remnants;  the  domes   being  part  of  those remnants.
  More dramatic are domes and anticlines in the gypsum terrains of northern Canada described by van Everdingen (1981) and Tsui and Cruden (1984) and similar features in the Arkhangel’sk gypsum karst of Russia  (Korotkov 1974). These features range from 10 to 1000 m or more in length or diameter, and up to 25 m in height in a majority of cases. Many are highly fractured, with  individual blocks being displaced by heaving and  sliding. At the extreme they become a megabreccia, an upthrust jumble of large blocks. The largest reported Canadian example is

a steep-limbed anticline that extends along the shore of a lake for a distance of 30 km and is up to 175 m in height. Its crest is marked by ‘chaotic structure and trench-like lineaments’ (Aitken and Cook 1969). These features may be due to post-glacial hydration processes or to diapiric injection  of  gypsum  during  times  of  rapidly changing glacial ice loading (section 10.3). These are also regions of widespread modern permafrost, so  that accumulation of ground ice in initial fractures probably contributes to the heaving and other displacement.
   A sabkha sequence of 250–300 m of dolomites  and anhydrite underlies 50 000 km2 of the Mackenzie  River valley around 66○N in Canada. Where exposed in outcrop in mountain ranges on either side, hydration and dissolu- tion have reduced this to a multiphase dolomite breccia cemented by calcite and with minor residual  gypsum (Figure 2.9). It thins progressively from ~140 m at new outcrop to zero higher up the mountains. The  top few metres are further case-hardened by evaporitic  precipita-
tion. The hardened crust is breached where sinking streams are able to penetrate the ~50 m of permafrost below. This produces a spectacular ‘dissolution drape’  topography of fragments of the crust tilting and  sliding down into the karst depressions (Hamilton and Ford 2001).
  The final category of positive relief features associated with  evaporite  karsts  are  cemented  sinkhole  or  breccia pipe fillings that come to be exposed as  residual hills when strata surrounding them are  preferentially eroded, as noted above. Breccia pipe residuals are normally a few tens or hundreds of metres in diameter and rise 5–40 m above the general land surface. More than 1000 such hills are mapped in the plains of western Oklahoma (Fay and Hart 1978). Shallow hills with a doughnut form (a central depression) in that  region are believed to be doline fillings, rather than breccia pipe fillings (Myers 1962).
  Castiles are steeper, irregular masses of secondary
calcite rising 3 to 30 m above the Gypsum Plain  south of Carlsbad Caverns, New Mexico (Kirkland and Evans 1980, Hill 1995). These formed to replace gypsum locally at the base of the Castile Formation at the  start of the H2S-generating process described  in  section  3.6  and Figure 3.11. They are exposed by  the preferential dis- solution of the remaining gypsum  along the margins of the Plain.
9.14 KARSTIC FEATURES OF QUARTZOSE  AND OTHER ROCKS
The dissolution of silicate rocks yields a range of land- forms that vary in scale from karren to large  enclosed depressions, although formation of the larger features is aided by mechanical erosion. Robinson and  Williams




(1994)  reviewed  such  features  in  Europe  and  a  global review has been provided by Wray (1997).  Dissolution forms on silicate rocks are found most  widely in warm temperate to tropical regions, where  the legacy of long periods of chemical denudation has not been destroyed by vigorous mechanical processes   such as glaciation, although karren forms on quartz  sandstones and quart- zites are also well known in  colder regions. Joints and other fissures provide the avenues by which water pene- trates quartzose rocks.  Dissolution then proceeds along crystal boundaries.
  Martini (1979) expressed the opinion that karst cannot normally  develop  on  quartzitic  rocks,  because  released quartz grains then require removal by  mechanical pro- cesses. However, we explained in section 1.2 that land- forms developed on these rocks can be considered karst if they are produced predominantly  by dissolution, but are fluvio-karst when the intervention of running water is essential for their development. Landscapes on quartzites and siliceous sandstones  clearly occupy the transition zone between normal  fluvial landscapes and karst. Drai- nage remains surficial in most cases and over most of the area. There is little dense epikarst development on quart- zites, implying that deep solutional attack is restricted to the biggest fractures and bedding planes, so that any karst that develops is comparatively impoverished.
9.14.1 Karren in basalts, granites and quartzites
Although quartz and silicate minerals have low solubility in   water   at   surface   pressures   and   temperatures   (see Chapter 3), given enough time and not too  vigorous effacing effects from competing processes,   such as freeze–thaw or sand abrasion, the result of  dissolution will become apparent, and is commonly  expressed in dissolution pans and hydraulically controlled linear forms of karren such as rundkarren and rinnenkarren. These can develop quite quickly as is evident from flutings coursing down the sides of  neolithic granite menhir in Brittany, France, where rinnenkarren developed at the rate of a few tens of  millimetres per thousand years (Lageat et al. 1994).  See Williams and Robinson (1994) for a review of weathering flutes on siliceous rocks in Europe. Rund- karren are also commonly found on basaltic lava  flows in humid warm temperate regions such as  Northland, New Zealand.
  Martini (2004) has reviewed silicate karst research and pointed out that the most spectacular karren features are developed by weathering under soil; a process that is conducive to progressive formation of sand and clay along joints and bedding planes. By erosion of the soft, deeply weathered material, he explained that unaltered or

only moderately weathered quartzite rock is then left standing as irregular pinnacles (Figure 4.10). He  noted that in areas with dry seasons the pinnacles are  often indurated  at  the  surface  by  iron  oxides  or  by  an opal matrix deposited by evaporation. Fields of  pinnacles formed in this way in South Africa were  estimated to have evolved in less than two million years.
9.14.2 Caves and closed depression in quartzites
Most caves in quartzose rocks are developed by an essential combination of dissolution and mechanical ero- sion  by  running  water.  They  are  therefore  fluvio-karst features. Although dissolutional widening  of joints and bedding planes is critical to their inception, under surface temperatures and pressures mechanical   processes are always heavily implicated as the  dominant agent of stream passage enlargement.   Nevertheless, although caves in quartzite are not  normally pure karst features (quartzite caves produced  by hydrothermal dissolution are the exception), the  silicate speleothems sometimes found in them are,  because they are formed primarily from the products of dissolution.
  Cave networks develop close to the escarpment edges of  quartzitic  plateaux,  especially  on  the  downdip  side, and are usually associated with unloading  fractures and gravity tectonics (see section 7.3.10 and  Figure 7.18). Martini (2004) noted that these systems  do not usually extend more than a few hundred metres from resurgences, although exceptionally they may be  several kilometres;
e.g. Sistema Roraima Sur in Venezuela is 10.82 km long (Urbani 2005). Most frequently these caves tend to  run parallel with or develop close to plateau edges  rather than develop under central parts. However, the  widened fissures capture surface streams and so enable an inva- sion style of speleogenesis. The majority of  quartzite caves are vadose and active, although  abandoned dry levels are known. Fissuring often  guides  water  to  the base   of   the   quartzose   formation, where caves may develop at the contact  with underlying impermeable rocks. Speleogenesis is  by  piping  through  zones  of deeply  weathered  quartzite that has been transformed into friable  neosandstone by the process illustrated in Figure 4.10.  Thus two steps are involved: weathering first,  followed by mechanical removal of sand. The weathering stage may be extremely protracted. The onset  of  the  second  stage  requires  triggering  by  uplift or regional incision, because it requires a  hydraulic gradient steep enough to generate turbulent  water flow of sufficient velocity to permit the  entrainment and transport of sands. Piping and removal of sand starts at the spring and works headwards.  Hence most caves in





Figure 9.62 Stylized depiction of landforms and water circulation on a small plateau (tepuy) in the quartzites of Roraima, Venezuela. Surface drainage from the centre of the plateau is absorbed down joints around its margins: 1, remnant of an old erosion surface; 2, tepuy surface; 3, lower platform; 4, ledge; 5, cliffs; 6, large towers in the dissected edge; 7, towers and mushroom rocks on the upper surface; 8, small towers amongst channel systems; 9, streams and ponds; 10, canyons and fissures at plateau edge; 11, fissure system; 12, depressions; 13, depression truncated by cliff retreat; 14, collapsed depression; 15, elongated shaft in fracture zone absorbing surface streams; 16, talus; 17, resurgences from caves; 18, waterfalls; 19, talus at cliff foot; 20, resurgences from bedding planes. Reproduced from Galan, C. and Lagarde, J. (1988) Morphologie et evolution des caverns et formes superficielles dans les quartzites du Roraima (Venezuela). Karstologia, 11–12, 49–60.


quartzose rocks are vadose features. They are prefer- entially developed in sites where high hydraulic gradients are attainable, and they are excavated mechani- cally along previously weathered fissures. In most cases passages show rectangular cross-sections, but some have low arched roofs. Martini (2004) observed that a char- acteristic  feature  of  such  caves  is  extreme  variation  in the size of a single passage which, in a  downstream direction, can narrow from the order of 10 m to much less than 1 m. He explained this as an outcome of variation in the degree of quartz weathering. Caves in quartzose rocks are known in Venezuela (Urbani and  Szcerban 1974, Pouyllau and Seurin 1985, Galan and  Lagarde 1988,
Bricen˜o and Schubert 1990, Sˇmida et al. 2005, Urbani
2005), Brazil (Correˆa Neto 2000), South Africa (Martini 1987), Australia (Jennings 1983, Wray 1997, Young and

Young 1992) and Saharan Africa (Busche and Erbe 1987, Busche and Sponholze 1992).
  Most drainage in silicate rock landscapes remains  on the surface. However, enclosed depressions can  occur particularly near the edges of quartzite plateau.  These include swallow holes, rift potholes over open joints and collapse dolines over caves (Figure 9.62). Such dolines in the Precambrian orthoquartzite plateaux of  Venezuela can be 300 m in diameter (Pouyllau and  Seurin 1985), and they overlie caves of huge dimensions, the deepest in the region descending 383 m. Although  solution pans can be large, the occurrence of a  significant epikarst in quartzite has not been  demonstrated, and so the hydro- logical circumstances that could give rise to the genesis of solution dolines appear to be absent. However, some enclosed depression in quartzose rocks in Venezuela and




the Sahara have been reported up to several square kilometres in area. They are point-recharge  depressions similar in morphology to shallow blind  valleys, but are entirely autogenic. Dissolution may  have played a sig- nificant part in their origin.
9.14.3 Residual towers and beehive hills
Deep and prolonged weathering along joints provides avenues that can be exploited by surficial erosion  pro- cesses that sluice out the fines. Enlargement of intersecting joints by such processes can yield tower  form residual hills up to 30 m or more in height  (Figure 4.11) that may take tens of millions of years  to evolve, although they are difficult to date. These  ‘ruined cities’, which sometimes resemble the  ruiniform relief of karst in dolomitic limestones, are a  common feature of Upper Proterozoic siliceous  cemented sandstones of Arnhem Land in Northern Australia (Jennings 1983, Wray 1997) and orthoquartzite  plateaux in Venezuela (Bricen˜o and Schubert 1990). Just as the style of carbonate cone and tower karst varies  with the structural attributes of the rock, especially bedding thickness and joint frequency, so this also  affects the form of residual quartzose hills which vary  from beehive-like to tower-like. However, recalling the discussion about tower karst development in section  9.11, there is no question about quartzose towers  being developed from a previous cockpit karst phase.  They can only form directly, and mainly by runoff  processes exploiting lines of weakness afforded by a  network of weathered joints. So although ruined cities  and beehive hills occur in quartzose landscapes, and quartz dissolution may have been a critical initial step in their development, such features are not simply karstic, and nor is the groundwater network beneath them. Never- theless, quartzite landscapes have some  morphologically similarities to some arid-zone  limestone landscapes with the low solubility of quartzite substituting for lack of water in limestone desertsf.
9.15 SEQUENCES OF CARBONATE KARST EVOLUTION IN HUMID TERRAINS
9.15.1 Early ideas
At the turn of the 20th century the influential ideas of the American geomorphologist W.M. Davis on the cycle of erosion in ‘normal’ landscapes were reverberating through the world of geomorphology. In Vienna, which  is on the doorstep of the Dinaric karst, one of the  best known European geomorphologists, Albrecht Penck, had amongst his students Jovan Cvijic´ (Figure 1.5),  who is

considered by many to be the father of modern karst geomorphology. Hence, the landforms of what we  now regard as the ‘classic’ karst provided the main source of inspiration from which concepts of karst landscape evo- lution emerged. Imagine the excitement and stimulation of  a  fieldtrip  in  1899,  when  Penck  and  his students accompanied by Davis set out to  investigate the karsts of Bosnia and Hercegovina.  Roglic´ (1972) considered this meeting in the karst of  two outstanding masters of geomorphology to have been of decisive importance for the further development  of geomorphological concepts, although we should not  forget that arguably the most influential work ever  written on karst had already been published by Cvijic´  in 1893.
  Penck and Davis both contended that karstification is preceded by an episode of fluvial erosion, an idea with which Cvijic´ concurred. The problem then remained to identify the erosional stages through which the karst landscape progressed. Although Richter (1907), Sawicki (1909) and Beede (1911) first offered solutions, a scheme proposed by Grund (1914) claimed most interest. His theoretical sequence of landscape evolution took into account both the Dinaric region, with which he had first-hand  experience,  and  the  humid  tropical  karsts  of Jamaica and Java, which he visualized from the writings of Danesˇ (1908, 1910). His scheme is shown in Figure 9.63. It depicts a doline karst of several  generations  in  which individuals   enlarge,  coalesce   and gradually consume intervening residual hills. The terrain is ultimately reduced to a corrosional plain.
  Cvijic´’s own thinking evolved significantly on the question of karstic evolution. In his 1893 monograph he suggested a genetic sequence involving amalgamation from dolines to uvulas to poljes, but it was not until 1918 that he published his considered opinion on the morpho- logical evolution of karst and its relationship to subterra- nean   hydrology.   In   this   work   he   drew   attention   to hydrographic zones within karst and pointed out  that subterranean evolution can proceed without the interven- tion of baselevel change, because  karstification itself leads to the lowering of the  hydrographic zones as permeability progressively  increases at depth. Whereas Grund attempted to produce a universal model, Cvijic´’s scheme of karstic evolution (Figure 9.64) was proposed for the Dinaric  karst only; and whereas Grund’s model assumed an indefinite thickness of limestone, with clear implications for uplift and rejuvenation, Cvijic´’s focused on a sequential development that terminates on imperme- able underlying beds.
  The conceptual framework provided by these early geomorphologists     persisted     essentially    unchallenged until the emergence of ideas on the  critical influence





Figure 9.63   The karst cycle according to Grund (1914).


of  climate  on  landform  evolution.  This  commenced  in 1936 with publication of H. Lehmann’s  observations  in Java   and   thereafter   followed   a   series of perceived schemes of karst landscape   evolution, each  tailored to the specific climatic zone  in which they occurred. Zhu’s (1988)  schematic   model of  the  evolution  of humid subtropical  fengcong and fenglin karst in the Guilin region of  China is a particularly good example (Figure 9.65).
9.15.2 Alternative conceptual models
One  of  the  major  difficulties  with  proposed  models  of karst evolution is that they do not adequately accommo- date the range of hydrogeological and geomorphological circumstances that occur. For a comprehensive summary of the possibilities that incorporates eogenetic and meso- genetic karst activity  in maturing rocks, see Klimchouk and Ford (2000). Here we focus our attention on surface landform  development at the telogenetic stage. Karstic erosion  may be envisaged as commencing from one of three main starting points, i.e. cases:

(1) uplifted unkarstified dense rock protected by imper- vious cover beds;
(2) uplifted unkarstified rock of high primary  porosity with no cover beds;
(3) 
uplifted rock karstified in a previous erosion phase.

There   are   two   important   variants   of   the   first   case (Figure 9.66):

(1a) stratification is horizontal or dips upstream and the impervious cover beds are stripped down and back from the spring (output) boundary;
(1b)  the   strata   dip   downstream   and   the   caprock   is stripped down and towards the spring boundary.

Highly tectonized terrain with complex geology can often be subdivided into more simple sectors such as the above two, although continuing uplift and tilting during karstification presents special problems. Stripe karst in steeply dipping strata adds the complexity of indefinite thickness.
Case 1a
The important point here is that surface karst landforms greater than superficial karren cannot evolve until  sub- terranean connections have been established from  input to output boundaries. Having acquired a   hydraulic potential and output boundary by deep  incision of an allogenic trunk stream, denudation of   the caprock begins to expose the carbonate formation  beneath. A





Figure 9.64   The sequence of karstic evolution according to Cvijic´ (1918).


first rank of point-recharge depressions develops at  the input  points  where  the  first  throughput  connections are made. As the caprock retreats   upstream, successive ranks of new connections form,  each supporting new dolines along the lines depicted  in  Figure  7.9.  By  this stage  the  karst  has  become  one of multiple inputs and multiple ranks, with caves  at different levels if local baselevel has also changed. During and following com- plete stripping  of  the   cover  beds,  the  epikarst  will

develop. The initial solution dolines will grow  in plan size, but may be limited in their extension or subdivided by development of daughter dolines above new  leakage  routes  in  the  epikarst.  Where  fissure  fre- quency is high and soil is thin, diffuse autogenic recharge down innumerable fissures coupled with the absence of a significant capillary barrier in the epikarst  promotes the development of a karren field morphology rather than a doline karst.





Figure 9.65 Development of humid subtropical cone (feng- cong) and tower (fenglin) karst in the Guilin district of Guangxi, China. Note that the sequential development accommodates synchronous evolution of peak-cluster depression and peakforest plain styles in neighbouring areas. The peak-cluster depression style develops where the water table remains at depth below the surface; whereas the peak-forest plain case occurs where the water  table  is  at  shallow  depth  and  rivers  are  at  the  surface. Reproduced from Zhu Xuewen 1988. Guilin Karst, p188© 1968 Shanghai Scientific and Technical Publishers.
Case 1b
The same principles apply, but with some important variations. Because strata dip downstream, the limestone is first exposed at its upstream boundary. Successive ranks  of  inputs  then  migrate  downdip  and  downstream with  the  contracting caprock.  Stripping   is therefore towards the spring into a previously  established deep and well-drained vadose zone. Any  underlying imper- vious beds are also first exposed at the upstream bound- ary; thus the karst area contracts as the input boundary migrates downdip. In Case 1a the   oldest surface landforms are closest to the output  margin, whereas in Case 1b they are closest to the input margin.
  Field examples of Case 1a are found in Yorkshire and Derbyshire, England; Fermanagh, Ireland; the Dordogne, France; eastern Kentucky, Tennessee and West Virginia,



USA.  The  most  celebrated  instance  of  Case  1b  is  the Mammoth Cave–Sinkhole Plain region  of   Kentucky (Figures 6.41 and 7.11). The change in landform texture across part of this area is depicted in Figure 9.67. In these cases, landscape evolution follows a sequence rather than a cycle, because the effective thickness of carbonates is limited and no further karst development is possible once erosion has removed them.
Case 2
Here we may imagine the extensive surfaces exposed on coral reefs during Pleistocene glacio-eustatic low sea levels. This is an eogenetic situation and is discussed more fully in Chapter 10. Essential points are that  the
rock possesses a high density of openings of all types that provide ready made hydrological connections from the recharge zone to the output boundary. Hydraulic con-
ductivity is high, its spatial variability is  comparatively small, and water retention in the  epikarst is minimal. Most caves form at the water  table and at the fresh- water:saltwater interface,  although glacio-eustatic fluc- tuations have forced this activity to be located at different levels. Autogenic karst of this type never becomes highly developed   because   of very high primary porosities, although where   denudation exposes an impermeable inlier, then point recharge of allogenic streams transforms the situation with the development of large State 4 caves (Figure  10.21) and blind valleys merge to form interior lowlands (small poljes). Collapse above caves  becomes common, but solution dolines remain rare.  The Cook Islands in the tropical Pacific provide an  interesting example (Stoddard et al. 1985, 1990).
Case 3
The course of karstic evolution following uplift of a previously karstified surface is strongly influenced by inheritance. The uplifted surface may be a previously baselevelled plain (Figure 9.38) or a karst with more relief (Figure 9.40), but in each case the drained phreas provides an instant vadose zone with ready made  con- nections from input to output boundaries. Any inherited topography will guide runoff underground  and hence guide solution in the  epikarst. Residual  hills become incorporated  into  the  topographic   divides of  the emerging rejuvenated karst (Figure 9.39c). Minor uplift results in development of a new  corrosion plain with dissected fragments  of  the   former surface  left  as terraces, whereas major uplift and deep gorge entrench- ment  by  allogenic  trunk  rivers may lead to incision below the base of  karstification in the former phreatic





Figure 9.66   Karstic evolution in uplifted dense carbonate rock protected by cover beds: Case 1a horizonal beds; Case 1b strata dip downstream.

zone. This leaves new vadose tributaries suspended above the trunk river. Their long profiles consequently steepen downstream as the gorge is approached, and undercapture (subterranean knick-point recession) works upstream. When the water table eventually lowers upstream, surface incision can commence. Hence underground rejuvenation is an essential precursor of surface rejuvenation. Water-table lowering occurs in two  stages:  initially  by  gravity  drainage  of  the  former phreatic zone during incision of the trunk river and later as a result of development of secondary permeability in previously unkarstified rock. The margins of the Guiz- hou plateau, China, offer  outstanding examples of this pattern of development (Smart et al. 1986, Song 1986, Ahnert and Williams 1997).
9.16 COMPUTER MODELS OF KARST LANDSCAPE EVOLUTION
Readers are referred to Ahnert (1996) for a discussion of the purpose of modelling in geomorphology. Process

models were discussed in Chapter 4, hydrological models in 6.11, and morphometric models that describe the two- dimensional statistical characteristics of karst landscapes in section 9.7. Conceptual models as discussed in section
9.15 are based on empirical observations and  represent their ‘‘authors’’’ understanding of karst  evolution. They are representations of reality that are intended to encap- sulate the essential elements of the  landscape; detail assumed irrelevant is ignored.  However, because the models are static time-slice representations of landscape development, they do not permit us to explore the relative importance of factors  that guide landscape evolution. Therefore in this  section we consider theoretical three- dimensional  computer models of the landscape that are designed  deductively  from  general  principles  based  on results  of prior empirical research. These enable us to investigate  variables  influencing  karst  landscape  evolu- tion over time.
  Topographic profiles across cockpit karst have long been recognized to resemble sinusoidal waves. Using this  as  a  starting  point  Brook  (1981)  developed





Figure 9.67 Morphological map of part of the Mammoth Cave–Sinkhole Plain district showing the change in closed depression texture from the youngest point-recharge depressions amongst the Knobs, where sandstone caprock is being pierced, to the oldest features at the updip Sinking Streams boundary, where underlying impermeable beds are being exposed. The situation is as depicted in Figure 9.66 (b), with the groundwater hydrology shown on Figure 6.39.




three-dimensional  models  of  such  landscapes  by  repre- senting karst forms along intersecting fracture  sets by intersecting sine waves, the wavelength being  equal to the spacing of dominant fractures and the  amplitude being determined by the ratio between the rate of vertical and horizontal dissolution. The latter is dependent mainly on climate and rock strength, and was taken by Brook to be revealed by the depth:diameter  ratio of enclosed depressions. Different styles of karst  relief could be replicated, therefore, by varying the   depth:diameter ratio. This was an interesting start, but  without a built- in process function and feed-back mechanisms could not give insight into the factors influencing the development of the relief over time.
  Ahnert and Williams (1997) developed a three- dimensional process–response model to assess (i) the minimum requirements for karst  landscape evolution,
(ii) the effect of different starting conditions on end-stage landforms, and (iii) whether different landform types are the result of different environments or merely  represent successive stages under unchanging conditions. Variables tested that influence the rate and location of dissolution included topographic control, structural   control, flow divergence and slope of the initial surface. Locally higher dissolution rates caused by flow convergence were found sufficient to explain the formation of solution dolines and polygonal karst, but not cone or tower karst, which require dissolution rates to be lower at points of flow divergence. In different runs of  the model, cones (or towers) were never found to develop directly, but were always derived from interdoline residual hills. This result has an important bearing on our understanding of how tower karst evolves, clearly favouring the sequential hypothesis explained in section 9.11. To explain the model landscapes developed, there was no general need to invoke any climatic factors, except sufficient rainfall to permit dissolution.
  The main components of the process–response ele- ments of Ahnert and Williams’ model are illustrated  in Figure 9.68. This was applied to a simple autogenic karst system represented by an uplifted limestone  block with already established input to output connections. All rain passes through the system without overflow and there is no storage. Dissolution rate is proportional to the amount of  runoff.  The  model  surface is an X–Y grid with fixed plan coordinates  and variable elevation. Runoff follows the steepest  slope, rainfall at each input point having eight grid-point neighbours towards which it could flow (Figure 9.69). Water sinks underground at the lowest points of topographic hollows.
  Figure 9.70 illustrates the results of a run of the model. In this case the initial surface at time zero (T ¼ 0)  is horizontal, but has small random irregularities. An arbi-



Figure 9.68 Components of a process–response model repre- senting one time unit of land surface development. Reproduced from Ahnert, F.,  and Williams, P.W., Karst landform  develop- ment in a three-dimensional theoretical model.  Zeitschrift  fu¨r Geomorphologie,   Supplementband   108,   63–80 © 1997 E. Schweizerbart0sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers.
trary baselevel is shown by a dashed line at Z ¼ 440. By nine time units of the model (T ¼ 9)  corrosion by water converging on topographic low points has caused solution depressions to develop.   These deepen until T ¼ 45 by which  time  the   bottom of the  deepest depression has reached  baselevel (in reality the water table). By T ¼ 69 the  floors of some depressions have

Figure 9.69  Points on a landscape model initial surface show- ing eight possible directions of runoff. Reproduced from Ahnert, F., and Williams, P.W., Karst landform development in a three- dimensional theoretical model. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplementband 108, 63–80 © 1997 E. Schweizerbart0sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers.





Figure 9.70 Block diagrams illustrating selected time unit stages in the course of running a process–response model (KARST1) of karst landscape development. Reproduced from Ahnert, F., and Williams, P.W., Karst landform development in a three-dimensional theoretical model. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplementband 108, 63–80 © 1997 E. Schweizerbart0sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Science Publishers.


widened at the water table. This continued until T ¼ 99 by which time the surface had lowered further and neighbouring dolines had coalesced at baselevel. Model results implied that locally higher solution rates  caused

by flow convergence are sufficient to explain the devel- opment of doline and polygonal karst. However, no cones or towers were generated by the conditions imposed on this model.





Figure 9.71 Block diagrams illustrating selected time unit stages in the course of running a process–response model (KARST11) of karst landscape development. The sloping corrosion plain at T ¼ 150 follows the hydraulic gradient. Reproduced from Ahnert, F. and Williams, P.W., Karst landform development in a three-dimensional theoretical model. Z. Geomorph NF Suppl.-Vol. 108, 63–80 © 1997.


  Figure 9.71 shows stages in the evolution of a more complex case in which baselevel is a sloping water table and a divergence effect is added. Divergence was measured in the model by the number of directions from a given grid point that have downslope  gradients (Figure 9.69). On a peak it is 8 and on a planar sloping surface it is 3. The more directions in which an incom- ing increment of rainfall is dispersed, the less effective will be its solutional denudation at a point. In the model this was programmed as a reduction in local denudation as a function of the number of downslope  flow direc- tions. This leads to relatively reduced   solution  on topographic highs where flow diverges and to increased solution in hollows where it converges. In this run of the model a doline karst at T ¼ 20 evolves  into  a  cockpit karst   with   conical   interdepression   hills by T ¼ 59. Cockpit floors converge at  water-table level producing

a sloping corrosion plain, the beginning of which is evident by T ¼ 98. Further development sees the isola- tion of cones on the corrosion plain (T ¼ 150). The model results clearly point to the importance runoff divergence and convergence effects in generating strong spatial variation in solutional denudation, which gains topographic expression in the evolution of cockpit karst (fengcong–depression). The model also shows that tower karst (fenglin) can develop from a prior polygonal cone karst stage. However, in this model solution is focused at points with unlimited infiltration capacity where flow sinks underground, which produces circular depressions. If instead infiltration were increased along intersecting fractures, then crossing joint corridors with intervening blocks would be produced (Telbisz 2001), which could be clints or plateau depending on scale assumptions.




  Ahnert and Williams (1997) also explored the effect of a sudden fall in baselevel (simulating uplift) during  the course of model development. When uplift occurs  at a stage similar to T ¼ 150 in Figure 9.71, the residual hills of the first cycle become the tops of hills of the second cycle. This can be confirmed to occur from field evidence around the head of rejuvenation gorges that  penetrate uplifted karst plateau in Guizhou, China.
  Karst landscape modelling is in its infancy. Much can  be   learnt  from   this  approach,   because   process–

response models can be built that can accommodate numerous  variables,  enable  their  relative  importance  to be assessed, and permit changes in their relative impor- tance  to  be  compared  over  time.  Computer  models  of karst landforms and of karst groundwater system evolu- tion    have    been    developed    independently    of   each other. We look forward to the next generation of models that will link surface and subsurface karst  development and so tackle the problem of karst  evolution in a fully integrated way.


10

The Influence of Climate, Climatic Change    and Other Environmental Factors
on Karst Development



10.1 THE PRECEPTS OF CLIMATIC GEOMORPHOLOGY
During a study of karst in Java, Lehmann (1936) recog- nized the coincidence of Kegelkarst (cone karst) relief with the humid tropics. This reinforced a growing belief amongst geomorphologists generally that landform assemblages are strongly influenced by climate through its control of natural processes. There then began a quest    to identify the singular relief styles that were expected theoretically in the various climatic zones, and maps of morphoclimatic regions were produced, e.g. by Tricart and Cailleux (1972) and Bu¨del (1982). European karst geomorphologists  such  as  Lehmann  (1954),  Lehmann    et al. (1956) and Corbel (1957) were particularly active      in this. Descriptions and comparisons of karsts from the tropics to the arctic provided a focus for research for 40 year, the aim being to determine and explain in morphogenetic terms the contrasting landform assem- blages that were found. Nevertheless, some detailed work showed lithology and structure to have a larger effect on relief forms than had been appreciated (Ver- stappen 1964, Panosˇ and Stelcl 1968).
  It is evident from more recent writing, for example in    the volume edited by Salomon and Maire (1992), that most geomorphologists now agree that broad landscape differences exist in regions with contrasting climates, but    at the same time it is admitted that subtler variations in   style had often been claimed than objective scrutiny could justify. A more important weakness of climatic geomorphology is that it has been unable to explain convincingly why many of these landscape contrasts occur. For example, it has not revealed why karstic

activity in the humid tropics sometimes results in the development of cockpit karst, whereas in the humid temperate  zone  doline  karst  is  apparently  more typical – even though dolines are also found in the tropics. It appears to us that qualitative climato-genetic geomorphology has reached about the limit of its con- tribution. Nevertheless, the effect of climate is real even      if difficult to pin down, Salomon (2000) providing a valuable summary of principal conclusions. We should now pass on, but avoid the mistake of dismissing the broad value of climatic geomorphology. There is a risk of this, as is evident from the content of a recent book about karst evolution from pre-karst to cessation, which com- pletely omits even mention of the importance of climate     in  the  evolution  of  karst  landscapes  (Gabrovsˇek  2002). Perhaps it is now taken for granted?
  The availability of water is the key climatic factor in  karst development. It is certainly the principal variable controlling total denudation by dissolution (Figure 4.3), although the targeting of corrosion is determined by the controls on water flow, as explained in Chapter 5. In Chapter 9 we explained how ‘normal’ karst evolves  in areas where water is abundant, but remarked that aridity and extreme cold place constraints on development. Both   of these climatic conditions lead to a scarcity of water in    its liquid state, thereby limiting dissolution and permit- ting other geomorphological processes to dominate mor- phological evolution. But if the other processes are themselves not very active, then dissolution effects may persist unaltered for a considerable time. We shall see from field evidence that many karst features (landforms    and groundwater circulation systems) in arid and cold


Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd




zones are the legacy of times in the distant past when conditions were much wetter or warmer. Thus it is not always easy to separate the effects of modern processes  from those of earlier times. A subtheme of this chapter, therefore, is inheritance because, where the contempor-     ary dissolution regime is feeble, palaeofeatures persist and guide modern processes. In this chapter we examine   the karsts that result.
10.2 THE HOT ARID EXTREME
We agree with Jennings’ (1983) assessment that ‘Less is known about karst in deserts and semi-deserts than any- where else except beneath glaciers and permafrost’, but progress has nevertheless been made since the publica- tion of our first review of this subject (Ford and Williams 1989), as can be seen in the latest global survey of karsts    in the arid and semi-arid zones by Salomon (2005). Present information indicates that the determinants of karstification are the same in hot arid environments as elsewhere, although there are differences in the relative influence exercised by the various controls. Because soil     is usually thin and patchy (or absent altogether) in the arid zone, it is less influential as an infiltration ‘governor’ and as a moisture store than in more humid regions. Since it can support only a small biomass, it  has reduced significance as a CO2 source. One major consequence is that individual drawdown solution dolines  are rare, and no extensive tracts of polygonal doline karst are reported. As a result, collapse dolines assume greater  relative importance, although they are still not common.
  Precipitation in these regions is delivered typically in short but violent, aperiodic convectional storms. This favours flash-flooding, especially in rugged terrains. For example, Frumkin (1992) studied the hyperarid Mount Sedom salt diapir in the Dead Sea basin, where the meteorological  ‘mean  annual  precipitation’  is  cited  as
~50 mm a—1. Instruments in stream caves there measured
just two short-lived flow events in 5 years. Gillieson et al. (1991) described similar behaviour in the limestone ranges of the Kimberley region of Western Australia, where proxy palaeoenvironmental records can be extended back for 2000 years. The rapid delivery, and then loss by runoff and evaporation, tends to limit the development of epikarst when compared with humid regions. Rillen, rinnen and pitting are common on bare desert surfaces but extensive clint-and-grike pavements draining efficiently to collector conduits in bedding planes are comparatively rare.
  The morphological consequences of these process factors vary according to the lithology, but it is possible      to offer some generalizations. In many carbonate rock

terrains (especially where the strata are chiefly medium-     to thick-bedded rather than consistently massive) and in    the majority of gypsum terrains  we have seen, the morphology is much more fluvial in character than it is       in humid karst regions. There are regular Hortonian patterns of dry valleys with rounded interfluves in gentle uplands, or of steeper-walled canyons or recule´es dis- secting massifs and plateaus. Both types lose most storm runoff into small solutional shafts (ponors) along the thalwegs. This is true of the Judean Hills around Jerusa-  lem, the Edwards Plateau of Texas and, more spectacular, the reefal Guadalupe Mountains (New Mexico–Texas) that contain the great H2S outlet caves such as Carlsbad Caverns and Lechuguilla Cave discussed in section 7.7. These three limestone examples all extend across the semi-arid to arid climatic transitions in their respective regions. They display little surface karst except the limited kind of epikarst described above, plus relict caves that have been intercepted and drained by entrench- ment of the valleys or canyons. Nevertheless, they sup-    port regionally important aquifers that usually discharge      at just one or a few large springs at the junction between limestone uplands and desert detrital plains. The relict caves tend to be well decorated with speleothems which indicates that, despite the characteristic flash-flood runoff   to ponors, there is some diffuse recharge via the epikarst. This dessicated fluvial morphology is perhaps best developed in gypsum and anhydrite, however. Folded   or block-faulted terrains with only narrow ridges, such as  the semi-arid hills of Catalyud in the Ebro valley of Spain (Gutierrez and Gutierrez 1998) or the very arid Bir al Ghanam in the Libyan Desert south of Tripoli (Ko´sa 1981), are dissected by consequent valleys regularly spaced between ranges of well rounded to conical hills. Recharge is via sinks in stream beds (thalweg ponors), with very limited epikarst elsewhere. Where the gypsum forms plateaus and escarpments, however, stream-sink and collapse dolines, uvalas and even small poljes may develop, as in the arid Pecos Valley of New Mexico or in
subhumid western Oklahoma (Johnson 1996).
  In contrast, in some dense, massively jointed crystal-   line   carbonate   plateaus,   the   relatively   ‘naked   karst’ becomes dissected along joint corridors into   blocks heavily fluted by karren. Dissection penetrates to  the level of neighbouring pediplains, which may truncate rocks of any lithology. The karst surface is then effi- ciently drained down open networks of grikes or corri- dors (section 9.2) that spill onto them.
  No matter how arid, exposed salt always displays dense karst because of its great solubility. Salt pan deposits   2–3 m   deep   on   the   floor   of   Death   Valley, California, are pierced through by solution pits  with




densely fluted walls. At 150 m below sea level, the summit of the Mount Sedom (Dead Sea) salt diapir displays regular Hortonian valley patterns on its anhy- drite caprock, but they terminate abruptly in deep solu-    tion shafts at the contact with the bare salt (Frumkin and Ford 1995).
  Speleogenesis in hot arid regions follows the principles explained in Chapter 7, but the size and frequency of caves developed is necessarily more limited than in humid regions. There is preferred development where simple cut-off caves can  capture  flash-flood  waters. For example, Sof Omar Cave (Figure 7.20) is a flood- water cut-off maze in a semi-arid region. Short vadose shaft-and-drain systems fed by ephemeral streams are common along escarpment edges. Intensive  exploration in the Bir al Ghanam gypsum karst discovered similarly simple  patterns  of  dendritic  caves  underdraining  the    dry valleys there, with a few tributaries passing under divides for short distances to join the trunk conduits (Ko´sa 1981). However, there is also deep phreatic circu- lation in mountainous deserts; deep interbasin flow is common in carbonate rocks in the Russian deserts and western USA, for example. A case in point is the great groundwater system draining to the Ash Meadows spring line (and Devil’s Hole) in the eastern Amargosa Desert in Nevada (Riggs et al. 1994). Relict phreatic caves, espe- cially of the maze type, are quite abundant. The system, though still active, may be a legacy of previous wetter conditions.
  Russian researchers have emphasized that seasonal condensation waters in otherwise dry areas can play a major role in enlarging relict phreatic caves by processes    of corrosion, breakdown and scaling. A valuable review     by Dublyansky and Dublyansky (2000) of work in the former Soviet Union on the role of condensation in karst   has enabled their research findings to be more accessible    to non-Russian speakers. Their data suggest that con- densation does not normally exceed 9% of the annual precipitation, but that it occurs in the summer when there may not be much rainfall. An estimate from the western Caucasus indicated that it could be responsible for about 3.7% of the gross annual denudation by dissolution. Domepit-type shafts with small drains may possibly be produced in escarpments entirely from dew. Castellani and Dragoni (1986) calculated that shafts 0.5 m diameter  and 10–15 m deep may develop in 500 ka by this mechan- ism; their field site, the Hammada de Guir plateau and scarp in Morocco, receives only 50–60 mm a—1 of conventional precipitation and has a mean annual tem- perature of 19.6○C. However, the precipitation of con- densation water underground is not just a feature of arid karsts because it occurs in caves in humid areas too

(section 7.11), but its relative importance is more sig- nificant in the arid zone.
  Jennings (1983) recognized that hot arid karsts present   us with a dilemma. With little process study accom- plished in these areas, it is difficult to know if we should ascribe their landscapes to the cumulative effect of repeated if sporadic modern events, or to more humid periods in the past when conditions for karst development may have been more favourable. Indeed, evidence is mounting that many, if not most, karst features in hot arid zones are largely the products of more humid intervals that may have occurred 105 or even 107 years ago. For example in the western desert of Egypt, El Aref    et al. (1987) found evidence for post-Eocene cone karst development; and from cave deposits in the same region, Brook et al. (2003) determined that humid intervals and, therefore, further karstification had also occurred there during Marine Isotope Stages 5, 7, 9 and 13. Similarly, in hyperarid northeastern Saudi Arabia, Edgell (1993) attributed weathered karren, ponors and collapse dolines giving entry to multilevel caves, and even some poljes, to Pleistocene pluvial periods. Nevertheless, complicating factors are:

1. the difficulty of distinguishing between karst and desert elements, e.g. in the broken drainage patterns often found in arid landscapes;
2. the difficulty of distinguishing between landforms developed under the present process regime  and those inherited from palaeokarst, but modified by modern processes and incorporated into the present landscape.

We illustrate the points made above by reference to the better studied dryland karsts of the world in Australia (Figure 10.1).
10.2.1 Karst of the Nullarbor Plain
The Nullarbor Plain lies immediately inland from the Great Australian Bight (Lowry and Jennings 1974, Gil- lieson and Spate 1992, Webb et al. 2003). It covers an area of about 200 000 km2 and extends across the Western Australia–South Australia border (Figures 10.1 and 10.2). From 40 to 90 m at the top of its precipitously cliffed and almost 900 km long coastal boundary, the plain rises almost imperceptibly inland to about 240 m over a dis- tance of 350 km. Annual rainfall diminishes inland from    up  to  400 mm a—1    near  the  southwest  coast  to  only 150 mm a—1 inland and is greatly exceeded by annual potential evapotranspiration, which varies from about 1250–2000 mm near the coast to 2500–3000 mm in  the





Figure 10.1   Distribution of karsts in Australia. ‘Soft rock karst’ refers to that developed in carbonates of Cenozoic age and ‘hard  rock karst’ to that in older carbonates. Modified from Lowry, D.C. and Jennings, J.N. 1974. The Nullarbor karst, Australia. Zeitschrift   fu¨r Geomorphologie, 18, 35–81.© 1974.


north. The mean annual temperature is about 18○C, although mean maximum summer (January) temperature     is 35○C. Most of the Nullarbor is treeless, as its name implies, and is covered by bluebush, saltbush and tussock grasses; however, in places near the coast there are small trees.
  The low plateau is underlain by an Eocene to Miocene carbonate sequence that extends well below sea level. The lower Wilson Bluff Limestone (up to 300 m thick) is chalky and porous, but although porosity can be high (up    to 30%), poor interconnection results in relatively low permeability. The overlying Abrakurrie (100 m thick) and Nullarbor Limestones (maximum of 45 m) both have high porosity (about 40%) and permeability, except the top 15 m which is indurated by secondary reprecipitation of calcite. This calcrete case-hardening reduces surface porosity, especially in the top 1 m or so.
  
The plateau comprises  an  almost  undisturbed, uplifted sea bed. At its inland margin up to 250 km inland from the present coast, lines of ancient coastal dunes define two distinct shorelines that mark stages in     the emergence of the Nullarbor Plain; one is Early Oligocene in age (~35 Ma), when the Wilson Bluff Limestone was exposed to erosion for about 10 Ma before resubmergence, and the other is Mid-Miocene (~14 Ma), when the final emergence occurred. During this period of regression, rivers originating on the surrounding  Precambrian  basement  rocks  extended their courses onto the emerging plain and, even though incised no more than 10 m, their now dry meandering channels have been traced across it for up to 130 km. It       is  probable  that  the  climate  was  particularly  humid  5–3 Ma, when the channels were active (Clarke 1994, Alley et al. 1999).



Figure 10.2    The Nullarbor Plain in southern Australia. Note the traces of former river courses. Most of the dolines and cave entrances marked are collapse features and have their               greatest density near the coast. The Bunda and Baxter Cliffs have a height of about 75 m. Reproduced from Lowry, D.C. and Jennings, J.N. (1974) The Nullarbor karst, Australia.              Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 18, 35–81.






Figure 10.3 (Upper) Doline with blowhole (beside the person looking down the shaft) on the Nullarbor Plain. The function is    that of a centripetally draining stream-sink. Note the dry channel that leads storm runoff to the blowhole drain. (Lower) Small blowholes on the Nullarbor Plain perforating a case-hardened surface. The area around the blowholes has been washed clear of soil by surface runoff.


  Judging by the 30 to 70 m of limestone that has been removed since the final emergence of the plains (more having been removed near the coast where it is wetter), dissolutional lowering has proceeded at an average rate of only  2–5 mm ka—1  over  the  past  14 Ma.  This  long-term rate compares well with an estimate of Quaternary sur- face lowering derived from cosmogenic 36Cl  measure- ment of < 5 mm a—1  (Stone et  al. 1994).  However,  it  is possible  that  the  present  phase  of  extreme aridity is relatively recent, because Lee and Bland (2002) provide evidence from desert varnish found on a meteorite from the Nullarbor that it resided in a relatively humid envir- onment for most of its 5.9 ka terrestrial history.
  Surface relief on the Nullarbor is always small, gen- erally less than 6 m, and is usually assumed to be karstic (Jennings 1983). In the wetter areas it is characterized by

shallow claypan corridors between low rocky ridges or by    a lattice of claypans around bedrock outcrops. In drier parts there is a scatter of shallow, circular depressions locally called ‘dongas’. These basins may be up to 1 km across, but have a depth of only 1.5–6 m. The extensive limestone plains (‘hammadas’) of the Sahara display similar features. Dongas tend to direct surface runoff after occasional heavy rains to blowholes, which are solution pipes (Figure 10.3). There are an enormous number  of  blowholes  on  the  Nullarbor  Plain,  possibly  of the order of 105. They are subvertical, smoothed- walled tubes that penetrate the surface indurated layer and appear to connect to complex anastomosing tube and cave systems. Reversing airflow through blowholes can be very strong (up to 70 km h—1 has been recorded)  in response to air pressure adjustments in large-volume underground networks as atmospheric pressure systems pass overhead. The origin of blowholes remains spec- ulative, but may be similar to solution pipes in Quatern-    ary dune limestones (aeolian calcarenites). Deeper collapse depressions and accessible caves in the Nullar-    bor are largely confined to a southern belt parallel to the coast roughly 75 km wide, although some are known 150 km inland. More than 150  collapse  depressions have been mapped, ranging up to 240 m diameter and 35 m deep (Figure 10.4). Some lead into caves, which can  be of impressive dimensions.
  More than 100 caves are known (James 1992, Webb et al. 2003), many being 50–120 m below the surface of the plain and developed largely in the Wilson Bluff Limestone. Gillieson (2004) pointed out that stream-cut passages are uncommon and that running water is absent except during flash flooding. Nevertheless, the occur- rence of a large enclosing arc of Precambrian hinterland from which allogenic runoff has been focused onto the Nullarbor since its emergence has probably been a critical factor in the development of the caves. Most of these had     a predominantly phreatic origin, the mixing corrosion of fresh and saline waters probably also assisting dissolu- tion. Old Homestead Cave has 30 km of mapped passages and appears to be the southern extension of a surface palaeochannel. Passage dimensions in many caves are large, often 15–40 m diameter, thus implying consider- able throughput discharges compared with present. Cock- lebiddy Cave has been shown by diving to be more than
6.5 km long and Mullamullang Cave has some 5 km of passages up to 30 m wide. The largest chamber known is    in Abrakurrie Cave and is 300 m long, by 30 m wide and   15 m high. The large cave passages are typically flattened collapse arches with numerous breakdown blocks on their floors, although some still have flat roofs. Presumably much of the collapse occurred when hydrostatic support





Figure 10.4   Collapse doline on the Nullarbor Plain. Note the flat treeless landscape.

was removed during glacio-eustatic low sea-level stages, although considerable contemporary  breakdown  is caused by salt wedging.
  Calcite speleothems provide evidence for past wet phases, although they are largely inactive at present and frequently broken by salt and gypsum wedging. There appears to have been a transition in speleothem deposi-    tion from calcite to gypsum to salt that probably reflects    the growing aridity of the region. Salt speleothems are known up to 2.7 m long. The calcite speleothems are commonly dark brown to black in colour due to humic compounds and their ages are generally beyond the range   of U/Th dating. Some are of Pliocene age as shown by   three recent  U/Pb  dates  of  3.28,  3.96  and  3.93 a (2s errors of 1–5%) (J. Woodhead, personal communica- tion), although it is conceivable that some of the younger speleothems may date from late Quaternary wet phases, perhaps of the same stadial and cool interstadial ages as those identified from speleothems at Naracoorte further east (Figure 10.1) (Ayliffe et al. 1998, Moriarty et al. 2000). Red aeolian quartz sand accumulations in some caves probably reflect arid phases, when the process of salt wedging (exsudation) in cave passages also caused  much breakdown. Gypsum and salt speleothems have been dated to 185 a and < 40 a respectively (Webb et al. 2003).
  The water table beneath the Nullarbor Plain lies at a depth of about 120 m in the south near the coast and rises   to within 30 m of the surface in the north. The present hydraulic gradient is extremely low at about 20 mm km—1. The saturated zone connects directly with the sea, although no submarine springs are known, and the water table has

no doubt been subject to considerable Quaternary oscilla- tion in response to glacio-eustatic shifts. Water in the phreatic zone is exceptionally clear and highly saline; the salinity arising from a mixture of sea spray carried far inland and evaporated rain and percolation water. James (1992) has recognized three mixing zones in the caves and rock mass beneath the Nullarbor: mixing zone 1 occurs at the runoff–phreatic brackish or saline water interface of cave lakes and canals; mixing zone 2 is in the porous bedrock at the vadose–phreatic interface; and mixing zone 3 occurs at a halocline deep beneath cave lakes and  flooded passages. Calcite  precipitation  occurs   at the mixing zone 3 interface in close association with microbial activity and results in deposition of ‘snow- fields’ of subaqueous spindle-shaped calcite microcrys- tals (Contos et al. 2001).
  Apart from a few solution pans, karren are entirely absent on the Nullarbor despite induration of the upper-  most limestones. Yet solution flutes are developed at the same latitude some 1000 km to the east in the Flinders Ranges (Figure 10.1) near Brachina Gorge, where rainfall   is also slight (250 mm a—1), but the  rock is a  dense Cambrian limestone (Williams 1978).
  A feature of the relatively moist southwestern corner of the Nullarbor is the occurrence of numerous inliers of crystalline basement rock. Some scarcely rise above the general level of the plain, but one emerges 450 m. The inliers are commonly ringed by annular depressions 50– 150 m across and 3–10 m deep, resembling dry moats. They are clearly formed by the corrosive action of centrifugal allogenic runoff from the impermeable inliers. Jennings (1983) considered these moats to be the only




distinctive karst landform at the meso- to macroscale in    this climatic zone. However, similar landforms created by the same process surround the volcanic inliers of some coral islands (section 10.5). They are a product of physical juxtaposition that is independent of climatic factors.
10.2.2 Karst of the limestone ranges of Western Australia
The relationship of modern processes to existing land- forms is of particular interest when trying to understand    the geomorphological history of the area. This is a problem that particularly applies to arid-land karsts, because of the likelihood of significant wetter periods (‘pluvials’) in the past when some of the morphological features may have formed. On the Nullarbor Plain, for example, it is possible that the region’s landscape is mainly a reflection of process environments of late Miocene–Pliocene times and has been subject to only relatively minor modification during the Quaternary Per-  iod, the more recent aridity of the region providing little

opportunity for further morphological development. In the Kimberley region of northern Western Australia (Figure 10.1), the imprint of past processes may be even more ancient because as Playford (2002) explains, some features of the present landscape may be ascribable    to the exhumation of palaeokarst. We discuss this further    in section 10.6.
  The limestone ranges of the Kimberley region lie about 1500 km north-northwest of the Nullarbor Plain in north-  ern Western Australia (Figure 10.5). In this area Middle Devonian reef limestones with lesser dolomite are found     in the Laidlaw, Lawford, Napier and Oscar Ranges. The Napier Range is formed of a fringing and barrier reef complex approaching 110 km long and up to 5 km wide;   the Oscar Plateau is significantly wider. A well defined     but stratigraphically complex forereef–main reef–backreef facies sequence is exposed in walls of limestone gorges in the area and supports a well-developed karst (Jennings and Sweeting 1963, Goudie et al. 1989, 1990, Allison and Goudie 1990, Playford 2002). Average monthly tempera- tures range from 22○C to 33○C with air temperatures probably exceeding 38○C on over 100 days in the year.




Figure 10.5    The limestone ranges of the Kimberley region, northern Western Australia. (a morphological map at 1:125 000 is        available in the original publication). Reproduced from Jennings, J.N. and Sweeting, M.M. (1963) The limestone ranges of the Fitzroy  Basin, Western Australia. Bonner Geographische Abhandlungen, 32, 60 pp.



Annual rainfall varies from about 640 to 760 mm, depending on distance inland, and is distributed over 30–80 days. The monsoonal wet season from December   to March is short but intense, with rain-day averages of 16–18 mm and 50–year intensities  of 80–90 mm h—1. Since annual potential evaporation is around 3400 mm, arid conditions prevail for most of the year. High-inten- sity rains during the wet season give rise to seasonal floods, however, and the flood history of the Lennard River where it passes through Windjana Gorge in the Napier Range (Figure 10.5) has been investigated by Gillieson et al. (1991) using slackwater deposits. The modern dissolution denudation rate has been estimated by the Corbel technique (see Chapter 4) as 6.4–10.4 mm ka—1 (Ellaway et al. 1990), i.e. in places perhaps up to twice that of the Nullarbor Plain but still small by global standards.





Figure 10.6 (Upper) Tower karst rising from a bare limestone pediment near J.K. Yard in the limestone ranges of the Kimber-    ley region, Western Australia. (Photograph by J.N. Jennings.) (Lower) The sharp break of slope as the pediment gives way to     the limestone plateau. Note the large, long wall karren that are incised into the scarp face. (Photograph by J.N. Jennings.)





Figure 10.7 Detail of dissolution runnels on towers in the limestone ranges of the Kimberley region, Western Australia. (Photograph by A. Goede.)

  The limestone ranges of the Kimberley region are an international type-site of semi-arid karst. In their study, Jennings and Sweeting (1963) described a distinctive landscape (Figures 10.6 and 10.7) and a particular sequence of landform evolution which has since been found applicable to other seasonally humid karsts in northern  Australia.  They  argued  that  during  Tertiary   and Quaternary denudation of clastic coverbeds a drai- nage pattern was lowered onto the underlying limestones  that resulted in the formation of gorges of superimposi-   tion. For example, the Lennard River has cut the 4-km-   long Windjana Gorge through the Napier Range, and drains runoff from a hilly impermeable catchment of about 500 km2 through the gorge. Although most allo- genic rivers in the area cross through the karst in gorges, some smaller streams pass through the plateau in caves,    the largest known being 8 km long.
  The exhumed and re-karstified plateau surface stands 80–100 m above a neighbouring lower pediment that rises inland from about 90 m in the northwest to 140 m in the southeast (Figure 10.6). The pediment surface truncates limestones, shales and siltstones and has a gradient of 1–2○ or less (Goudie et al. 1990). The sequence of evolution proposed by Jennings and Sweeting (1963)




envisages the plateau being gradually dissected and reduced to the level of the pediment, mainly by a process   of parallel joint-aligned retreat in interfluvial areas. Through-rivers provide regional baselevel control. The main stages in the present phase of evolution of the karst were identified as follows.

1. The plateau surface is stripped of soil and joints are penetrated by corrosion, producing fissure caves which enlarge to become intersecting sets of closed solution corridors or ‘giant grikes’ that isolate large bedrock blocks. The block surfaces are densely fluted   by rillenkarren and solution pans, and the grike corridors that isolate them are up to 5 m wide, 50 m  deep and hundreds of metres long. Vertical wall karren flute their sides. Modern fissure caves prolong the open grikes underground and link up joints with different  orientations. Intersection points of solution corridors  sometimes widen into steep-walled closed depressions.
2. Solution corridors and infrequent closed depressions amalgamate to form integrated valley systems reflect-  ing the joint geometry in plan. Termed ‘box valleys’, they have rectangular cross-sections with steep walls,  flat floors and plateau-like divides. Their long profiles grade to the adjoining pediment. Closed depression floors are also adjusted to this level. Significant tufa deposition in some valleys may seal their floors.
3. Plateau remnants are consumed by the widening of box valleys, thereby isolating towers that are scattered across bedrock pediments. In places, the landscape comprises a bare fluted tower karst (Figure 10.7) that     is sharp and abrupt, but of comparatively small relief    (< 40 m). However, the bounding slopes display a wide range of morphologies from abrupt free faces to gently convexo-concave slopes.
4. Pediplanation results from continued dissolution of the towers and from direct scarp recession into the margins of the plateau. Scarps are fluted by wall runnels  up  to  2 m  deep  and  to  30–60 m  long.  Ulti- mately the upper surface is completely replaced by the lower. Valley floors are the sites of abundant tufa and calcrete deposition.

  Just how much this pattern of evolution has been preconditioned and directed by palaeokarst developed between the first late Devonian emergence of the lime- stones and their Early Permian burial under clastic deposits (Playford 2002) remains an interesting question  well worthy of further research, but it seems certain that some karst depressions and therefore probably some caves and fissures have Early Permian precursors. It is

also likely that a major part of the present phase of evolution occurred during more humid periods of the Tertiary when, as was the case with the Nullarbor karst, Australia was in more southerly latitudes and more exposed to a strong westerly circulation.
  We suggest that the extension of pediments into some karstlands is the one truly distinctive climato-genetic feature so far recognized in desert karst. The frequent occurrence of thick tufa and calcrete crusts is also notable (see section 9.12), with these deposits often sealing valley floors. The patterns of poorly integrated to non-integrated channels, claypans and dongas (‘dayas’ on the Moroccan hamada) are quite distinctive, but similar patterns occur     on humid northern plains where the deranging agency is glaciation rather than aridity. Salomon (2005) provides numerous illustrations of such features around the globe.  We agree with Jennings’ (1983) general conclusion that carbonate karst declines with precipitation; quite simply,   the richness and diversity of landforms diminishes. We observe also that the mode of development and the scale  and form of landscape produced in the limestone ranges is very similar to that of the subarctic Nahanni karsts (sections
9.2 and 10.4) save in one crucial respect. This is that the Nahanni corridor karst is drained via younger generations   of caves developed in the floors of the corridors and platea (box valleys), whereas the limestone ranges of Kimberley drain surficially across a pediment.
10.3 THE COLD EXTREME: KARST DEVELOPMENT IN GLACIATED TERRAINS
10.3.1 The Late Tertiary–Quaternary glaciations
The cold extreme is represented by land that is ice- covered or that is bare but permafrozen. At the present time (considered to be ‘post-glacial’) 10% of the aggre- gate continental area is occupied by glaciers (glacier- ized) and a further 15% is widely or continuously permafrozen. At the maxima of the Quaternary glacia- tions ice cover increased to approximately 30%. Much of  the terrain that is now permafrozen was then glacierized. Because the glaciers were so extensive, relationships between the karst system and glacial processes will be discussed first. Karst development in permafrozen terrain    is considered in section 10.4.
  More than 95% of the volume of modern glacier ice is    in Antarctica. Ice sheets have existed there for at least the past 8 Ma, though not necessarily at the modern scale. Expansion to ~30% continental cover during glaciation maxima was accomplished by minor extension of the Antarctic sheets, growth of major ice sheets over Canada  and over Scandinavia plus the Russian northwest and




Barents Sea shelf, and of ice caps and valley glaciers in all high mountain regions. Withdrawal of so much water from the oceans lowered global sea level as much as 130 m. This  radically  affected  the  world’s  coasts  (section  10.5) and significantly changed the 18O:16O ratio in the remain- ing seawater (section 8.7). Study of fluctuations  in that ratio, as it is recorded in foraminiferal tests recovered from tropical ocean sediment cores, suggests that there  may have been as many as 17 cycles of glacier ice growth and decay within the past 2 Ma, i.e. roughly 100 000 years per cycle (Bradley 1999). These are correlated with changes of net global solar radiation induced by periodic irregularities in the Earth’s orbital motion about the Sun. The number of glaciations recognized on the continents is fewer because of destruction of early evidence. In well-studied regions at least three or four glaciations  separated by warm inter- glacial conditions such as the present are known. The first glacial perturbations appear in lowland mid-continent sites such as Nebraska at 2.5–3.0 a and in the Mediterranean region at 2.4–2.6 a. Local  glaciations in high mountain areas probably began earlier, e.g. 8 year in Alaska.
  The warm climate peak of the last interglacial occurred about 125 a. This was followed by a worldwide glacial cycle; all glaciers expanded close to their greatest known extent, reaching their maxima in most regions between 26 and 18 a. Recession to the modern sizes or less was completed by about 7 a. There have been at least two other glaciations of this magnitude since ~780 a.
  The effects of such radical, comparatively rapid changes of conditions upon karst in the glaciated regions   are fundamental and complex. Glaciokarst relationships range from the perfect preservation of ‘pre-glacial’ karst to its complete destruction and from the prohibition of any post-glacial karst to its most rapid development.
10.3.2 Relevant conditions in glaciers
Glacier ice flows by intracrystalline creep and by sliding      on its bed (Drewry 1986, Martini et al. 2001). With creep,  the velocity of flow is proportional to temperature and to    the surface slope of the glacier; it varies from 1–2 m a—1    in cold, near-horizontal ice sheets to 100–1000 m a—1 or more in steep, ‘temperate’ glaciers. Sliding over the bed  is limited largely to temperate glaciers, where basal ice temperature is at the pressure melting point (0○C or a  little below), so that water is present to lubricate the sliding. Velocity is proportional to bed slope. Wet-based glaciers, flowing by both creep and sliding and loaded with rock debris, can scour rock surfaces very effectively. Dry-based glaciers are frozen to the rock, either partially      or everywhere. They may protect it completely from effects of creep in the overlying ice, drag it to create

local folding, or wrench it and remove large blocks as integral parts of the basal flowing mass. Blocks of sedimentary bedrocks as great as 1 km2 in area may be extracted intact and moved downstream for short dis- tances. Where the wrenching is only partial, however (the rock block is not entirely extracted), glaciotectonic cav-   ities can be created. Often, these are best developed in carbonate rocks because earlier dissolution weakened bedding plane and joint contacts there, thus permitting differential slip. Figure 10.8 shows spectacular examples    of these processes from the work of Schroeder and colleagues in glaciated Quebec.
  Water from two different sources may be present at glacier beds. The first source is of meltstreams that have descended from the glacier surface or from allogenic terrain (e.g. nunataks). It flows in channels melted upwards into the ice (R channels, which may closed by annealing during the winter) or in channels partly pro- tected in the bedrock (N channels). A subglacial lime- stone cave is an N channel fully protected against annealing, although its entry may become obstructed. The second type of water is a thin pressure melt/regela-   tion film present wherever temperate ice and rock are in direct contact (Hallet 1979). It may function as a wholly closed system, melting against an obstruction and freez-    ing again in its lee, or part may escape into the R or N channels or pass down under pressure into the bedrock (Smart, 1983b, 1984).
  Smart (1997) undertook detailed studies at the Small River site in the Canadian Rocky Mountains, where a temperate alpine glacier 2.8 km2 in area is drained under- ground  into  dipping  limestones  sandwiched  between quartzites.  Moulins (ablation shafts  in  glacier  ice – section 7.3) develop above bedrock ridges there, channel- ling  supraglacial  meltstreams  down  into  the  rock. Repeated dye traces at one moulin demonstrated karst groundwater flows of  0.5–1.0 m3 s—1  to  springs 1.75 km distant; maximum straight-line velocities ranged  480– 650 m h—1. Boreholes to pressure-melt areas of the glacier sole  adjoining  the  moulin  found  that  there   was  no hydrological connection of the pressure melt to  the moulin flow (Ross et al. 2001). Lauritzen (1996a) reports on larger glaciers in South Spitsbergen, where much of the ice is dry-based. At the coast, Trollosen Spring discharges 13–15 m3 s—1  of  englacial and supraglacial water from the large Vitkovski Glacier. It is mixed with       a smaller proportion of thermal water from deep sources. The extent to which meltwaters from supra-, en- and subglacial sources can accumulate above a glacier base and so raise the water table there is controversial. At the least, such accumulation is inescapable where the ice occupies a closed depression such as an overdeepened






Figure 10.8 (Upper) Pull-apart cavity created by glacial wrenching of horizontally bedded  limestones  along  some major joints. Ste. Foy, Quebec. (Lower) A spectacular instance      of subglacial drag-folding exposed in the wall of a limestone      cave at Pont Rouge, Quebec. There is glacial till in the cores          of the folds. (Photographs by J. Schroeder, with permission).



cirque, unless karst channels are open already to drain it. Lauritzen (1984a,b) has deduced glacier aquifer depths of
> 100 m at Norwegian cave sites where there is no overdeepening,  as  shown  in  Figure  10.9.  Schroeder (1999) found that englacial caves flooded to similar depths when the outlets (R channels) annealed during the polar winter in Spitsbergen (section 7.3). Schroeder  and Ford (1983) contended that Castleguard Cave (sec-  tion 8.1) was back-flooded and filled with varved clays when the Columbia Icefield expanded to fully bury it during two or more glacials. Melt-season water tables will then have been ~1000 m above the local glacier base, which was > 50 km upstream of the glacier snout. Continental glacier conditions exist when all of the topography is buried by ice flowing over it. The ice is normally 500–5000 m deep. These conditions prevailed over Canadian karst areas east of the cordillera, over most karsts of Scandinavia, northwest Russia and the glaciated British Isles. Alpine glacial conditions prevailed over most other glaciated karsts, where the flowing glaciers



Figure 10.9 Two examples of glacier-induced phreatic cave development from the Norwegian karst. Adapted with permission from Lauritzen, S.-E. (1984b) Evidence of subglacial karstifica- tion in Glomdal, Svartisen. Norsk Geografisk Tidesskrift, 38(3–4), 169–70. Lauritzen, S.-E. (1986) Kvithola at Fauske, northern Norway: an example of ice-contact speleogenesis. Norsk Geografisk Tidesskrift, 66, 153–61.



Table 10.1   Categories of karst landforms in glaciated terrains Category	Type
Post-glacial	1. Simple forms – independent of preceding glacial forms: many karren, collapse dolines
2. Suffosion dolines, many solution dolines, limestone pavements, etc., where the location or part of the       form is determined by preceding glacial features
Adapted glacial	3. Glacial grooves, scourholes, potholes, S and P forms, kettle holes, cirques, moraine-dammed valleys,        etc., adapted to karstic drainage
Subglacial and	4. Normal karst landforms (e.g. solution shafts) occupying anomalous hydrological positions
glacier marginal	5. Subglacial calcite precipitates; some arctic corridor karst?
Glaciated karst	6. Dolines, etc., subject to one apparent episode of glacial erosion and/or deposition
Polygenetic forms	7. Most large closed karst depressions in glaciated terrains; created by repeated glacial and karst episodes Preglacial karst	8. Some relict caves (surface karst features are modified into types 6 or 7)



were channelled between ice-free ridges and summits that often supplied allogenic streams to the glacier systems. Alpine local relief normally ranges 500–4000 m.
  Alpine karst has received more attention than the con- tinental type because it is well developed in the Alps and Pyrenees, close to the classic centres of karst study (Kunaver 1982, Maire 1990). It is important to recognize that two distinct ice–karst relationships have existed in alpine terrains. The first is where glaciers were confined to the highest ground (cirques, summit benches, upper valleys) so that meltwater could discharge underground into lower karst valleys that were ice-free at all times, i.e. the karst water input points are glacierized but not the outputs. This relationship prevailed in most of the Pyrenees and Picos     de Europa, much of the western and southern Alps, the Taurus, the Caucasus, the Rocky Mountains (USA), etc. and may be termed the Pyrenean type. Many detailed case studies around the world are given in ‘La Haute Montagne Calcaire’ (Maire 1990); see also Bini et al. (1998a,b) and Audra (2000). In the second relationship, glacier ice occu- pied all valleys and extended far beyond the output spring positions. This condition prevailed in the Canadian Rocky Mountains, parts of the central Alps and Scandinavian mountains and may be termed the Canadian type. Oppor- tunities for karst development are more restrictive in these conditions because glacial effects have a direct impact on all of the karst system. Canadian findings are emphasized here; Lauritzen (1996b) gives details from glaciated stripe karst in the mountains of northern Norway. In the Southern Alps of New Zealand, the situation is transitional, being of Canadian type in the south (Fiordland) and Pyrenean type in the north.
10.3.3 Surface karst morphology in glaciated terrains
Where there have been multiple glaciations many different relationships between surface karst landforms and glacial

action are possible. Those that we have noted are listed in Table 10.1. Post-glacial karst forms are freshest and easiest to categorize. In type 1 (Table 10.1) the form, its dimensions and location owe little or nothing to prior glacial effects. Examples are many types of karren, collapse dolines such as that of Vermilion Creek, NWT (Figure 9.56) and the densely packed schlotten in gypsum (Figure 9.58).
  In type 2 the location and/or recognizable parts of the morphology and dimensions are determined by inherited glacial features. As discussed in section 9.2, the place- ment and extent of modern limestone pavements are most often determined by prior glacier scour. Suffosion dolines also develop particularly well because fine-grained gla- cial detritus is readily piped into surviving epikarst cavities such as grikes. Probably the majority of post- glacial solution dolines also belong in this category. They are located at low points prepared by glacial scour and the form is often irregular because it retains part of the  scour morphology. Steep- to vertical-sided dolines on scoured fractures trap and conserve snow, becoming sites   of accelerated corrosion termed ‘schachtdolinen’, ‘schneedolinen’ or ‘kotlic’. Solution dolines in glaciated terrains rarely compose regular polygonal karst because of the deranging glacial effects. However,  suffosion dolines over buried pavement may yield excellent poly- gonal drainage.
  Type 3 are glacial depressions adapted to karst drai- nage. Small depressions in bedrock include potholes, grooves and  irregular, shallow  scours of  weaker strata or fracture lines that range from centimetres to a few hundred metres in length (P forms and S forms – Shaw 1988, Tinkler and Stenson 1992). Their origin may be by glacier scour, fluvial corrosion, dissolution by meltwater floods, or a combination. Smaller examples may be modified into karren pits and runnels, larger into one or       a line of small kotlic dolines.




  Innumerable closed depressions of all shapes and sizes  are created during the glacial and pro-glacial deposition      of clastic detritus. Amongst those of small to intermediate scale, such as kettle holes, four different conditions may arise (Ford 1979):

1. the depressions cannot drain underground, and so fill    up as ponds;
2. the depressions drain underground through the glacial detritus without modifying it;
3. the depressions drain underground through drift with a high content of soluble clasts, so that there is dissolu- tion with collapse or piping;
4. the depressions drain underground into bedrock karst – subsidiary suffosion or collapse features  may develop.
  
Only this fourth condition belongs to the karst system,  but in many continental glaciated terrains covering thou- sands of square kilometres there is the greatest difficulty in distinguishing it from the others. Interesting large exam-  ples are provided by the turloughs (dry lakes) of western Ireland (Williams 1970, Coxon 1987), where more than   100 are known up to 250 ha in area. In the lowlands, they flood as a consequence of seasonal fluctuations of the regional water table, whereas in upland areas such as the Burren plateau their flooding can be a response to pro- longed intense rain at any season, the capacity of their swallow holes being exceeded. Canadian examples from permafrozen regions are illustrated in section 10.4.
  Moraine-dammed valleys that drain karstically are comparatively rare. Figure 10.10 shows a fine example from the Mackenzie Mountains, NWT, Canada, that





Figure 10.10 (Upper) Post-glacial landforms. An erratic block on a pedestal on a glacier-moulded ridge in marble, Pikhauga, Norway. Stream-sink in medium-bedded limestones, Anticosti Island, Quebec. (Lower) ‘Moraine Polje’, a karst-adapted glacial feature. The photograph is taken from the crest of a terminal moraine which blocks a valley in dolomites (catchment is 90 km2). The     valley floor is seasonally inundated; all waters sink in a cave at the arrow. Mackenzie Mountains, Canada.





Figure 10.11    (Left) Subglacial calcite precipitates (white material) upon an ice-scoured surface. Ice flow was towards the camera.           Ice receded approximately 20 yearbefore this picture was taken. (Right) Detail of the calcite deposition around a limestone drumlinoid. A pattern of subglacial microrills is seen at the stoss (upstream or near) end of the drumlinoid. Scale in inches. Castleguard karst, Canada.


functions in the same manner as a seasonally inundated polje.
  Karst landforms created beneath the ice include shaft dolines of normal appearance occupying what become anomalous hydrological positions when the ice is gone. Examples are shafts in the crests of subglacial ridges, created because crevasses formed above them and were adapted as moulins. The Small River moulin described above is an example. There are also stream sinkholes stranded high in valley sides where they once swallowed marginal streams from the ice. They are characteristic of alpine karst.
  Subglacial calcite precipitates (Figure 10.11) are a class of karst forms unique to the subglacial environment. They are crusts deposited from the basal pressure-melt film as it refreezes (Hallet 1976). They are highly stream- lined in accordance with local ice flow, including ridge- and-furrow forms and even small, horizontal helictites oriented downflow. In some instances it is apparent that    the feedwater flowed through the bedrock in a miniature epikarst before reaching the freezing site. Crusts are up to a few   centimetres   thick   and   may   cover   70–80%   of a limestone or dolomite surface if it is comparatively regular and free of basal clastic debris. In the Alps the forefield of the Glacier de Tsanfleuron is a particularly well-studied locality (e.g. Hubbard and Hubbard 1998). There are a few instances of the precipitates being found on non-carbonate rocks (Hillaire-Marcel et al. 1979), includ- ing in Antarctica.
  In southern parts of the continuous permafrost zone of Canada there are patterns of solutional corridors

(giant grikelands) that are now draped with glacial till, permafrozen and relict. They occur on lowland and plateau surfaces where, despite their northerly situation,    the continental ice flow was probably wet-based for at least parts of each glaciation. It is suggested that they may have been created by subglacial dissolution (Ford 1984). They are not glacial erosion forms but it is evident that the carbonate rock surfaces between corridors were scoured by ice able to remove overlying beds.
  Simple glaciated karst (Table 10.1, type 6) describes karst features subject to one significant episode of glacial action which has modified their form. The example of a small doline is shown in Figure 10.12. Such simple forms are comparatively rare. Most karst features subject to glaciation must be placed in type 7 – landforms that have suffered several or many later episodes of glacial action  plus, in most instances, significant karst solution when ice was absent. They are polygenetic, multiphase features. There are no examples where the precise number of phases has been reliably determined.
  A majority of the largest closed depressions now functioning  karstically  in  glaciated  regions  belong  in  this  category.  It  includes  hundreds,  perhaps  thousands, of cirques in the carbonate ranges (Figure 10.13; Ford 1979, Maire 1990). The cirque is the basic alpine glacial landform, normally 0.5 to 5 km in length or diameter. Many are overdeepened by scour into the bedrock, i.e. their bases are closed depressions. In others closure is created, partly or wholly, by a moraine barrier. Some contain seasonal or permanent lakes that may overflow at  the surface. Others are always dry, with karren and





Figure 10.12 A simple (i.e. one-event) example of a karst form overridden and scoured by warm-based ice. Ice flow was from     left to right across this small doline which displays glacial plucking on the upstream (left-hand) wall, abrasion and sub- glacial precipitation on the downstream wall.
varieties of the post-glacial and adapted dolines in their floors. Many drain to springs at the foot of the riegel (bedrock step below the cirque) and thus are local karst hydraulic systems subordinate to the glacial topography. Others contribute to regional aquifers. Together with spreads of schichtreppen karren, kotlic, and suffosion dolines on patches of glacial till, karst-drained cirques are the type features of alpine karst.
  High, rugged limestone ranges in southern regions of  Italy and Greece, and in Mexico, Guatemala, etc. were never glaciated. Their slopes are often dissected by deep, very asymmetric dolines that may be 1000 m or more in diameter. These are ‘prefabricated cirques’ should  gla- ciers become established there. They may help to explain the  high  frequency  and  regularity  of  form  that  is char- acteristic of cirques in glaciated limestone mountains.
  Large depressions also occur in alpine plateaus and valleys (e.g. Figure 10.13; Smart 1986), and even on plateaux and plains subject to continental glaciation. Intensive geophysical exploration for kimberlite pipes is currently discovering closed depressions up to several kilometres in length and 200 m deep scoured into the very extensive limestone plains of northern Ontario. The process is glacial overdeepening of initial subsidence holes created by dissolution of minor underlying gypsum beds. These depressions are now fully infilled with glacial and pro-glacial deposits.
  In most glaciated terrains truly pre-glacial karst land- forms (i.e. antedating all episodes of glaciation) cannot be recognized. A few exceptions are noted, such as in southern Ireland where numerous enclosed depressions with organic deposits containing early Tertiary pollen are






Figure 10.13    (Upper) Racehorse Cirque and (lower) Surprise  Lake II. These are two deep, ice-scoured depression in massive, steeply dipping limestones in the Rocky Mountains of Canada.    The waters drain karstically, their water surfaces being 50 m and   80 m respectively below the lowest points in the bedrock rims. Features such as these are probably produced by many succes-    sive episodes of karst and glacial action.
clearly pre-glacial in age (Drew and Jones 2000). In most other glaciated regions such features possibly existed but have been modified into the glaciated and polygenetic types. In the literature, ‘pre-glacial’ is often used where it is established only that a feature is older than the last glaciation.
  In the alpine karsts of Europe and North America, landforms of types 1, 2 and 3 (Table 10.1) are numeri-   cally predominant. Many authors have recognized strong altitudinal zonation of these features, beginning with a doline zone at the treeline, succeeded by a higher karren zone and then a highest zone where frost shattering is predominant (e.g. Bauer (1962) in the Alps; Jennings and Bik (1962) in Papua New Guinea; Miotke (1968) in the




Picos de Europa). Ford (1979) emphasized that in the Rocky Mountains most modern alpine karst zonation may  be more strongly tied to ice extent, erosion and deposition during the last glaciation. In particular, terrain covered by glaciers displays mixed assemblages of karren and differ-  ing types of dolines, varying with slope gradients and with the depth of any detrital cover. Terrain that was not   ice covered tends to be dominated by frost debris, regardless of altitude, and so does not host karren. It will display kotlic and other dolines if sufficient drainage can be focused.
10.3.4 Effects of glacier action upon karst systems
This section briefly considers the effects that glaciers may have upon the karst system as a whole. The most extensive tracts of formerly glaciated karst rocks occur in Canada where Ford (1983a, 1996b) recognized the nine distinctive effects listed in Table 10.2. There may be others awaiting analysis.
  Erasure of shallow karst features by glacial scour and plucking is perhaps the most widespread and frequently recognized effect. Positive forms such as spring mounds, pinnacles and hums may be removed entirely, as are microkarren and the smaller karren such as rillen. Shal-    low epikarst aquifers such as limestone and dolomite pavements can be stripped away, leaving unbreached, ice-polished surfaces in their stead. However, it is common for the bases of deeper grikes to survive a single glaciation: unless they are rendered hydrologically inert     by infilling and shielding (below) they then may guide the post-glacial renewal of karstification. Most dolines are too deep to be removed by the scouring capacity of a single glaciation although, once again, they may be rendered hydrologically inert.
  Glacier ice cannot be abstracted into karst aquifers as invading allogenic rivers can. Therefore, extensive aqui-  fers may be dissected by means of glacial groove, trough

or cirque cutting. The process is most effective in alpine terrains with temperate glaciers. In perhaps the majority     of such regions the consequence is that fragments of large, deep phreatic cave systems that are long drained and relict are preserved high in valley sides and even close to the summits of horn peaks. The famous Eisrie- senwelt near Salzburg, Austria, is an example; Ford (1983c) and Lauritzen (1996b) illustrate many others in     the Canadian Rockies and north Norway respectively.
  Infilling is used to describe the filling of surface karst forms by glacial detritus. In Canada it is known that closed depressions as great as 300 km2 in area were filled completely during the last glaciation and ceased to exist     as topographic entities. It may be presumed that, at the   least, tens of thousands of doline-scale depressions have been filled in the world’s glaciated regions during the Quaternary Period.
  Filling and burial do not necessarily imply that a doline will be unable to perform its hydrological role after the     ice has receded. If there is an adequate hydraulic gradient  the clastic fill may function merely as an infiltration regulator as discussed in section 9.4. With time the depression then is partially re-excavated by dissolution or suffosion or, most often, by a combination of them both. The most striking Canadian example is Medicine Lake, where it is estimated that 1:8 × 108 m3  of detritus    has been removed into the Maligne River conduit aquifer (section 5.3) during the Holocene. This has created a closed depression 6 km in length that is a partial re- excavation of a greater, infilled bedrock depression.
  Glacial debris can be injected deep into conduit aquifers. At Castleguard Cave, the heads of six inlet passages are sealed by intruded glacier ice itself; this is     the only explored cave that extends substantially beneath modern flowing ice and the intrusions are believed to be very short. Normal injecta are clastic detritus of all grain sizes, transported by meltwater (section 8.2). The streams



Table 10.2   Effects of glacier action upon karst systems Type	Effect
Destructive, deranging:	Erasure – of karren, and residuals
Dissection – of integrated systems of conduits
Infilling – of karren, dolines and larger input features; aggradation of springs Injection – of clastic detritus into cave systems
Inhibitive:	Shielding – carbonate- or sulphate-rich drift protects bedrock surfaces from post-glacial dissolution
Preservative:	Sealing – clay-rich deposits seal and confine epikarst aquifers
Stimulative:	Focusing inputs, raising hydraulic head – with superimposed glacial streams or aquifers Lowering spring elevations – by glacial entrenchment
Deep injection – of glacial meltwaters/groundwater when bedrocks are being flexed during crustal
depression or rebound




may be supraglacial or englacial in position (e.g. at the Kvithola cave, Figure 10.8) but in the majority of cases studied appear to have been subglacial or pro-glacial. Substantial sections of many deep alpine cave systems have been filled, nearly or completely, by injecta of varied grain size. Repeated filling is common. However, other sections escape filling so that, during the deglacial     or post-glacial periods the aquifer can be substantially renewed by a combination of re-excavation of some conduits and opening of new bypasses to others.
  Where the relief is intermediate or low, so that it is completely buried by ice, and abundant clay is available from nearby shales or other strata, aquifers may be more comprehensively deranged or rendered quite inert by injection of the clay sealant. The Goose Arm Karst, Newfoundland, is an excellent example of severe derangement (Karolyi and Ford 1983). It is a rugged terrain with a local relief of 50–350 m that may have been a cone karst before glaciation. It contained more than 40 large, bedrock closed depressions (100 to > 1000 m diameter), implying the existence of mature conduit aquifers draining to a small number of regional springs. Following clay injection, some depressions were com- pletely blocked and have filled with water to function as normal lakes. Others discharge via short or tiny post- glacial conduits to their individual springs. Orientation of  the modern flow paths correlates poorly with both geo- logical structure and maximum topographic gradient, the




Figure 10.14    A dry cirque in marble on Mount Arthur, South-   ern Alps, New Zealand. The glaciokarstic depression failed to maintain a lake because it is drained underground resurging
6.3 km distant and 990 m lower. Several stream-sink positions
are  evident  as  the  ponor  point  retreated.  (Photograph  by
M. Tooker.)

two factors that control the directions of flow in normal aquifers (section 5.2).
  Post-glacial  karst  development  is  inhibited  where the bedrock is shielded from solutional attack because the solvent capacity of the waters is expended on soluble clasts in the cover of glacial detritus. Because they are com- paratively weak most carbonate rocks and gypsum yield abundant clasts to scouring glaciers, enriching the local    till. Some marbles do not yield significantly and tills immediately downstream of yet weaker rocks such as shale may be deficient in soluble fragments.
  At different sites in Ontario and Quebec 1–2 m of till or outwash, or no more than 0.25 m of marl, have served to protect underlying limestones and dolomites entirely during the 10 000–14 000 year since the ice receded (Figure 10.15) despite the fact that an ideally open (i.e. optimal) dissolu- tion system may be operating. At Windsor, Nova Scotia, an ice-scoured surface of gypsum is beautifully  preserved beneath 4–6 m of till rich in gypsum fragments.
  Much of the terrain underlying sluggish, cold-based glaciers may suffer negligible erosion; e.g. tors created by deep weathering are widely preserved in Swedish Lapp-  land (Andre´ 2001) and, more remarkably, spreads of felsenmeer in the Torngat and Kaumajet Mountains of Quebec and Labrador (Marquette et al. 2004). Eyles (1983) presents zonal models. In such situations karst features as fragile as densely fissured pavement may be preserved more or less intact. The principal Canadian example is pavement in medium- to thick-bedded dolo- mites that underlies the city of Winnipeg, perhaps extend- ing for as much as 3000 km2  (Figure 10.15; Ford 1983b).    It is overlain by up to 4 m of meltout till that is not injected into it significantly. This sealed the pavement and has converted a quickly drained epikarst into a productive confined aquifer. Such extensive preservation appears to be rare, however.
  Probably the fastest rates of development of ponors and short sections of new cave in carbonate rocks occur during glacial recession in rugged terrains such as alpine areas. This is because large melt streams can be focused    on specific input points at a glacier sole or margin for a    few tens or hundreds of years, and because the hydraulic head building up in a glacier might be superimposed functionally upon that in an underlying karst aquifer. There are many examples of shafts drilled into the crests    of subglacial ridges, as noted above, and of others aligned along the outer margins of end-moraine ridges where they were  evidently  fed by supraglacial  streams, e.g. Glazek    et al. (1977) in Poland. In the modern Columbia Icefield a small melt-lake builds up in a depression in the ice until      it discharges abruptly through its base, apparently into the underlying Castleguard aquifer, i.e. it is a karstic







Figure 10.15 Illustrating two extremes of glacial effects upon epikarst solutional pavements in limestone and dolomite. Both sites were overridden by the (Wisconsinan) Laurentide ice sheet   but were close to its margins. (Upper) Scour beneath warm-based ice led to complete removal of upper beds plus infilling of grike bases with injected clay, to create a truncated and inert palaeo-  karst. Striae are perfectly preserved beneath 1.3 m of diamict rich   in dolomite clasts. Hamilton, Ontario. (Lower) Perfect preserva-  tion of open clint-and-grike epikarst beneath meltout tills re- leased from cold-based ice, Winnipeg, Manitoba.

‘jokulhaup’ (ice-dam burst), an extreme form of  super- imposition (Ford 1996a).
  Glacial entrenchment also steepens groundwater hydraulic gradients by lowering potential spring points.      In alpine glacial regions of the Canadian type many springs ‘hang’ above the floors of limestone valleys because they have not yet adjusted.
  The final effect is somewhat more speculative than those summarized above. In Canada and elsewhere there     is increasing evidence to suggest that there may be very  deep injection of meltwater into karst aquifers, into interstratal karst and into palaeokarst features that were

buried and inert before the Quaternary glaciations. Injec- tion may be abetted by the crustal flexure that occurs when land is rebounding isostatically from the release of   ice load, especially in extensive lowlands.
  The most important evidence is that some deep col- lapse structures have been either initiated or rejuvenated during glaciations (Ford 1983a, Anderson and Hinds 1997, Grasby et al. 2002). The principal examples are of giant breccia pipes above salt in the plains of Sas- katchewan and Alberta (Figure 9.59). In Figure 10.16a, Howe Lake is a closed depression in which tills of last glacial age were downfaulted 78 m (Christiansen and Sauer 2001). The depression has been infilling during the Holocene and is now only 10 m deep though it is 300 m in diameter. The ‘Saskatoon Low’ is more  com- plex. In one or a series of early collapses, Cretaceous and older clastic rocks downdropped at least 190 m to create a principal depression measuring 25 × 40 km (Christiansen 1967). These collapses may be Quaternary in age and glacially triggered but could be earlier. The final collapse occurred at the close of the last (Wisconsin/Wurm) glaciation,  when tills  of that  age  were  downfaulted 70 m into the older depression (Figure 10.16b). The collapse propagated from salt approximately 1000 m beneath the surface of the Cretaceous cover rocks. The depression was infilled by post-glacial lake sediments and has been inert during the Holocene.
  Evidence of glacial rejuvenation of palaeokarst of Palaeozoic age has been revealed at Pine Point, a zinc– lead mining region on the south shore of Great Slave Lake, Canada. The ores fill palaeocaves and collapse dolines in a Devonian barrier reef (Figure 2.11). Certain dolines display cores of Quaternary till (or multiple tills) passing through the centres of the older breccia and sulphide fillings. In a few cases these cores extend below the palaeokarst groundwater circulation base in the carbonates and enter a deeper anhydrite formation. Modern hydraulic gradients are very low and could not support such deep circulation.
  This effect operates at large spatial and temporal scales. The Saskatoon Low is as large as the greatest modern poljes. The deep injection concept implies that a proportion of the water in some deep aquifers or emer-    ging at regional springs may have been resident under- ground since the last or earlier glaciations.
  To conclude, the development of karst landforms and systems in formerly glaciated terrains is particularly com- plex. Glacial action may create a wide range of effects within comparatively small regions. The problem of inheri- tance from previous glacial or interglacial conditions complicates all analysis. In general, destructive or inhibitive effects tend to predominate where the relief is intermediate





Figure 10.16 (a) The surface expression of the Howe Lake collapse structure, Saskatchewan. (b) The ‘Saskatoon Low’. The shaded feature is a Late Wisconsinan collapse of 70 m depth that is infilled by lake sediments. Earlier depressions (unshaded) are probably Quaternary and glacially triggered but could be earlier. Arrow indicates possible glacial spillway. Note the very large scale of these   features. Based on figures in Christiansen, E.A. (1967) Collapse structures near Saskatchewan, Canada. Canadian Journal of Earth    Sciences, 4, 757–67.

or low. For example, in Midwest USA density and variety of explorable caves and other karst features increases markedly to the south of the glacial limits. Where relief is high and alpine glacial conditions prevailed there is always drainage derangement and complex inheritance present in an exten- sive karst but individual features or systems may develop rapidly and to a spectacular scale.
10.3.5 Nival karst
Nival karst is a term widely used to describe regions where the snowfall is comparatively heavy and its sea- sonal melt contributes a large proportion of the ground- water budget. There are two distinct situations. In the first, the terrain has been glaciated so that the modern

nival conditions are superimposed on assemblages of glaciokarst features. In terms of karst form and distribu-  tion, the effects of modern snow-patch deepening are subordinate to the effects of glacier and karst interaction already discussed.
  The second situation occurs where the terrain was not glaciated and was also too warm for deep permafrost to establish during glacial periods. Examples are found among the lower slopes or foothills of most alpine karst regions of the Pyrenean type, such as the Dolomites and    the Julian Alps. The clearest examples of nival effects, however, are found in wholly unglaciated mountain ranges such as the Carpathians of Romania, the Pelopo-  nese and Crete (Greece), the Zagros in Iran, etc. that are remote from former glaciations. Frost shattering and




Figure 10.17  Type-section of a ‘wave’ (vague) on the Ait Abdi Plateau, a nival karst in the High Atlas Mountains, Morocco: 1, gelifracts (frost- shattered clasts); 2, snowdrift; 3, colluvial soil; 4, karren; 5, wind direction; 6, clumps of xerophytic vegetation; 7,        snow. Reproduced from Perritaz, L. (1996) Le ‘karst en vagues’ des Ait Abdi (Haut-Atlas central, Maroc). Karstologia, 28(1), 1–12.




solifluction limit the development of karren in many cases, so that dolines are normally the dominant land- forms. The ‘karst en vagues’ at 2200–3000 m a.s.l. on the Ait Abdi Plateau of the High Atlas Mountains, Morocco, is a striking example from a mediterranean (summer dry) setting. Well-bedded limestones dipping westerly form sequences of small scarps and dipslopes that together appear like waves at sea.  The  recharge  of  ~150– 250 mm a—1 is largely derived from snow drifts against the scarps, and sinks at their feet in shallow dolines or dry valleys (Figure 10.17; Perritaz 1996). Maire (1990) pre- sents many other well-illustrated examples of nival karst.

10.4 THE COLD EXTREME: KARST   DEVELOPMENT IN PERMAFROZEN TERRAINS
10.4.1 The nature and distribution of permafrost
Bedrocks or detrital cover are said to be permafrozen if   their  temperature  remains  below  the  freezing  point  for  1 year or longer (French 1996; Smith and Riseborough

2002). A classification for karst in permafrost zones devised for Canada is shown in Figure 10.18. Glacie`res    are the distinctive karstic category of permafrost that can form and survive outside of these zones because of the configuration and large size of some cave cold traps, as explained in section 8.5. Sporadic permafrost is confined largely to silts and similar detritus at the surface. Wide- spread permafrost extends to all types of rocks and in the continuous zone it is present everywhere except beneath lakes, large rivers or in a few special circumstances described below. Pulina (2005) shows the relationship between the limit of permafrost and occurrence of karst in Russia.
  Permafrost in alpine regions may be placed in a separate category because of the great local irregularity    that it displays in its distribution and depth. Here we treat    it under a more general ‘rugged terrain’ model outlined below.
  Groundwater conditions in widespread and continuous permafrost may be most complex. The active layer is the




Figure 10.18   Model to depict the general relationships between permafrost and karst activity in terrains of low to intermediate            relief. The model is based on conditions in the interior platform and arctic islands of Canada.




top layer, present everywhere, that is thawed and refrozen seasonally. Its depth diminishes from ~2 m at the warm limits of permafrost to no more than 30 cm at the coldest sites. The thermoactive layer (the downward limit of any seasonal temperature change) is deeper, ranging
—5m to —30 m at differing sites. Taliks are unfrozen areas extending below the active layer. They may reach    the base of the permafrost or terminate above it. They are present to some extent beneath all permanent lakes and ponds that are too deep to freeze to their beds in winter. Static or flowing groundwater bodies may be present in taliks or elsewhere within or below the permafrost (Figure 10.18). In karst rocks most intrapermafrost waters are contained within conduit systems or in particular strata with high diagenetic porosity.
  The freezing process is weak because of the release of latent heat as water freezes. As a consequence little energy is required to keep conduits open once flow is established below the thermoactive layer. Maximum seasonal discharges into ponors (at the top of that layer)     of as little as 5 L s—1 provide enough heat to keep them perennially open as taliks at the northern limit of the discontinuous permafrost zone in Canada (van Everdin-

gen 1981). Finally, it should be noted that the freezing point of water decreases as its content of dissolved solids increases; thus sulphate or saline groundwaters may flow where bicarbonate waters would freeze. Figure 10.19 shows one of a series of springs at Gypsum Hill at 79○N on Axel Heiberg Island, Canada, where there is perennial discharge of saline groundwater as cold as
—4○C: the mean annual air temperature is —15○C (Pollard et al. 1999)
  The most extensive tracts of karst rocks in the perma- frost zones occur in Canada and Russia. Most of the Canadian areas and those of northwest Russia were glaciated. Large tracts of carbonate and evaporite rocks       in the Angara–Lena Platform and adjoining Yakutia in Siberia were not (Pinneker and Shenkman 1992, Pulina 1992, 2005, Alexeev and Alexeeva 2002). However, the models presented here from Canadian  experience (Figures 10.18 and 10.20) are broadly appropriate to them.
10.4.2 Karst development in permafrozen terrains
Development of karst systems does not appear to be significantly   restricted   in   the   sporadic   permafrost





Figure 10.19 Gypsum Hill, a sulphate and saltwater karst spring emerging from a talik leak in permafrost under the channel of the Expedition River at 79○N on the west coast of Axel Heiberg Island, Nunavut, Canada. This ‘frost blister’ is ~20 m in diameter. (Photograph by Wayne Pollard, with permission.)





Figure 10.20    A zonal model for the relationships between permafrost and karst drainage in alpine permafrost and for rugged terrain          in the widespread-to-continuous permafrost regions. Based upon the doline and corridor karst of Nahanni, Mackenzie Mountains,          NWT, Canada. SH, shale caprock.


zone in Canada. Permanent freezing there is confined to patches of susceptible soils such as silts that readily accrete ground ice. In never-glaciated southern Siberia the morphology is of long shallow valleys tributary to the Angara and Lena rivers, with mixtures of carbonate, gypsum and clastic rocks. On the interfluves karst aqui-   fers are recharged by diffuse flow or shallow dolines. In    the valley bottoms, however, alluvium is permafrozen and supports surface streams for tens of kilometres until  leak points via taliks are encountered; stream-sink dolines may develop there to lengths of several kilometres and be seasonally inundated (local term – suchodol; Salomon and Pulina 2005).
  For alpine permafrost conditions and intermediate to high relief in the widespread permafrost zone the Nahanni karst may be taken as a model (Ford 1984; Figure 10.20). It extends between 61 and 62○N in the Mackenzie Mountains of Canada. Mean annual tempera- tures range from —6 to —8○C. There is little snow to insulate the ground and winter temperatures fall below
—50○C. Summer temperatures can attain 35○C. As a consequence the thermoactive layer is deep. The region   was glaciated at some time or times before the last interglacial but not since then. Topographic and climatic conditions are broadly similar in the central and northern Lena and Angara highlands.
  
The Nahanni is a mixed doline and corridor karst in 200 m of limestones overlying ~1000 m of dolomites. There are some ‘scablands’ (proglacial lake outburst channel landforms) superimposed on the karst. Larger depressions are >100 m deep and up to 1000 m in lenght (Figure 10.21). Their walls are frost-shattered and floors filled with talus. Where allogenic streams supply sand or clay these depressions become alluviated and may func-   tion as ideal baselevel poljes (Brook and Ford 1980).
  There is unimpeded, highly integrated conduit drainage from all larger depressions to springs at the two ends of the karst belt. Mean velocities of ground water flow through conduits in the dolomite can exceed 4 km per day over distances of 20 km or more, as proven by recent dye traces. Between the depressions the highest karst is permafrozen and relict. An intermediate zone displays aperiodic impe- dance of the recharge. Its catchments are small, a few hectares at the most. Being in the thermoactive layer, the drains of dolines become sealed by ice or detrital plugs that freeze. Over one or a few melt seasons water accu- mulates  above  the  seals  until,  it  is  supposed,  the  hydro- static pressure is sufficient to rupture them; then they drain in the space of a few hours or days. Such behaviour tends to create cenote-form point-recharge dolines.
  Further north in the Mackenzie Mountains the Bear Rock cemented dolomite breccia karst (Figure 10.22






Figure 10.21   Aerial oblique views of the Nahanni karst. (Upper) Raven Lake, a doline that is 150 m deep to the waterline. It drains        dry in winter. (Lower) Flood waters rising in a small polje.

and section 9.13; Hamilton and Ford 2002) is at the widespread–continuous permafrost boundary. It was ice-covered during the last glaciation, so permafrost is only ~50 m in thickness. Many former (fini-glacial?) dolines there retain perched ponds for decades or longer    but all allogenic streams are taken underground along the

geological contacts. To the northwest in the Yukon Territory, Tsi-It-Toh-Choh is a rugged limestone karst which escaped all glaciation because of regional aridity (Cinq-Mars and Lauriol 1985). Mean annual temperature    is —10 to —11○C. Frost-shattered surfaces (felsenmeer)   are more extensive than in the Nahanni and Bear Rock







Figure 10.22    (Upper) Solifluction lobes descending into a large doline in the Bear Rock karst at 66○N, Mackenzie Mountains,         Canada. (Lower) At the same latitude, a turlough in the lowland karst of the West Arm, Great Bear Lake, Canada, in the widespread permafrost zone. It is ~4 km in length, a seasonally inundated closed depression in shallow glacial deposits underlain by dolomites          over gypsum. (Photograph by R.O. van Everdingen, with permission.)


regions. Permafrost to 50–100 m depth is widespread to continuous. Relict caves are well decorated with speleothems which (from U series and palaeomagnetic studies) are almost entirely of Tertiary age (Lauriol et al. 1997). This suggests that most epikarst drainage has been eliminated in the Quaternary. Nevertheless, over a large

area focused drainage to large dolines or valley bottoms permits unimpeded groundwater circulation to perennial springs that are marked by prominent winter-ice buildups (‘aufeis’, German: or ‘naledi’, Russian):  these   may linger long into the summer season. Clark and  Lauriol (1999) reported aufeis spreads up to 32 km2 in the Yukon




ranges, typically being ~1.3% of the areas of the source groundwater basins.
  Aperiodic impedance is particularly relevant to the study of temperate highlands that experienced episodes of permafrost but not of glacier cover during the last or earlier glaciations. Examples include the Mendip Hills and Peak District of England, parts of the Ardennes, Jura, Moravia, Carpathians, French fore-alpine regions such as  the Vaucluse Plateau, etc. At least the smaller threads of drainage from the epikarst base were often halted because speleothem growth in underlying caves was widely arrested (section 8.6). Blockage of dolines is suggested by deep accumulations of layered clays that are now dissected and drained by ponors. Occasionally, relict overspill channels cross the doline rims (e.g. Ford and Stanton 1968). The clay often has a large component of periglacial loess. Some dolines became infilled entirely with soliflucted debris.
  East of the mountains in northern Canada, as the southern limit of continuous permafrost is approached the topographic relief also diminishes. The constraint of   low hydraulic gradient is combined with the constraints imposed by permafrost so that the latter are often difficult   to distinguish. On carbonate rocks modern karst is poorly developed except along escarpment edges where ground- water gradients are high (e.g. Lauriol and Gray 1990). Karst is widespread where gypsum crops out or is covered by comparatively thin dolomites or shales. Van Everdingen (1981) mapped more than 1400 closed depressions functioning karstically and 67 perennial springs in gypsum around the western end of Great Bear Lake. This is at the widespread–continuous perma- frost transition. The largest depressions probably antedate the last glaciation, contain much glacial sediment and function as seasonal turloughs (Figure 10.22).
  Further north, active dolines become fewer but are recognized until relief becomes very low 200 to 300 km inside the continuous permafrost belt. Seasonal melt- water may accumulate and freeze in small dissolutional cavities to heave up shallow rock blisters a few metres        in diameter. There is one known example of an open pingo (a larger blister form in which the ice derives from subpermafrost water) at 69○N close to the arctic coast. It is in dolomite, ~60 m in diameter and 22 m high (St-Onge and McMartin 1995). The region was glacierized during the last cold stage; much of the karst   does not appear to have expanded during the post- glacial period and may actually be shrinking in its extent. This last observation again raises the issue of inheritance.
  In the modern permafrost regions it is suspected that many functioning karst systems may have been estab-

lished under more favourable combinations of hydrological and thermal conditions. They are maintained today because of the comparatively feeble freezing capacity below the thermoactive layer, but are essentially inherited. In arctic Canada and other glaciated terrains this implies inheritance from conditions of subglacial, or ice-margin deglacial, thawing of the permafrost. In non- glaciated regions of Siberia researchers consider compar- able conditions to be warm interglacial episodes or to be   the legacy of pre-permafrost times in the Cenozoic or Mesozoic (Pulina 2005).
  Where there is groundwater circulation today it is difficult to prove that this has been inherited, although        in Siberia mining and other engineering work has revealed numerous buried karst depressions, some filled  with Cretaceous and others with Jurassic  deposits. Origin under more favourable conditions is better understood where the inheritance could not be passed on, i.e. where permafrost has grown and arrested the circulation during post-glacial times. Examples include shallow corridor karst that, as noted, is quite widely scattered on limestone and dolomite plains between 68     and 73○N in Canada, and some large breccia collapses cemented by ground ice that have been found in arctic  mines or on sea-cliff faces. Figure 10.23 shows the example of the Nanisivik zinc–lead mine at 72○300N on Baffin Island. The ore body is a paragenetic cavity filling of pre-Cambrian age that is 100 m or more in width and > 2 km in length. Along the south side, abutting a glacial valley, it is a very open pack breccia     that is now firmly cemented by ground ice. The temperature is —13○C. Brecciation is attributed to dis- solution following the thaw of permafrost beneath a valley glacier during the last glaciation (Ford 1996b). On west Spitsbergen, Salvigsen and Elgersma (1985) suggest that a doline terrain of low relief in gravels overlying gypsum on the seashore was initiated after it     had thawed beneath a marine inundation and then had risen isostatically.
  In the extreme conditions prevailing in the northern Canadian  islands,  northeast  Spitsbergen,  the  Siberian high arctic, and Antarctica, mean annual temperatures are below —12○C and the warmest months are cooler than 5○C. As a consequence the thermoactive layer is shallow. Precipitation generally is < 200 mm, in addition. If glaciated most land remains permafrozen. Recent karst development on the carbonate rocks is very limited in these conditions, although there may be effective ground- water circulation with dissolution to the base of the active layer at 30–100 cm. Ciry (1962) suggested that this would favour development of subcutaneous karst such as lime- stone pavements. Vestigial pavement no more than a few





Figure 10.23 Schematic cross-sections through the Nanisivik zinc–lead ore body (Baffin Island, NWT) to model the develop- ment of a megabreccia arrested by ground ice. (1) Before brecciation (the last interglacial or earlier). The terrain is ice- free and permafrozen to depths >100 m except beneath Strath-   cona Sound, an arm of the sea. (2) The brecciation event (the last (Wisconsinan) glaciation?). Permafrost largely or entirely thaws beneath a cover of glacial ice. Subglacial meltwater is diverted through the Nanisivik palaeokarst into the Sound. Dissolution induces collapse of the southern part of the ore body along a frontage of ~200 m. (3) Post-glacial. Permafrost returns. Brec- ciation is halted by growth of ground ice. Reproduced from Ford,
D.C. (1996b) Karst in a cold climate, in Geomorphology sans Frontie’res (eds S.B. McCann and D.C. Ford), John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp 153–79.



metres wide is occasionally seen along escarpment edges  and small channel karren may develop on steep, bare slopes (e.g. Woo and Marsh 1977; at 73○N on Cornwallis Island). However, in most instances the surface is reduced to felsenmeer by frost shatter (Figure 10.24). This is the predominant aspect of carbonate outcrops in arctic Canada (Bird 1967). Shattering is often more effective on them than on other comparatively strong rocks because solution opens up cracks to permit veins of  ice to form more readily (e.g. Goudie 1999). Solvent capacity is then dissipated on the rubble. When the water freezes or is sublimated much of the solute carbonate is redeposited as calcretes or biocrusts on the undersides of clasts or in joints beneath the rubble (Lauriol and Clark 1999). Some groundwater flows through for short dis- tances because seasonal seeps are common along the bases of low escarpments.
  Deeper, subpermafrost karst systems may develop in salt and gypsum because of the greater solubility of these rocks and the lower freezing point of strong solutions. The systems are artesian. Most of them discharge where permafrost is dissipated at the sea coast, e.g. the Gypsum Hill springs noted above. There are stream-sink dolines      on the flanks of salt diapirs in Axel Heiberg Island, 80○N. The groundwater flow paths are no more than a few hundred metres in length and appear to be shallow supra-   or intrapermafrost features. Gypsum solution breccia has been noted in sea cliffs on the north coast of Ellesmere Island (83○N). This may be the most poleward karst, but      it is believed to be inactive (arrested by ground-ice cementation) today.
10.5 SEA-LEVEL CHANGES, TECTONIC MOVEMENT AND IMPLICATIONS FOR COASTAL KARST DEVELOPMENT
Mean sea level closely approximates the geoid, i.e. the equipotential surface of the gravitational and rotational potentials. Mo¨rner (2005) has explained the complex interplay of processes that determine its level and pro- duce changes in its position. The interface between this surface and the land has varied considerably over geolo- gical time, particularly in the past 2 Ma. This is because there have been worldwide oscillations in ocean level, termed eustatic variations, plus regional- to continental- scale vertical crustal adjustments and linear mountain building or trough-forming disturbances attributable to plate tectonics. These movements of both land and sea have forced repeated vertical displacement of the sites of coastal karst development.
  The most important factors producing eustatic changes  are of glacial, tectonic and geoidal origin; the former





Figure 10.24 Limestone pavement reduced to felsenmeer, Akpatok Island, Ungava Bay, Canada. The island is underlain by permafrost, which is breached here where the hydraulic gradient is steep along the valley side. Drainage down into a clint-and-grike   epikarst is clearly indicated by the pattern of microdolines in the frost rubble. (Photograph by Bernard Lauriol, with permission.)

being the most significant over the timescale with which   we are concerned. Glacio-eustatic changes stem from the transfer of water mass from the ocean to continental ice sheets during glaciations. Glacial eustasy accounts for sea-level movements  of up to 130 T 20 m in periods  of  103  to 105 years (Figure 10.25); sea-level change through  the last glacial cycle having been reviewed by Lambeck   and Chappell (2001).
  The world’s most important data on sea-level variation over time have been obtained from the datable evidence available on limestone coasts. However, Mo¨rner (2005) emphasized that since tectono-eustatic and glacio-eustatic rises and falls cannot occur without accompanying geoi-   dal eustatic changes, we cannot expect to find a perfectly parallel history of absolute sea level for different regions    of the globe. Although the major cause of Quaternary sea-level variations must be glacial eustasy, Nunn (1986) stressed the danger of assuming negligible geoidal eustatic changes in an ocean with ~150 m of movable relief, particularly when the above type-sites are in areas    of large geoid anomaly, where the probability of change could be correspondingly high.
  One of the consequences of variations in sea level is   that, even in tectonically relatively stable areas, the present  coastline  has  only  been  vertically  within  30 m of its present position  for  about  30%  of  the  past 800 000 years (Figure 10.26). So with the baselevel of erosion well below its present position for much of the

Quaternary, the water table inland and the associated freshwater–saltwater interface zone were also lower. Hence there was ample time in the Quaternary to produce karst almost anywhere in the zone exposed by glacial low sea levels down to —130 m or more. On tectonically stable coasts, abrasion platforms and coral reefs marking past positions of the shoreline are presumed to have had  their most extensive development during periods of relative stillstand of the ocean. On tectonically active coasts, the corresponding position is at an interval of tangency between uplift and sea-level oscillation. Excel-  lent examples of carbonate coasts where this sort of movement has occurred, although at different rates, include the Huon Peninsula (Figure 10.27) of Papua New  Guinea  (Bloom  1974,  Chappell  1983,  Chappell  and Shackleton 1986, Ota and Chappell 1999), Barbados (Fairbanks and Matthews 1978, Schellmann et al. 2004)   and Bermuda (Harmon et al. 1978, 1983). In Patagonia there is a spectacular series of horizontal notches in the cliffed marble coast formed by chemical and biological erosion in the intertidal zone during brief stillstands on an otherwise rapidly uplifting coast (Maire et al. 1999), but unfortunately they are very difficult to date.
  Smart and Richards (1992) analysed over 300 published  U series analyses of corals from Quaternary marine terraces and resolved eight high seastands with means and standard deviations of 129.0 T 33.0, 123.0 T 13.0,
102.5 T 2.0, 81.5 T 5.0, 61.5 T 6.0, 50.0 T 1.0, 40.5 T





Figure 10.25   Sea-level curve derived from coral terraces on the Huon Peninsula, Papua New Guinea (Figure 10.27), correlated with  Pacific Ocean deep-sea core V 19-30. Reproduced from Chappell, J. and Shackleton, N.J. (1986) Oxygen isotopes and sea level.         Nature, 324, 137–40.© 1986 Nature Publishing Group.


5.0 and 33.0 T 2.5 a. Using both U series and electron spin resonance dating on coral from Barbados, Schellmann et al. (2004) differentiate three high seastands during the last interglacial (MIS 5e) at ~132 a (ESR) to    128 a  (U/Th),  at  ~128 a  (ESR)  and  at  ~120 a  (U/Th)  to 118 a (ESR). In Western Australia, coral ages indicate  that the last interglacial started at ~128 T 1 a and termi- nated at 116 T 1 a with the main period of coral growth being  a  short  interval  from  128  to  122 a  (Stirling  et  al.

1995, 1998). Reviewing coral age data from four sites (Bermuda, Bahamas, Hawaii and Australia), Muhs (2002) concluded that the last interglacial had a sea level at least   as high as present from ~128 to 116 a.
  Marine overgrowths on speleothems (Figure 10.28) can also be used to determine the dates of high sea- level stands. Thus for example, Forno´s et al. (2002) found high MIS 5e sea levels in the Mediterranean to have occurred at 135–130 a and 125–112 a. From an analysis




100

Per Cent of Elapsed Time


80		For 70% of elapsed time (= 490 k.y.) Sea Level was between -30 and -120 m

60
40
20
0	20	40	60	80	100	120	140
Depth Below Present Sea Level (m)

Figure  10.26    Cumulative  residence  time  of  sea  level  below  its  present  level  during  the  past  800  000  years.  Reproduced        with permission from Purdy, E.G. and Winter, E.L. 2001. Origin of atoll lagoons. Geological Society of America Bulletin 113 (7), 837–854, Geological Society of America.






Figure 10.27 Oblique aerial photograph of the Huon Peninsula showing the raised coral reefs used in the construction of the sea- level curve of Figure 10.25. (Photograph by D. Dunkerley.)

of speleothems drowned by rising sea level, it is also possible to estimate the maximum level attained by the     sea at different times in the past, e.g. Richards et al. (1994) and Figure 8.22b.
  In addition to sea-stand data, information on the ages      of emerged coastal terraces and the rate of tectonic tilting may also be obtained from cave deposits. Williams (1982b) constructed uplift-rate curves for different cave locations along the northwest coast of the South Island,

New Zealand, and by comparing the different rates was   able to estimate the rate of tilting. Forno´s et al. (2002) identified the rate of tilting along the coast of Mallorca in  the Mediterranean by comparing the elevation of MIS 5e speleothem deposits in caves.
  On stable coasts, new features may be built on or cut   into a base inherited from the past. Thus post-glacial morphology may be superimposed onto that developed in  the last interglacial around 125 000 year ago, when sea level briefly stood up to 6 m above present. Similarly, landforms developed in coastal zones exposed during low sea levels may have been reactivated and resubmerged several times during their history (Figure 10.29); thus drowned karst is normal along all carbonate coasts except those subject to very rapid tectonic uplift. Large cave networks discharging at the coast, in particular, have been drained and reflooded repeatedly with Quaternary rise and fall of sea level. Caves in the Yucatan Peninsula provide  spectacularly  good  examples  of  this  (Beddows et al. 2002) (see section 5.8). The conduits feeding many submarine springs would also have been formed in association with lower baselevels.
10.5.1 Karst phenomena in the coastal zone
In the coastal zone a distinction must be made between  those features formed at the coast and those that land–sea interface changes have by chance located there. Those




Figure 10.28   Marine molluscs growing part way up a stalactite in a cave on Manus Island, Papua New Guinea. They record precisely the position reached by a former sea level.





Figure 10.29   Dolines on the New Zealand coast drowned by the Holocene rise of sea level. These are solution dolines that were          filled by volcanic deposits, partly removed by suffosion prior to drowning.


formed at the coast mainly comprise littoral karren and notches of the intertidal zone, discussed in section 9.2. Here we focus predominantly on the other characteristics. The coastal zone in karst is defined by the inland  limit  of  marine  tidal  influences.  Controls  on  the seawater–freshwater interface are explained in section
5.8.  In  porous,  emerged  coral  islands  the  sensitive groundwater  lens  readjusts  twice  daily  to  the  low- amplitude variations of marine tides. On Niue Island in     the Pacific (Figure 5.36), for example, the seawater– freshwater transition at the level of the water-table occurs about 0.5 km inland and tidal effects are measurable to the centre of the island more than 6 km from the shoreline (Jacobson and Hill 1980, Williams 1992). The intrusion      of marine influences along coastlines composed of dense crystalline carbonates is more irregular than in porous limestones, and penetration of tidal effects along conduits can be considerable. For instance, in the Gort Lowland of western Ireland (Figure 9.36), tidal Lough Caherglassaun    is 5.3 km inland and in summer fills and empties twice daily with a lag of 3 to 4 h behind tides in neighbouring Galway Bay. Nearby Hawkill Lough is 8.75 km inland and is also reputed sometimes to show the effect of tides. Difficulties exist in the interpretation of some morpho- logical  features  of  carbonate  islands.  Thus  whereas Darwin (1842) believed barrier reefs around volcanic islands to be due to subsidence, Stoddart et al. (1985) explained them as principally the result of karstic erosion   of the inner margin of a fringing reef by allogenic runoff,

followed by drowning by a rising sea; and Purdy (1974)   and Purdy and Winterer (2001) ascribed the origin of atoll lagoons to differential solution by rainwater during glacial low sea levels. Whereas numerous authors, such      as McNutt and Menard (1978), have attributed suites of  coral island terraces to uplift, Nunn (1986) has warned that some could alternatively be a result of geoidal eustatic regression. It is clear that many carbonate islands have undergone long and complex histories with the alternation of marine and terrestrial influences leaving complex patterns in the landscape. Mylroie and Carew (1995) have provided a valuable review and explanation     of these phenomena.
  Carbonate islands are like dip-sticks in the sea, so the effects of eustatic variation is well displayed in them (Figure 10.30). Emerged coral atolls record the relative level of the ocean as it has moved in the past, as well as lithospheric flexure (Spencer et al. 1987). Negative shifts   in sea level around atolls exposed precipitous fore-reef submarine slopes, and with the loss of buoyant support, massive scale cliff failure often followed. Dislocations arising from  this  are  schematically  illustrated  in Figure 10.30. Long fracture traces subparallel to the coast now mark the inland margins of foundered blocks. Deep fissures sometimes open at the surface have been confused with karst caves because of their vadose canyon- like morphology and speleothem decoration, but many are simply tectonic features. Good examples of such fracture caves occur in the Bahamas (Palmer 1986) and on Niue




Island (Terry and Nunn 2003). Accelerated corrosion at    the base of cliffs produces prominent notches in the intertidal zone of tropical seas (Figures 9.15 and 9.16). Notches have been found to —105 m in the submerged wall of San Salvador Island in the Bahamas (Carew et al. 1984).
  Falling sea levels result in the drawdown of the fresh- water lens and in deepening the vadose zone. The loca-    tion of mixture corrosion at the halocline and at brackish springs is correspondingly lowered and with it an impor-  tant horizon of karst cave development – the flank-margin

caves of Mylroie and Carew (1995). According to Back      et al. (1984), differential solution generates pocket valleys at spring heads round the coast of Yucatan; their later submergence being responsible for coves and crescentic beaches.
  The karstification of atolls and fringing reefs during low sea levels has been recognized for many years, although obvious suites of surface karst landforms other  than karren are uncommon. Since hydrogeological pre- requisites for the focusing of percolation are generally absent,  because  of  the  extreme  porosity  of  coral





Figure 10.30 Geomorphological and stratigraphical effects of sea-level changes observed in coastal cave systems. (a) Mixing corrosion at the freshwater–saltwater interface promotes cave development near the water table and especially flank-margin caves      around the island perimeter. The tension fracture is a non-karst feature resulting from rock failure due to loss of buoyant support          during glacio-eustatic low sea levels, although it is exploited by karst circulation. (b) Allogenic runoff causes seawards retreat of the inland-facing reef margin and promotes cave development through the emerged reef. Submarine or intertidal springs occur where         outlets of stream passages remain clear of reef overgrowth.




limestones, the generation of solution dolines by draw- down is uncommon and the evolution of cockpit karst relief is unlikely even in the humid tropics. Suffosion dolines can occur in residuum. Very high rock porosity works against the centripetal focusing of runoff (which requires lateral movement), and so argues against the central lagoons of atolls being drowned basins formed by focused dissolution. Instead, it is more likely that their basin form is a product of differential corrosion achieved   by vertical percolation of water acidified in the soil. Evidence for this is provided by Urushibara-Yoshino (2003) on Minamidaito Island, Japan, where she found the dissolution rate of limestone tablets buried in the soil    of an emerged lagoon floor to be four times greater than    the rate in air. This differential corrosion helps to explain  the emergent ‘walls’ of relatively soil-free limestone that rim the island and provides a mechanism for increased dissolution in the atoll interior. If such islands were later submerged, new coral growth would be favoured on the higher rims rather than in the deeper lagoon interior; thus accentuating the atoll form. These processes are accen- tuated by repeated exposure and submergence.
  The karst that develops on emerged reefs depends on    the hydrochemical controls (Figure 4.1). Entirely auto- genic systems such as Niue and the Trobriand Island (Ollier 1975) usually support relatively few karst fea- tures; this being more a function of their vadose hydrol-   ogy than their coastal location. Nevertheless, tropical cyclones ensure the penetration of salt-spray influences well inland. Emerged coral islands often have rough corroded surfaces (makatea) with the texture of scoriac-  eous lava rather than sculpted karrenfeld; these features being developed on a weakly case-hardened crust that commonly occupies the top few metres of the vadose zone (Hopley 1982). Makatea are eogenetic karren, as described  by  Taborosˇi  et  al.  (2004)  on  Guam.  Across these surfaces are scattered the  occasional   collapse doline, a few giving access to karst caves. Only rarely, as in Barbados, is doline development  comparatively extensive (Table 9.3).
  The highly porous nature of coral encourages diffuse infiltration and circulation and hence inhibits karst cave development. But where there is pronounced point recharge from allogenic streams flowing from adjacent non-karst rocks, exposed coral reefs may develop a dis- tinctly karstic drainage with large river caves. For exam-  ple, streams draining radially from the impervious volcanic inliers of some coral islands (e.g. Mangaia Island) usually terminate in a ring of blind valleys on the inland side of an emerged reef, from where subterra- nean conduits lead runoff to brackish springs on the coast. Neighbouring blind valleys coalesce to yield a circular

moat-like depression with a steep inland-facing limestone cliff; the retreating corrosion front (Figure 10.30). During high stands of the sea, the moat becomes a swamp, lake or lagoon behind the barrier. Dry valleys across the emerged reef mark abandoned stream courses or atoll passes, but otherwise the surface topography displays a limited range   of karst features, including karren, pit caves and occa- sional collapses. Corrosion plains may form along the allogenic input boundary, but residual towers are not expected unless there was an earlier cockpit phase. In a detailed critical examination of the applicability of the antecedent karst hypothesis to the Great Barrier Reef, Hopley (1982, p. 218) concluded that ‘there is no evidence for larger karst features such as marginal plains or towers having evolved. Only the blue holes, and possibly the gorgelike interreefal channels, provide evidence of a major karst process, and both features are very localised’. However, as we saw in section 9.5, some (if not most) blue holes are related to fractures rather than to karst conduits. The syngenetic karst of Pleistocene calcareous coastal   dunes (section 9.12) is in many respects similar to the karst  found  on  exposed  reefs.  Even  though  aeolian calcarenite is extremely porous, case-hardening welds   its surface together and lateral allogenic recharge from the hinterland generates blind valleys and river caves. Few other karst attributes are evident except solution pipes (or pit caves), occasional collapses and a limited range of karren forms. Some enclosed depressions in aeolian limestones are not karstic, but interdune hollows. Calcareous beach sands in tropical and warm tempe-  rate regions are often indurated between the limits of high and low spring tides, although sometimes cementa-  tion extends  to  the  immediate  supratidal  zone.  The resulting  coarse-grained  limestone  is  termed  beach- rock (Figure 10.31). The cemented sands are usually identical to unconsolidated materials nearby and retain the seawards dip of the beach bedding. Induration appears  to proceed inland, with the stratigraphically lowest of the dipping beds being the most recently cemented. Cementation has been attributed to micro-organisms, inorganic processes involving fresh water and inorganic processes from seawater (Neumeier 1999, Webb et al. 1999). Hopley (1982) noted the frequent occurrence of aragonite cement, as opposed to the calcite spar that would be expected from fresh water. Cementation of beach-rock can be very rapid, with considerable indura-
tion having been recognized since World War II.
  Where dense crystalline limestones form the coast the features are more clearly karstic, even where drowned, simply because such rocks are more favourable for karst development. For instance, spectacular examples  of partly submerged tower karst occur in Ha Long Bay in





Figure 10.31   Sheets of beach-rock accumulation on Vava’u Island, Tonga group.

Vietnam and the Phuket Island of Thailand. Doline karst affected by high sea level is known along the Dinaric coast of Adriatic Sea and elsewhere (Figure 10.29), and often these regions have submarine springs (section 5.8), which along the Dinaric coast are called vrulje. It is assumed that their conduits were formed during Quaternary lowstands     of the sea, but that their activity has been maintained because of sufficient hydraulic head inland. More unusual are sea swallow holes, the best known case being the Sea Mills of Argostoli in the Ionian Islands (Maurin and Zo¨tl 1963). Seawater is drawn into the karst and passes right through the island to springs on the other side. Although there may be an ejector effect caused by autogenic recharge, differential tide levels on each side of the island aids the head difference. Bo¨gli (1980) noted the occur- rence of saltwater swallow holes elsewhere and the relevance of the Bernouilli equation to their explanation.     A more common phenomenon is the reversing flow of coastal subterranean rivers with the ebb and flow of tides (sea-estavelles), particularly in regions with a large tidal range. Tidally generated reversing flow through blue holes  is reported from the Bahamas.
  Brackish karst springs are sometimes located above sea level. The main outflow pool of the Waikoropupu springs   of New Zealand, for example, is 14 m above sea level but  its water is 0.5% salt. Williams (1977) suggested this to     be the result of a venturi mixing process drawing in water from the underlying coastal intrusion into the aquifer. This mechanism is supported by the observation of increasing salinity with spring discharge. Stringfield and

LeGrand (1971) and Milanovic´ (1981) discussed other cases.
  Deep submarine karst has also been observed. Maire (1986) briefly reported the discovery of karren-scale grooves and  pitting on steep  limestone slopes  at depths    of 1000 m to 3000 m off the Iberian Peninsula. This is far too deep for any eustatic fluctuation of Quaternary age.     He suggested that the features may be dissolved by descending cold waters, perhaps with thermal or chemical mixing effects. Possibly they are very ancient relict forms, although this seems unlikely. However, palaeokarsts that have been taken deep below sea level by tectonic sub- sidence are well known, including the Rospo Mare beneath the Adriatic Sea (Soudet et al. 1994).
10.6 POLYCYCLIC, POLYGENETIC AND EXHUMED KARSTS
W.M. Davis (1899) maintained that all uplifted land will ultimately be worn down to a surface of low relief termed    a peneplain at an elevation close to baselevel, which is usually sea level. This unidirectional erosion process he called the cycle of erosion. As the cycle progressed, he considered landforms to pass through an identifiable sequence of stages termed ‘youth’, ‘maturity’ and  ‘old age’. The occurrence of uplift before the completion of the cycle would lead to its interruption; erosion processes would be rejuvenated and a second cycle would ensue, with development proceeding headwards from the sea. Thus landforms of the present cycle would be found




downstream of rejuvenation heads (marked by knick- points in stream profiles), while the still unconsumed morphology of the previous cycle would persist upstream. Grund (1914), Cvijic´ (1918) and others incor- porated Davisian cyclic ideas into their schemes of karst landscape evolution (section 9.15) and Davis himself proposed a two-cycle hypothesis of cave evolution (Davis 1930). Landscapes showing evidence of more than one cycle of erosion are termed polycyclic. The relationship of stepped erosion surfaces to karsts is discussed in many contexts, e.g. in the eastern USA by Palmer and Palmer (1975) and White and White (1983)    and in southern China by Song (1981), Zhu (1988) and Sweeting (1995). In a review of karst types in China, Zhang (1980) described numerous cases of knickpoint recession into such surfaces, which probably range in age back to the Cretaceous.
  Rejuvenation results from increased erosive energy. This can stem from (i) increased potential energy due to a negative shift in baselevel (following either uplift or sea level fall) or (ii) increased erosive power (chemical as well as mechanical) particularly following a climatic change that results in increased runoff. Uplift, if suffi- ciently great, can also lead to climatic change, as in the   case of the Tibetan plateau. Many variations in climate   have occurred during geological time, for example at the height of the Quaternary glaciations both the cold polar    and semi-arid mid-latitude zones expanded, with com- pensating contraction of the intervening mediterranean and humid tropical zones. The direct effects of glaciation were particularly influential on karst, because glacial deepening  of  valleys  lowered  the  local  baselevel  of karst springs, and because large volumes of glacial melt- water incised valleys and invaded pre-existing caves. The effect and timing of rejuvenation of karst in Indiana and Kentucky following the entrenchment of the Ohio River   (by glacial meltwaters) and its tributary the Green River   has been investigated by Pease and Gomez (1997), Granger and Smith (2000) and Granger et al. (2001).
  Climatic change does not always stimulate rejuvena- tion. Often it alters the balance of processes instead, most radically when fluvial erosion gives way to glaciation, as discussed in section 10.3. In numerous cases the climatic shift persisted long enough to have its geomorphological consequences engraved in the landscape, yet was of insufficient duration to obliterate all traces of previous regimes. Landforms moulded under one climato-genetic regime are then remodelled under the next. But if modification is incomplete before the climate changes again, then the landscape will bear the imprint of more    than one genetic environment and can be termed poly- genetic. Good examples are provided by pre-Quaternary

but subsequently glaciated karsts in Ireland (Williams 1970, Drew and Jones 2000) and by karst hills similar to tropical mogotes buried under detrital cover in western Europe (Salomon et al. 1995).
  Because changes in baselevel and climate have affected large parts of the world, most karsts can be expected to   have both polycyclic and polygenetic elements in their landscapes and groundwater systems. To these, in conclu- sion, we should add the complication of the exhumation     of palaeokarst topography and hydrological systems that is occasionally detected contributing to modern karst assem- blages. The Australian continent is particularly interesting   in this regard because it has so much ancient landscape    that has evolved slowly in comparatively low-relief and low-energy (dry) conditions.
10.6.1 The Tindall Plain and Riversleigh karst, Northern Territories and Queensland
The Northern Territories of Australia contain very large areas of buried carbonate rocks in synclinal structures known as the Daly, Wiso and Barkly basins (Figure 10.1).  In places around the margins of this region the cover beds have been eroded and karst is exposed over hundreds of square kilometres. This is the case in the north around the town of Katherine where at the edge of the Daly basin there is a broad strip of karst, and also further east on the Barkly tableland, especially in the Lawn Hill–Riversleigh area of Queensland. In both of these districts there is clear evidence for a long complex period of karstification.
  In the Katherine region, karst is developed at 100– 220 m a.s.l. on Lower Cambrian Tindall Limestone, a platformal rock of 180 m thickness. The limestone is thick to massively bedded with deep regular jointing, and is overlain by thinner, weaker ferruginous Middle Cambrian sandstones and silicified limestones. All these strata remain flat-lying and with little tectonic distur- bance. They were dissected to form tableland topography with shallow scarp fronts on the stronger beds at some time or times before they became buried by Lower Cretaceous sandstones (Lees Formation) during the course of a low-energy marine transgression. The unac- counted Middle Cambrian to Early Cretaceous, time interval is about 400 a.
  The modern climate is tropical semi-arid, with rainfall    at  Katherine  ranging  from  800–1020 mm  during  a 5 month rainy season; the district being near the inland   limit of penetration of monsoonal rains. Average annual temperature is about 27○C and potential evapotranspira-   tion approaches 2300 mm.
  Local relief on the limestones is up to 60 m, and the Katherine River, which is shallowly entrenched across







Figure 10.32    (Upper) Air oblique photograph showing a clint-and-grike paleokarst surface on the Tindall Plain, Australia, being    exhumed and destroyed. (Photographed by D. Karp, with permission.) (Lower) Corroded clint surface at the exhumation margin and          the lower surface of the Tindall Plain that replaces it.

the Tindall outcrop, provides the regional baselevel for karstic groundwater discharge. Allogenic streams collect    on the Cretaceous cover, dissect and strip it and the Middle Cambrian strata before sinking at the limestone contact. Water- and windborne detritus is carried onto lower areas of the limestones where it forms deep soils: subsoil pinnacle karst formation is active beneath them,  with much suffosion doline development (Karp 2002). In  the wet season caves fill with water and there is inunda-   tion of some very shallow poljes.
  In ‘The enigma of the Tindal Plain’, Twidale  (1984) suggested that the limestone morphology developed as a shallow scarpland with mesas and plateaus during  the Jurassic before being buried by the Lees Formation

sandstones. Burial was then followed by later Cretaceous and early Tertiary deep weathering with lateritization. Beginning in the Miocene, the lateritic surfaces began to    be stripped back, exposing limestone plains decorated with pinnacles of the Cambrian limestone in situ, plus tors and corestone piles from the Cretaceous sandstone. These stratiform plains thus must be at least of Jurassic   age, and are being exhumed intact and scarcely marked. Twidale noted the ‘anomaly’ that, although the plain appears to be a youthful landform, field evidence points      to it being an ancient feature of complex origin perhaps at least 135 a; this is the ‘enigma’ to which he referred.
  The complexity in detail is illustrated in a low eleva-   tion aerial oblique picture of a Tindall Plain surface and






Figure 10.33 Strongly cemented fill of ferruginous sands and limestone clasts emplaced within solutionally widened joints in Cambrian limestone bedrock (pale in situ blocks on the right). Layering of the fill was disturbed by slumping in the centre prior    to induration. The fill may be pre-Cretaceous in age and forms    part of the wall and ceiling of Cutta Cutta Cave near Katherine, Northern Territory, Australia.

its bounding scarp edge (Figure 10.32). The intact plain is densely dissected by rectilinear grikes (up to 1 m or more    in width) that have been uniformly infilled with detritus.     In the top right corner of the upper figure some Lees Sandstone remains in situ. Modern storm wash keeps grikes clear of filling along the scarp margins, leaving the intervening clint blocks upstanding as pinnacles ~2m     in height that are degrading comparatively quickly. The exhumed surface is replaced by a more recent surface just     a few metres lower in elevation (Figure 10.32). Thus the modern Tindall Plain mimics the pre-Cretaceous surface,   but stands just a little lower as a consequence of post- exhumation dissolution. The wash detritus is deposited on lower plains (often across surfaces of individual Cambrian

limestone beds) in the form of deepening veneers that will retain some moisture and so induce the modern subsoil pinnacle karst and suffosion doline development.
  Several caves up to 3000 m in length have been discovered  beneath  the  plains.  They  are  restricted  to  one or a few of the massive beds, none being deeper than 30 m or so before reaching the regional water table, although extensive flooded joint networks extend beyond. They have developed along the major, grike-forming joints, with parts of the cave roofs being composed of the filling materials (Figure 10.33). Lauritzen and Karp (1993) found that these consisted chiefly of limestone clasts within a ferruginous sand matrix that often con- tained fragments of (vadose) stalagmites. The caves lack regular flowing streams today but some can be flooded during modern storms. There is evidence of earlier development in thermal waters (ceiling cupolas, etc.), and there are thermal karst springs on the Katherine River today. The caves therefore appear to belong to the modern (Miocene and later) cycle of erosion but are guided by grikes that may be of palaeokarst origin and thus could be considered at least partial exhumations.
  Evidence of conditions that affected the karst during Oligo-Miocene times is available further east at the edge    of the Barkly tableland in Queensland (Figure 10.1) where, in the Lawn Hill–Riversleigh area, the karst is also developed on tabular Cambrian carbonates (Thorn-  tonia Limestone). The limestones are dolomitic and cherty, and rest unconformably on a basement of Proter- ozoic sandstones (Figure 10.34). The O’Shanassy and Gregory Rivers traverse the karst in gorges before emerging onto a pediplain cut across basement clastic deposits. They then flow north to the Gulf of Carpentaria.  Of particular interest is the occurrence in the district of  linear patches of dense, fossiliferous Tertiary freshwater limestones  set  within  the  Cambrian   carbonates (Figure  10.34).  These  occupy  basins  that  may  have  been small lakes along river valleys, and they indicate that the water table was near the surface. The exception-  ally rich fossil fauna that they contain (the area is a World Heritage site for that reason) indicates a rainforest envir- onment in Oligo-Miocene times. At the time, the con- tinent had a more southerly latitude: in the course of drifting further north the region has become drier, the rain forest has disappeared, and so morphogenetic conditions have changed. In the process the region was also uplifted
~150 m with the result that main rivers were rejuvenated  and able to entrench their courses, but their tributaries could not respond as vigorously and so became a network   of dry valleys. Across the tableland this encouraged the deepening and widening of joints, and has produced a pinnacled terrain of a few metres local relief.






Figure 10.34 (Upper) A sketch of karst landforms in the Riversleigh area of Queensland. (Lower) A belt of Tertiary (Oligo- Miocene) freshwater limestones set within Cambrian limestones in the Riverleigh area. Reproduced from Williams, P.W., Interpretations of Australasian karsts. In J. L. Davies & M.A.J. Williams (eds.), Landform Evolution in Australasia, 259 286 © 1978 ANU Press.


  The combined evidence from the Katherine and Riv- ersleigh areas reveals a long and complex history of which we have gleaned only the sketchiest of details. More than one episode of karstification has been involved

and there have been considerable shifts in morphogenetic environment. Evidence from Riversleigh indicates early karst development under lowland rain-forest conditions; while seasonally humid tropical to subtropical conditions



are suggested by the ferruginous sandy matrix of cemen-   ted cave and joint deposits in some caves near Katherine. Some of the filled grikes on the Tindall Plain are even reminiscent of those exposed by glacier-ice stripping of clint-and-grike terrain on the carbonate plains of Canada (Figure 10.15). Interestingly, it is known from numerous other sites in Australia that there was exposure to the Permian (‘Gondwana’) Glaciation (Twidale 1976), so  a subglacial contribution to the evolution of this already genetically complex terrain is possible.
10.6.2 The Kimberley region, Western Australia
The main stages of the present phase of evolution of the karst of the limestone ranges of the Kimberley region in Western Australia (Figure 10.1) were discussed in  section 10.2. However, there is a much older dimension.  This has been investigated and explained by Playford  (2002), who provides compelling evidence that the  Devonian reef limestones of the area have been subjected  to four periods of karstification. The first followed Late  Devo- nian reef emergence, evidence for which is now seen as sequence boundaries within the carbonate rocks. A sec- ond period involved latest Devonian or earliest Carboni- ferous hydrothermal karst development beside active faults, resulting in caverns that were filled penecontem- poraneously with zinc–lead mineralization. The third phase, Mid-Carboniferous to early Permian, occurred when the area was faulted, tilted and mildly folded before being  truncated  and  intensively  karstified.  Playford observes that a well-exposed glacial pavement provides evidence that a continental ice sheet (part of the Permo- Carboniferous ‘Gondwana Glaciation’) moved towards the north to northwest, and he suggests that during this interval glacial meltwaters could have been responsible for considerable dissolution. Largely glacigenic clays- tones and sandstones of the Lower Permian Grant Group were deposited over the karstified and glaciated terrain,    and the karst remained buried until Cenozoic times. In the fourth period of karstification Playford argues that as these clastic coverbeds were denuded an Early Permian palaeokarst was progressively exhumed (Figure 10.35) and incorporated into the developing modern topography. Playford (2002) contends that many features of the present landscape are the legacy of Early Permian sub- glacial dissolution. Thus the Mimbi Caves system, which    is the largest cave and karst corridor network of the area,     is suggested as having been formed by subglacial solution along a series of rectilinear joints, which resulted in a maze of narrow passages and corridors 2–5 m wide and several kilometres long, and up to 50 m deep. However, under modern conditions most of the system is inundated





Figure 10.35 Rugged eroded surface in Devonian reef lime- stones (foreground) being exposed as coverbeds (cliffs in the background) of Lower Permian glacigenic clastic deposits are stripped back. Kimberley region, Western Australia. (Photograph   by P. Playford, with permission.)
during times of flood and there are many recent spe- leothems; so present processes must be seasonally active  and could have been so (with variable intensity) through-  out Cenozoic times. Section 10.3 discusses the issues associated with dissolution under continental glaciers in more detail.
  According to Playford (2002), much of the Permo- Carboniferous subglacial meltwater would have drained through networks of subglacial channels cut in bedrock,    but roofed by ice (such features are known as N or Nye channels, see section 10.3.2). He interprets numerous gaps and gorges that cut through the limestone ranges to be examples of N channels that were exhumed by Cenozoic erosion of the relatively soft Permian sedimen- tary rocks that once filled them. The major Windjana, Geikie, Galeru and Brooking Gorges are considered to have been initiated in this way. However, because sub- glacial channels are produced under pressure flow, their floors can be undulating and their morphology can change rapidly over very short distances. Such morpho- logical characteristics must therefore be demonstrated before their origin as N channels can be confirmed. An alternative and less demanding hypothesis is that the rivers were superimposed from the overlying clastic beds, the  larger  rivers  having  maintained  their  courses  as incision produced the gorges, but  the  smaller streams having  passed  entirely  underground  leaving dry valleys at the surface. In this process, blocks of




Early Permian clastic rocks would have slumped into developing karst features and sediments would have been  redistributed  and  deposited  in  slackwater  areas   and hollows.
  Playford (2002) demonstrates that Permian sediments occur in certain depressions on the limestone plateau and provides evidence from drilling that some dolines and pipes contain fills of siliceous sandstone and claystone more than 200 m deep, although 50–100 m is more usual. Jennings and Sweeting (1963) commented that the clastic sediments may have been let down by solution from a higher   level   and   ‘may   represent   the   fill   of   former enclosed depressions in the limestone’. Some flat-floored depressions bounded by Devonian limestones  in the Lawford Range are up to several hundred metres across, and  are  floored  by  clastic  deposits  that  sometimes sur- round interspersed limestone towers.  These depressions are interpreted by Playford as sites of  Early Permian subglacial lakes, but confirmation of this  requires the discovery of laminated lacustrine deposits.
  A key issue in this interesting interpretation is the extent to which the main elements of the landforms we     see today (Figures 10.6 and 10.7) could in fact have been developed before and during the Early Permian and subsequently survived erosion beneath a continental ice sheet. It is unlikely that the pediment surface and its bounding cliff line, for example, could have developed under such cold conditions, and given the evidence for

wet-based glaciers with intense scouring indicated by glacial striations, it is also unlikely that pinnacles and towers would have survived the glaciation. At the very least they would have been moulded into streamlined moutone´e forms.
  Playford’s (2002) hypothesis concerning landscape evolution of the Kimberley limestone ranges therefore remains to be confirmed. Nonetheless, it brings a search-  ing light to bear on the much less demanding interpreta-   tion by Jennings and Sweeting (1963), who essentially considered only Cenozoic evolution and recognized the influence of two episodes of erosion, superimposition of drainage and the importance of climatic change. At  the  very least one must now conclude that there is strong evidence for several erosion phases in the past and for exhumation of a previously eroded limestone topography from beneath glacigenic deposits: the extent to which the exhumed landforms dominate or have at least directed fluvial and karstic elements in the modern topography remains to be clarified.
  The examples that we have discussed in this section show that when the effects of major, repeated climatic changes, burial, uplift and exhumation are superimposed on stage of development and underlying lithological influences, there    is clearly considerable potential for great complexity of morphology and landform assemblage. Herein lies the difficulty of interpreting many of the world’s great karsts in terms of climato-genetic models.


11

Karst Water Resources Management



Karst water resources have been important for millen- nia. Karst springs are larger than most others, so in all karst regions many of the earliest villages and towns centred upon them. Such natural ‘fountains’ were exploited by ancient Greeks, Persians and Romans to supply their cities, sometimes delivering water via aqueducts and qanats. For example, the giant Ras el Ain springs of Lebanon (Burdon and Safadi 1963) were being captured with dams and an aqueduct to convey water to the Phoenician port of Tyre as early as 1200 BC (Figure 11.1). By 453 BC karst spring water was used for irrigation in Shanxi Province, China. The Mayan people of Yucatan (Classical period AD ~317–889) centred their civilization around cenotes penetrating the  karst  aquifer  there  (e.g.  at  Chichen  Itza).  Thermal karst springs were used at Pamukkale  (Turkey) by Greeks and Romans, and at Budapest  (Hungary) and Bath (England) by Romans. These and other examples of karst water exploitation over several  millennia are reviewed in Drew and Ho¨tzl (1999).  Many cities and rural populations still depend heavily on water supplies from karst. In Europe, for example,  carbonate terrains
occupy about 3 × 106 km2 (35% of the land surface) and
many important cities are supplied totally or partly with karst waters, including Bristol, London, Paris, Rome and Vienna. In some European countries karst water contributes 50% of the total drinking water supply (COST Action 65 1995), and in many regions it is the only available source of fresh water. Forty per cent of the area of the USA east of the Mississippi River is underlain by karstic aquifers. At a global scale,  if  one  compares  the  world’s  population  distribution  to the distribution of carbonate rocks, then it is possible that 20–25% of the world’s population depends on karst water supplies to a greater or lesser extent. In south

China  alone  well  in  excess  of  100  million  people  live on karst.
11.1 WATER RESOURCES AND SUSTAINABLE YIELDS
Sustainable management implies the use of resources for the benefit of the present generation without limiting the potential use of the same resources by future generations. Effective  sustainable  management  will  leave  the  envir- onment in at least as good a condition as when its use first started. It is a major challenge to achieve sustainable use of groundwater resources and difficult  to prove that the management regime implemented is being successful.
  Karst groundwater resources are contained in aquifers that involve recharge, storage and discharge. The volume in storage is dependent more on the size and porosity of the aquifer than on amounts of recharge, and if the combined natural and pumped output is greater than the recharge, then the resource will be depleted regardless of the size of the store. The situation is not unlike a lake: the basin may be large but if more water is used than comes into it, the lake level will fall. In karst, water abstraction can  take  place  in  allogenic  streams,  thus  reducing  the recharge; by pumping the aquifer, thus reducing  the storage; and at the outflow spring, thereby  depleting streamflow downstream. One of the major problems we face is that exploitation often occurs without any evalua- tion of the resource until problems of depletion emerge. So a key question is: how can we  achieve sustainable use? And is the target moving  because climate change may be altering the water  balance in some locations? Younger et al. (2002)  considered the sensitivity to cli- mate change of four major carbonate aquifers in Europe, and concluded that  ‘significant reductions in available


Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd





Figure 11.1   An artist’s reconstruction of the waterworks at Ras el Ain Spring, Lebanon, as they would have appeared around 1200 sc. The elevation of this conduit spring was raised by a surface enclosure in order to furnish gravity flow to an aqueduct supplying the city of Tyre. Reproduced from Bakalowicz, M., Fleyfel, M. and Hachache, A. (2002) Une histoire ancienne: le captage de la source de Ras el Ain et l’alimentation en eau de la ville de Tyr (Liban). La Houille Blanche, 4(5), 157–60.

resources can be expected in low- and mid-latitude carbonate aquifers in Europe by the middle of the  present century’. Thus even without pressures on the resource caused by rising demand on one hand and  reduction of useable supplies because of pollution on  the other, changes in the water balance caused by  climatic change may in some places exacerbate supply shortages in the future.
  To achieve sustainable management of karst water re- sources we need first to assess the magnitude and quality of the resource; then compare the demand to the potential supply; and, finally devise methods of equitable allocation of available water surplus amongst   competing users (including ecological instream demands). Long-term mon- itoring against agreed baselines of quality and quantity can then be used to assess the effectiveness of management.
11.2 DETERMINATION OF AVAILABLE WATER RESOURCES
Chapter  6 discussed  how karst drainage  systems  can  be delimited and analysed. A valuable and proven  starting point for karst water resource surveys is  speleological investigation (i.e. cave exploration and  mapping) with associated water tracing. This establishes the basic facts

about catchment limits and drainage network  geometry. Other exploration and survey techniques,   including methods  for  estimating  the  water  budget,  are described in section 6.2. So suffice to say here that a climatic water balance  calculation,  when  combined  with data on the drainage area, will provide an order  of magnitude esti- mate of annually renewed reserves. This approach adopts a reference period, such as a water year (dry season to dry season), and a well-defined  reference area, such as a representative basin or a   karst district with known boundary conditions. Error  terms associated with the calculation of the water surplus in this way are typically quite large though  seldom evaluated; probably of the order of T25% or more. But the estimate can sometimes be cross-checked by a complementary technique based on spring  hydrograph analysis (section 6.5), provided that the  watershed of the basin feeding the spring is known accurately.  The  technique  usually  expresses  exploitable resources as a volume in storage or as a  mean annual discharge, but can be converted to  equivalent depth of runoff if the basin area is known. In the allocation of re- sources, knowledge of annual and seasonal variations in water surplus is important, as is information on the recur- rence intervals of low flows at karst springs. For a recent




review that takes into account advances in aquifer model- ling, we particularly recommend that of Bakalowicz (2005). He asserted that in the evaluation of karst water resources ‘the classical hydrogeological approach is gen- erally  inoperative  because  of  the  inability  to  show  the existence of conduits’ and proposed an  investigation approach that:

1. characterizes the geological structure;
2. delineates the karst system;
3. characterizes their lump functioning by hydrody- namic methods (spring hydrograph analysis,  spectral analysis, etc.) and hydrogeochemical  methods (in- cluding isotopic techniques);
4. characterizes their local functioning by artificial  tra-
cing tests and pumping tests.

In this way a karst system can be characterized by its struc- ture and functioning. Armed with this  knowledge the hydrogeologist can then (i) make realistic estimates of its water resources and exploitable storage, and (ii) draw up plans for water quality protection and aquifer management. Various methods of spring hydrograph recession ana- lysis  (Chapter  6)  permit  calculation  of  the  dynamic reserves of karst groundwater systems. Integration of the area under a master spring-flow recession curve provides a measure  of the volume of dynamic reserves, which includes  water stored in the epikarst as well as in the phreatic  zone. This provides an estimate of the total volume  of water discharged between floodflow, when storage  is at a maximum, and baseflow, when it is at a minimum. However, the volume calculated will  depend on the model used (section 6.5) and it does not include the reserves impounded below the level of  the spring (which are still in storage after spring-flow has ceased). In field situations where water is extracted directly from the spring, available water resources are  usually estimated conservatively from the baseflow  component, because floodwaters runoff rapidly and so are not easily captured, but if the total outflow is collected in a reservoir then the
floodflow component should be included.
  In very large groundwater systems the water can have a long residence time, the duration of which can sometimes be assessed by dating using radioactive isotopes (sec- tion 6.10). Using this information, the total water  stored in the system can be calculated from the  product of the average age of the water and the mean annual discharge of the spring(s). However, estimating the average age of the water can be complex, because the average residence time progressively increases from conduits to fissures and then to matrix. So here we need to be pragmatic and estimate the average  age  of  the  mix of water appearing at a spring,

noting that even that average may vary with  discharge (usually inversely). Having determined a  representative age, the next problem is that average turnover time calcu- lated for water in the aquifer will vary with the model used (Table 6.7), as explained in  section 6.10. Nevertheless, potentially useable groundwater reserves estimated in this way can amount to many cubic kilometres. Boreholes are often used to exploit this water, utilizing various forms of borehole  investigation (section 6.4) to assess the locally accessible water supply. However, there is a  significant practical problem in locating subterranean  conduits that would be a suitable target for drilling,  as noted in sec- tion 6.4: Bakalowicz (2005)  expressed the opinion that almost no geophysical  method is suitable for locating conduits at depths greater than 40–50 m. The most success- ful sites are likely to be close to permanent karst springs.
  Having  identified  a  suitable  site  for  water  resources extraction, the next problem is to decide  how much of the resource can be exploited without causing unacceptable environmental impacts. A common reality is that a surpris- ingly small proportion of the  aquifer volume may be useable without unacceptable  depletion of spring-flow, because spring discharge is  reduced as the water table is drawn down by pumping (Figure 11.2). Excessive pumping not only depletes water resources available at the spring, but also may give rise to other problems such as saltwater encroachment and sink-hole collapse (sections 9.5 and 12.3). Saltwater encroachment  in  coastal  sites   (section  5.8), especially following heavy pumping during dry summers, imposes a severe limitation on exploitable resources. Case studies from Croatia and Italy illustrate efforts to manage such problems (Biondic et al. 1999, Tulipano and Fidelibus 1999). Because over half the Earth’s population lives along the coast, pressure on coastal aquifers is set to increase and so these problems will become severe.
  In practice, water resource managers are often forced to adjudicate between competing users only when demands exceed available supplies. Identification of  all competing users is essential  before  determining   the priority of their claims. Some require water at the spring or downstream of it; others require it from bores into the aquifer or from allogenic streams that recharge it. These
cases can be subdivided into exploitive users that deplete
or degrade the resource in some respect and sustainable users that have relatively little or no adverse impact on  the total quantity or quality of the resource. In the  first group are demands for domestic, agricultural and indus- trial water supplies, irrigation, fish farming and  waste-
water dilution (including factory, farm and domestic waste waters); and in the second group are  requirements for ecosystem maintenance, most tourism  and recreation, and hydroelectric power generation  where there are no





Figure 11.2  Depletion of the discharge of Jinan Spring, Shandong Province, China, following exploitation of groundwater resources in its catchment. Reproduced with permission from Sweeting, M.M., Karst in China: its Geomorphology and Environment © 1995 Springer-Verlag.


interbasin transfers. In agriculture, for example, wet  rice (paddy fields) is the primary cereal for human consump- tion in southern and eastern Asia. In an  example from south China, Zhang (1996) showed that ~5 m3 of irriga- tion water is required to produce 1 kg of rice, twice the common standard in the non-karst areas and four to five
times greater than in the best regulated. This is a result of losses into underlying karst aquifers.
  The approach to water allocation adopted by different societies varies (see Drew and Ho¨tzl (1999), Richardson (2001) and Hiscock et al. (2002) for general discussions of legislation related to water-resource exploitation  and protection), but user priorities and needs are  usually determined by some combination of legal,   political, economic and environmental considerations.  For exam- ple, Florida State has mandated a ‘5–3–1  Criterion’ for phosphate mines over its main ‘Florida Aquifer System’ (LaMoreaux 1989): the latter must not be lowered more than 5 ft (1.5 m) at the boundary of  the pumped pro- perty, the limit for the overlying  surficial aquifer is 3 ft (0.9 m), the limit for the  nearest pond or river is 1 ft (0.3 m) and the maximum allowance is 1000 gal. per acre
per day (10 000 L ha—1 day—1). Assessment of real needs
involves consideration of the volume and season of peak demand and the consequences of a partial failure of supply in a drought period. In making these assessments, sustainable users may be disadvantaged because of  the difficulty of assigning an economic value to their claims

or because of a lack of scientific data permitting identi- fication of optimal and minimal acceptable requirements, particularly in respect to ecosystem maintenance.
  The case of water allocation at a large spring complex in an International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) Project Aqua site was discussed by Williams (1988b, 2004b). The  Waikoropupu Springs yield a combined flow averaging 15 m3 s—1 and are fed by a partly artesian system containing a water volume of at least 1.5 km3, but most of the recharge zone lies outside the protected area. Claims on the resource exceed the available spring-flow during dry periods. Although there is abundant phreatic storage  in the aquifer, it cannot be ‘quarried’ without risking the viability of the rare aquatic ecosystem of the spring  and the stream it sustains. Thus  it is the limitations  of the dynamic reserves of the system that
determine how much water can be made available for use, rather than the total volume stored in the aquifer.  The dilemma for local water resource managers is  how to resolve the problem of seasonal shortage in  the face of plenty, especially considering their responsibility for a site of international ecological  importance. The minimum
recorded spring discharge (5.3 m3 s—1) gives some  gui-
dance as to what minimum flows the ecosystem can withstand, yet still drier years must have occurred in the past. Thus it can be argued that some proportion of the minimum recorded flow is sufficient for maintenance of the ecology during droughts. What proportion is adopted




as appropriate then becomes a political decision. In this case, interim limits were set of 0.5 m3 s—1  for total abstrac- tions from the recharge zone and 2.9 m3 s—1 for minimum residual streamflow from the springs, although for most of the time the springs discharge much more than this. Rights to abstract water were allocated for a  finite period (but potentially renewable) in order to  permit limits to be reassessed in the light of further data and monitored effects. The problem of defining ecologically acceptable flows
has also been faced in the Zˇ rnovnica River in  Croatia,
which  is  a  karst  spring-fed  system  near  Split  used  for water supply. Its median discharge is about 1 m3 s—1, but there is considerable seasonal variation. It was concluded that at most no more than 30% of the annual volume of water could be abstracted (Bonacci et al. 1998).
  In springs, as in rivers, floodflows often discharge water that cannot be easily used. Thus regulation of springs is often practiced in order to impound floodflows and make the  volume  captured  available  for  future  use. The most noteworthy case is that of the Ombla spring near Dubrov- nik, Croatia (Bonacci 1995,  Milanovic´ 2000), where an underground dam contains underground storage of about

3 × 106 m3 and permits controlled short-term exploitation of   up   to   around   twice   the   mean   spring   discharge (Figure 11.3). Lu (1986) shows many examples of smaller scale underground impoundments in the caves of China. Valuable subsurface dams are also built  beneath the stepped coral terraces of some tropical islands to impound groundwater flow moving at the contact of coral and the underlying impermeable rock. Cases in the Nansei Islands of southern Japan are described by Yoshikawa and Shoko- hifard (1993). Along the shore of the Alpes Maritime of France springs that were drowned by the post-glacial rise of sea level have been fitted with submarine interception dams to control  the ingress of salt water and allow extraction of fresh water (Gilli 2002).
11.3 KARST HYDROGEOLOGICAL MAPPING
The ability of a society to obtain and allocate water re- sources wisely depends largely on the comprehensiveness of data on the resource and the clarity with which scientists communicate the relevant information. One of the important ways of conveying water resources





Figure 11.3 The underground dam and reservoir installed at Ombla Spring, near Dubrovnik, Croatia: 1, Ombla Spring at 2.4 m a.s.l.; 2, entrance of an upper cave at 137 m a.s.l.; 3, cave at spring elevation; 4, thrust plane – limestone is thrust over (5) flysch; 6, K is limestone and J is dolomite; 7, cave passages; 8, underground dam, a grout curtain; 9, concrete plugs in lower caves; 10, power plant; 11, outlet tunnel; 12, penstock; 13, water intake tunnel; 14, spillway; 15, upper tunnel. Reproduced from Milanovic´, P.T. (2000) Geological Engineering in Karst: Dams, Reservoirs, Grouting, Groundwater Protection,Water Tapping, Tunnelling, Zebra, Belgrade, 347 pp.



Figure 11.4   An extract from the Beaver Dam quadrangle of mapped karst groundwater basins in Kentucky, USA (Ray and Currens 1998a). The original map is in colour, at a scale of 1: 100 000, and has a contour interval of 20 m. Depicted are stream-sinks, other tracer-injection points, wells, underflow springs, overflow springs, groundwater flow routes, subsurface and surface overflow routes, and groundwater catchment boundaries. Further information available from http://www.uky.edu/KGS/home.htm




knowledge is through the medium of hydrogeological maps with supporting explanatory notes.
  Maps are conceptual representations of the real world. Hence the way in which information is depicted is impor- tant for the ideas conveyed. This is not just a matter of the symbols used, but of the mapping objectives and  target end-users. Hydrogeological maps are of various types and can be prepared at several scales. They can have a multi- plicity of  end-users,  from  politicians   and planners to hydraulic engineers, well drillers, hydrogeologists and tea- chers. The preparation of any  hydrogeological map must therefore take into account the likely variation in scientific expertise of its principal  users. Small-scale maps are appropriate for atlases, such as the Hydrogeological Atlas of the People’s Republic of China, which features a map of karst regions in the south of the country. Other excellent examples are the   Hydrogeological  Map  of  France at 1:1.5M by  Margat (1980) and a map of karst water resources in Mediterranean France at about 1:760 000 by Drogue et  al. (1983). Small-scale maps are necessarily imprecise, but are still useful for reconnaissance planning. A range of larger scale special purpose maps may present data on water quantity, quality and pollution.
  Maps at 1:10 000 to 1:200 000 are of the greatest technical interest because at such scales issues of content and its representation also become particularly important. Three types of hydrogeological data are basic to all maps of  this  kind:  information  on  permeability,  aquifer  geo- metry and hydraulic regime. What information  can be mapped depends on what is available and the  more abundant the data, the larger the scale map  needed to convey it clearly. The 1: 100 000 scale  maps of karst groundwater basins in the Mammoth   Cave area  of Kentucky (Ray and Currens 1998a,b)  are of particular interest in this context because they  show stream sinks, springs, water-traced connections,  groundwater divides, overflow routes, wells, etc. (Figure 11.4).
  Paloc  and  Margat  (1985)  pointed  out  that  two  com- plementary approaches to mapping have been proposed, one more hydrogeolithological in emphasis and the other more hydrogeodynamic. The first is the more common and led to a recommended international legend (UNESCO 1970). The second is illustrated by Margat’s (1980) map of France. Various colour conventions  have also been adopted in these schemes.
  The hydrogeolithological approach superimposes three kinds of information:

1. lithological types that are assumed to represent  per- meability classes;
2. piezometric data from which groundwater flow  may be inferred;



Figure 11.5   Some symbols used in hydrogeological mapping to convey dynamic conditions. Reproduced from Margat, J. (1980) Carte hydrogeologique de la France a 1: 1 500 000. Bureau de Recherches Geologiques et Minieres, Orleans.
3. surface  hydrography  with  data  on  sites  of   water exploitation.

For karst areas, Paloc and Margat (1985) emphasized the importance of classifying baseflow discharges of springs and surface streams. Some symbols used are illustrated in Figure 11.5.
  The hydrogeodynamic approach presents  information concerning:

1. the constitution of aquifer systems, based on the distinction between disposition of and location of the principal rock bodies (taking into account the degree to which they are water-bearing and their possible layering);
2. the boundary conditions of aquifers, distinguishing between
(a) the direction of water flow (input, output, or static)
(b) flow conditions as opposed to potential conditions.

Symbols   used   to   convey   these   ideas   are   shown   in Figure  11.6  and  an  illustration  of  a  hydrogeological map is provided in Figure 11.7.




Figure 11.6 Some symbols used on large-scale hydrogeological maps. Reproduced with permission from Paloc, H. and J. Margat, Report on hydrogeological maps of karstic terrains, in Hydrogeological Mapping in Asia and the Pacific Region (eds W. Grimelmann, K.D. Krampe and W. Struckmeier), International Contributions to Hydrogeology, Vol. 7, Heise, Hannover, pp. 301–15. 1985.




Depending on the end-users, it may also be helpful  to present other information that complements the  hydro- geological data. Relevant material may include topogra- phy, rainfall, surface streams, dams, sealed  roads and buildings, and waste disposal sites. Some of this can be depicted on  small-scale  insets,  although   the use of geographical information systems (GIS)  permits such data to be represented in different layers (Longley et al. 2005; see Figure 11.14 Lower).
11.4 HUMAN IMPACTS ON KARST WATER
Karst  hydrological  systems  are  susceptible  to  a  greater range of environmental impact problems than  others, because in addition to surface waters there is another set of difficulties associated with highly  developed subterra- nean conduit networks and their associated fragile ecosys- tems. In all inhabited karsts, dolines and other sink-points are perceived,  unfortunately, as being particularly suited for the dumping of solid or liquid waste (see Figure 11.9), because when it disappears underground ‘out of sight  is out of mind!’ Ekmekc¸i and Gu¨nay (1997) make the point that the general attitude of administrators in   Turkey appears to be that karst pollution problems do  not exist if they are not seen; and this is sadly true of most other jurisdictions with which we are familiar.  Many serious problems of human impacts on karst waters emphatically
do exist, even if they are not obvious to the casual
observer. These are discussed by Yuan (1983), Williams (1993), Drew and Ho¨tzl (1999), Veni and DuChene (2001) and many others. Water contamination may be  trans- mitted into karst by both allogenic and autogenic sources. In the autogenic context, contamination can  arise from both dispersed and point sources. Dispersed-source con- tamination enters the epikarst before being transmitted to the phreatic zone, whereas  point-source contamination normally bypasses the  epikarst, typically down doline drains, and is rapidly transmitted to the water table.
  The most important of the many human impacts on the karst  environment  is  that  arising  from  water  pollution, especially where aquifers are unconfined. This is because karst aquifers are notoriously effective in  transmitting rather than treating pollutants (Sasowsky  and Wicks 2000, COST Action 620 2004), a  consequence of the ease of contaminant transport  through conduit systems and of the limited capacity  for self-treatment found in many karst groundwater systems. A stark reminder of the ease with which  unexpected but serious water pollution can occur in karst is given by the ‘Walkerton Tragedy’ of May 2000. In this small Ontario town of 5000 population, 2300 were affected by illness and seven people died after drinking water from a municipal water supply poisoned

by a strain of Escherichia coli and inadequately  chlori- nated. The water supply was from bores in Silurian and Devonian dolomites. The source of  contamination was thought to be  stormwater   infiltration from a freshly manured field that had penetrated a well casing. Although conventional  understanding was that the aquifer in the dolomite bedrock could be modelled using Darcian assump- tions, downhole video showed the presence of open bedding planes with turbulent inflows of water. Thus transmission of the bacteria was relatively rapid. Two dye traces  yielded velocities about 80 times faster than MODFLOW simula- tions, clearly demonstrating that pathogenic bacteria could be carried through solutionally enlarged  fissures at velo- cities  of  hundreds  of  metres per   day and  that  the possible capture zone for contaminants was much larger than believed  (Worthington et al. 2001). This also reemphasizes the limitations of much current computer modelling of karst aquifers (section 6.11).
  Transport of contaminants through karst aquifers is by a variety of mechanisms depending on the physical and chemical properties of the contaminant. Vesper et al. (2000) recognize six categories.

1. Water soluble compounds, both organic and  inorga- nic, such as nitrates and cyanides. These compounds move with the water, forming linear  stringers along ribbons of high-velocity flow, but with some detention in eddies as well. Field (2004)  discusses means of accurately forecasting or  predicting their rates of transport through karst by use of breakthrough curves, storage and diversion models.
2. Slightly soluble organic compounds, less dense  than water (light, non-aqueous phase liquids or  LNAPLs), such as petroleum hydrocarbons. These will float on the water and tend to pond behind obstructions such as cave siphons. Buried fuel tanks  that leak are a worldwide problem. Layers of petroleum several centimetres deep have been discovered at the water table, where cave ex- plorers have been killed by accidentally igniting them.
3. Slightly soluble organic compounds, more dense thanwater (DNAPLs), such as chlorinated hydrocar- bons. The DNAPLs sink to the bottom of the aquifer, or may infiltrate and adhere to clastic sediments. Figure 11.8 is a conceptual model of DNAPL storage and transport in karst aquifers (Loop and White 2001). Common industrial solvents such as trichloroethylene (TCE; CCl2:CHCl, density ¼ 1.47) are   particularly   significant   because   they   begin   as DNAPLs but degrade over many years to  LNAPLs that can rise again from the deep traps; TCE degrades to vinyl chloride (C2H3Cl, density ¼ 0.9)  which is a particularly hazardous substance.  Contamination of



Figure 11.7  Hydrogeological map of the Takaka region, South Island of New Zealand. The main aquifer is in marble with a total water volume of >1.5 km3, partly under confined conditions. A second karst aquifer occurs in the overlying limestones, also partly confined; and a third aquifer is in floodplain gravels. (Data from Grindley 1971, Williams 1977, Mueller 1987.)



Figure 11.7   (Continued )



Contaminated surface water

Sinking stream
 
Spills and leaks on soil

Spills into
  sinkholes	Volatilization
Sinkholes and sinkholes drains




 Fracture and matrix porosity


Pipe and open channel flow Ponded DNAPL


Cave atmosphere

Overflow springs

Sediment pile


                 Degradation Deep fractures and channels
Deep storage



Underflow springs


Figure 11.8   A conceptual model for the storage and transport of dense non-aqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs) in a karst aquifer. Reproduced with permission from Loop & White, Ground Water © 2001 Blackwell Publishing


karst by DNAPLs is extremely difficult to clear  up (Kresˇic et al. 2005).
4. Pathogens, such as viruses, bacteria and parasites. These are transported readily through conduit systems because most are too small to be filtered.
5. Metals such as chromium, nickel, cadmium and mer- cury. These tend to precipitate as hydroxides and carbonates or be adsorbed onto clays and organic particles and transported in suspension.
6. Trash such as plastic, animal carcasses, tin cans and bottles. Trash collects at stream sinks and ponds behind underground obstructions, depending on its density.  It  is  readily  mobilized  during  flood  events (Figure 11.9).

  The natural treatment of waterborne contaminants  in karst is relatively ineffective for a number of reasons.

1. The surface area available for colonization of natural micro-organisms as well as for adsorption and ion exchange is much less in dense, fractured karst rocks than in porous clastic sediments.
2. 
The   characteristically   rapid   infiltration   into   karst reduces the opportunity for evaporation, a mechanism that is important in the elimination of highly volatile organic compounds, such as the  solvents and many pesticides.
3. Physical filtration is relatively ineffective in typically thin karst soils and through rocks with large secondary voids; thus sediment and micro-organisms are readily transported into karst aquifers, as shown in Chapters 5, 6 and 8.
4. Transmission of particulate matter entirely through karst systems is assisted by the turbulent flow regime commonly associated with conduit aquifers.
5. Time-dependent elimination mechanisms (e.g. bac- teria and viruses) are curtailed in their  effectiveness because of the rapid flow-through  times in conduits and reduced retardation by   adsorption–desorption processes.

  The  nature  of  subsurface  processes  leading  to   the purification/attenuation of waterborne contaminants  has been investigated by Golwer (1983) and COST  Action







Figure 11.9 (Upper) A sink-hole garbage dump; unfortunately, typical of many seen throughout the world. This case is in Newfoundland,  Canada.  (Lower)  Floating  trash  collected  at  a swallow hole in Guizhou Province, China. The highly polluted stream water is used further upstream for paddy field irrigation.



620 (2004). Natural purification is brought about by  the interaction of numerous physical, chemical and biological reactions and is significantly affected by  transport pro- cesses and hydrogeological conditions. Various processes act on inorganic, organic and particulate contaminants, but the effectiveness of these processes depends, firstly, upon the properties of the  substrate layers through which the contaminants are transmitted and, secondly, on the physi- cal  and    chemical properties of the  contaminants (Figure 11.10). In  laboratory  experiments  to assess  the survival of nine bacteria in water at 10 T 1○C, Kaddu- Mulindwa et al. (1983) found that Escherischia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other pathogenic or potential pathogenic bacteria sur- vived up to 100 days or even longer in sterilized natural groundwater. Only two bacteria species did not survive 10–30 days (Figure 11.11). Given that the transmission of  water through most conduit aquifers is shorter than this (Figure 5.18) and given the neutral buoyancy of bacteria, then the probability of spreading contaminated water through karst is high and potentially serious. Case studies such as by Felton (1996) in Kentucky, USA, and Tranter et al. (1997) in Derbyshire, England, provide ample field evidence to confirm these theore-
tical considerations. Pores in limestones are typically in the range of 10—8 to 10—5 m and fissures from 10—5 to 10—3 m;  thus  viruses  and  bacteria  of  10—9   to  10—6 m diameter  will  pass  through  most  fissured  limestones, although  some  protozoa   (10—6   to   10—4 m) such as Cryptosporidium and Giardia may be  filtered.  Viruses are   especially   small   (<0.25 mm),   so will often be filtered by the small primary pores of the rock matrix, but gain ready access to fissure and  conduit networks. Numerous case studies are reported  in COST Action 620 (2004).
11.4.1 Agricultural impacts on karst water
In agricultural areas, dispersed-source contamination emanates from spreading manure and fertilizers, spraying agricultural chemicals such as pesticides, and from urine and faeces from grazing animals. Point-source pollution arises from waste dumped in dolines and from discharges from piggery, poultry and dairy sheds into doline ponds and sinking streams. The Asiago Plateau in the Venetian Fore-Alps   (home   of   the   celebrated   cheese)   provides excellent examples (Sauro 1993). Chlorides  (conserva- tive) and nitrates (non-conservative) are  now widely measured over time as a pair to  determine the extent and persistence of such contamination (e.g. Castillo et al. 1994, Plagnes and Bakalowicz 2002). Many studies have shown that it is  nitrogen fertilizers that are primarily





Figure 11.10   (Upper) Matrix showing the relationship between the physical and chemical properties of layers through  which contaminated water passes and the effectiveness of natural treatment processes (—, indicates little or no correlation; þ, significant correlation; þþ, strong correlation). (Lower) Matrix showing the relationship between the physical and chemical  contaminant properties and the effectiveness of natural treatment processes (—, indicates little or no correlation; þ, significant correlation; þþ, strong correlation). Reproduced with permission from COST Action 620 (2004) Vulnerability and Risk Mapping for the Protection of Carbonate (Karst) Aquifers, Final report (COST Action 620), Report EUR 20912. Directorate-General  Science, Research and Development, European Commission, Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg, 297 pp.

responsible for the major increases in nitrate contamination over the past 50 years or more. Boyer  and Pasquarell (1995) found a strong linear relationship between nitrate concentration in karst groundwater and percentage agri- cultural land in West Virginia. Panno et al. (2001) showed anomalously high nitrate  concentrations in water from 52% of wells and most springs beneath part of the sink-

hole plain of Illinois. Pulido-Bosch et al. (1993)  found 88% of 230 sampling wells to be above the NO3  drinking water limit of 50 mg L—1 during the rainy  season in an
Andalusian aquifer. Burri et al. (1999) present other case studies worldwide. The Green Revolution, which greatly increased food production in southern and eastern Asia in the  1960s  and  1970s,  relied  heavily  on  herbicides  and





Figure 11.11   Survival of micro-organisms in natural groundwater at 10 1 C. Reproduced with permission from Kaddu-Mulindwa, D., Filip, Z. and Milde, G., Survival of some pathogenic and potential pathogenic bacteria in groundwater, in Ground Water in Water Resources Planning, Publication 42 (UNESCO Koblenz Symposium), © 1983 International Association of Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 1137–45.


pesticides; Urich (1993) reported that these were respon- sible for killing off the fish, crustaceans, wild birds, even water buffalo, in a wet rice region on karst in the Philippines. Sadly, even natural estrogen from the urine of livestock can significantly damage cave  ecology, as Wicks et al. (2004) show in a study of fish and inverte- brates under the Ozark Plateau, Missouri.
  Even when there is primary treatment of such wastes  in purpose-built settling ponds, the decanted fluid is often still rich in nitrates, and overflows have very high biochemical oxygen demand and faecal coliform counts. Domestic waste water in agricultural communities is often treated by septic tanks, while villages and agri- cultural industries may have waste-water lagoons for primary treatment. Septic tanks use anaerobic bacteria to treat waste and then effluent is directed through a system of subsoil drains that encourage further treat- ment   by   aerobic   bacteria,   filtration,   adsorption   and biodegradation before the water percolates to  ground- water via the epikarst. However, the processing of waste water is not always effective, especially if the soil is thin and has well-developed macropores, which  limit the time available for die-off of pathogenic   organisms. Consequently, chemical and biological  pollution can often be detected in karst groundwaters  from septic tank drainage (Alhajjar et al. 1990,  Crawford 2001).

Reporting results from a 4-year study of a range of contaminants in a karst area of Kentucky, Felton (1996) concluded that most karst springs in the area are likely   to contain sufficient faecal  bacteria to be  hazardous  to human health. Herbicides were also found in  ground- waters.
  Disposal of waste  water  after  primary  treatment in  sewage  ponds  is  normally  to  surface  streams,  some of which drain underground. The treatment is  usually effective in reducing the biochemical oxygen  demand, but N and P loads in the discharged effluent can be high. Sometimes waste-water treatment ponds  constructed on karst fail. There have been notorious cases of karst col- lapses beneath them, resulting in  their sudden draining and consequential surcharges of  highly  contaminated waste   water   into   the   underlying aquifer. Alexander et al. (1993) found that there was a 20% rate of failure over a 20-year span in Minnesota.
  Quinlan and Ewers (1985) described how sewage, creamery waste and heavy-metal-containing effluent from the Horse Cave area of the Sinkhole Plain in Kentucky (Figure 6.39) was spread by a karst distribu- tary  system  to  56  springs  in  16  areas  along  an  8  km reach of the Green River. In spite of that, none  of the 23 wells sampled had contaminated water,  presumably because they are up gradient from the conduits or have




no  direct  connection  to  them.  This  would  give  a  false sense of security concerning the quality of the  total groundwater system, if the  condition  of   discharge through the conduits were not also known.  This led the authors to stress that reliable monitoring  of water
quality in karst must involve springs, not just wells,
because  they  are  places  where  flow converges  at  basin outfall points (Quinlan and Ewers 1986). This is a vital message in all well-karstified  fissure  aquifers,   but becomes of lesser significance in more granular  lime-
stones even with large conduits when hydraulic gra-
dients  and  associated  groundwater  velocities  are  low,          as the following example shows.
  Waterhouse  (1984)  mapped  nitrate  contamination   in the porous Tertiary limestone aquifer underlying the small town of Mount Gambier in South Australia (Figure 11.12). Data were obtained from 257 bores over  a period of two years. The water table is roughly 14 m above sea level about 25 km inland; so hydraulic  gradi- ents are slight and groundwater velocities are low in what is considered a Darcian aquifer (Emmett and  Telfer 1994), even though there are phreatic conduits  flooded by post-glacial sea-level rise (indicated by  flooded col- lapse dolines; Figure 9.26). Uncontaminated water in the
region has a nitrate concentration of about 2 mg L—1, but
a typical polluted groundwater sample had a nitrate concentration of 300 mg L—1 (maximum >450 mg L—1). In spite of effluent loading  for more than 80 years, the lower part of the aquifer still remains substantially free of contaminants, probably mainly  attributable to the very slow water movement and  diffuse natural recharge of only modest water surplus (<200 mm a—1).
11.4.2 Urban and industrial impacts on karst water
Some cities built on carbonate rocks have limited or no sewer systems, a situation encouraged by the nature  of karst with its numerous ready-made sink-holes. As  a consequence,   considerable   municipal   and   industrial waste has been and in many cases still is being discharged into karst aquifers without treatment. Such was the case for Bowling Green, Kentucky, in 1921 when Charles E.
Mace claimed it to be

‘The only city in the United States boasting a sewer system  in  which  all  the  ‘‘pipes’’  were  laid  by  Mother Nature’
and he went on to explain that:
‘When a new residence is being built in the Bowling Green region, a ‘‘sink finder’’ is employed who  merely goes out in the back yard and digs about in the surface

soil, which is seldom more than 3 ft. deep, until he locates a fissure. A garden hose is then placed in the crevice, and the water is allowed to run until it is free from obstruc- tions. It is then approved by the city inspector, and  the house has perfect sewer connection. No city has a more sanitary system. Chemists say the sewage would  be purified in a very short distance by passing  through the limestone.’ (Mace 1921).
  Although many engineers, city inspectors and chemists now know better, regrettably this still is not always  the case, as is evident in the city of Antalya in  Turkey (Kac¸arog˘lu 1999), to a lesser extent in  Lusaka, Zambia (De Waele and Follesa 2003), and in many smaller towns around the world. Impacts on  karst that arise from the building of settlements and  transport systems are dis- cussed in volumes edited by Williams (1993), Drew and Ho¨tzl (1999), Beck and Herring (2001) and Beck (2005). Deposition, storage  and discharge of solid and liquid wastes  give  rise   to  many  water  quality  problems; urbanization  also   exacerbates  runoff  problems.  Thus pollution,  flooding and ground collapse are identifiable as the main impacts arising from the urbanization of karst. It is well known that urbanization considerably increa- ses the size of the mean annual flood in normal surface watersheds, but has progressively less influence on high- magnitude, long recurrence interval events. These accen- tuated storm hydrograph effects are transmitted to karst when urbanized impervious rock surfaces provide  allo- genic inputs, and are also seen in autogenic  systems following the paving of urban areas. Case studies demon- strating the hydrological impacts of urbanization on karst are provided by Barner (1999), Betson (1977), Crawford (1981, 1984a, 2001) and White et al. (1984), and numer- ous examples of the serious effects of industrial effluents on karst water quality are recorded  in Drew and Ho¨tzl
(1999).
The city of Bowling Green, Kentucky (population
~50 000), and subject of the quotation above, is built upon the Sinkhole Plain. Crawford observed that almost all surface storm water generated there escapes either to natural sink-holes or to drainage wells, over 400 of which have   been   drilled.   Urban   flooding   occurs   by   three mechanisms:

1. by surface detention when storm flow into sink-holes is greater than their discharge capacity, which may be reduced by clogging during building;
2. when  the  increased  and  rapidly  concentrated  runoff volumes typical of urban storm water so  surcharges underground tributary conduits that  backflooding is produced upstream of constrictions and extends back to the surface;





Figure 11.12 Isopleths of nitrate concentration showing dispersion patterns arising from up to 80 years of agricultural practices (mainly animal husbandry) around Mt Gambier, South Australia. Samples were obtained from about 3000 bores. This is a  good example of a young (Tertiary) and porous limestone aquifer functioning in a Darcian manner because of low recharge  and low hydraulic gradients. Reproduced from Waterhouse, J.D., Investigation of pollution of the karstic aquifer of the Mount Gambier area in South Australia, in Hydrogeology of Karstic Terrains, Vol. 1, pp. 202–5 A. Burger and L. Dubertret (eds) © 1984 International Union of Geological Sciences.


3. when the trunk conduit (the subterranean Barren River) is in flood due to rural runoff, as a  consequence of which its backwater effect on  vadose feeders causes them to backflood, so exacerbating the other tendencies.
  
Subsidiary problems are also associated with these processes.   Crawford   suggested   that   increased   runoff down drainage wells drilled into the bottoms of dolines causes increased subsurface erosion, which in turn led to




collapse of residual soils in about 10% of cases, so presenting an additional hazard for buildings. In addition, the quality of urban storm water is poor with consequent deleterious impacts on the subterranean ecology, a  pro- blem that can be compounded by the dispersion through karst cavities of toxic and explosive fumes from chemical spills (Crawford 1984b). Flooding damage   has been alleviated in Bowling Green by restricting  building in flood-prone areas and by requiring   developers to construct floodwater detention basins.  The concept of a sink-hole ‘flood plain’ has been adopted for flood insur- ance purposes, based on a 3-hour, 100-year return period rainfall and assuming no leakage, i.e. complete ponding (Figure 11.13). From the  perspective of American law, legal aspects of  sink-hole development and flooding in karst terrains  have been reviewed by Quinlan (1986b), and legal  impediments to utilizing groundwater as a municipal  water supply in karst terrains by Richardson (2001).
  In central Pennsylvania, White et al. (1984) concluded that human activities (i) increase hydraulic gradients through the lowering of the natural water table and
(ii) modify stormwater runoff patterns. However, only

the latter has a major effect on the generation of dolines in the area. Urbanization strongly modifies the  previously diffuse pattern of rainfall infiltration, focusing stormwater runoff from paved areas into natural  sink-holes, swales or into the soil. Prevention of  runoff focusing through planning measures is much less expensive than engineer- ing solutions but, where point discharge from paved areas is inevitable, the guiding principle should be to pipe storm water directly to the subsurface bedrock without giving it the opportunity to  excavate the soil. Where possible, building lots on karst should be large so as to minimize the volume of rapid runoff from paved surfaces. Barner (1999) evaluated some of the engineering practices asso- ciated with managing urban runoff in sink-hole terrain.
  Industrial contamination, by accidental spillage or deli- berate disposal underground, has been common on karst in the developed world. Mine tailings ponds are especi- ally hazardous. Copper mining contaminated springs  in one case in Serbia, killing all flora and fauna downstream as far as the Danube River (Stevanovic´  and Dragisic´ 1995). Very caustic bauxite waste  despoils parts of the principal aquifer in Jamaica.  Organic waste from saw- mills kills cave fauna. Historically, many early, uncased





Figure 11.13 An urban floodplain’ in an enclosed karst depression in Bowling Green, Kentucky. The dashed line is a contour that defines the  boundary  of  the  area  that  would  be  inundated  by ponded  runoff  following  an  intense  3-h,  100  yr  rainfall  event. The depression is assumed to have an insignificant rate of outflow. Reproduced from Crawford, N.C. (2001) Field trip guide, Part 1: environmental problems associated with urban development upon karst, Bowling Green, Kentucky, in Geotechnical and Environ- mental Applications of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds B.F. Beck and J.G. Herring), Balkema, Lisse, pp. 397–424.





Figure 11.14 Dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) contaminant plumes from spills of 1986 and a little earlier spreading in Silurian dolomites at Smithville, Ontario, near Niagara Falls. In dark grey, undissolved poly-chlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) dispersing below the source; lighter shades ¼ dissolved phase PCBs moving down gradient in the two uppermost dolomite units (modeled). Contours ¼ measured plume of dissolved TCE in the dolomites in 1988, in mg L—1. This is a good example of contaminant dispersion where underground karst development is limited (young) and hydraulic gradients are low, but flow is focused along key bedding planes. The bedrocks are covered by 6–7 m of glacial silts and clays exhibiting blocky fracture. The lower frame shows the reduction of the TCE plume achieved at the marked monitoring well as a consequence of eight years of pump-and-treat ground water extraction around the source; cost ~$0.5M/year. (Adapted from Smithville Phase IV Bedrock Remediation Program, Ministry  of the Environment, Ontario).




oil wells spilled crude oil or H2S-rich brine into overlying aquifers (e.g. at Parker Cave on the Kentucky  Sinkhole Plain). Cyanide-rich waste oil is widely detected, in trace amounts or greater, in urban spring waters.
  Even thermal spas are reporting adverse affects. Dewatering for bauxite mining dried up hot springs  in Hungary. Some of the  famous  travertine  terraces   at Pamukkale, Turkey, have been seriously discoloured by algal  growth  due  to  routing  of  their  hot  water  first into swimming pools upstream of them, and to  faulty septic tanks (Simsek et al. 2000).
11.4.3 Landfills and hazardous waste disposal
We have noted that many of the world’s karsts are densely peopled. Satisfactory disposal of their wastes can pose  severe  problems. Dolines  are  used  for  casual waste dumping everywhere in rural areas (and  many urban areas), so ensuring rapid transmission of contami- nants into the conduit aquifers beneath them. Historically, municipal authorities often made the deliberate decision to site their landfills (garbage  dumps) where compara- tively large dolines were available locally. In many other instances there was  dumping onto bare or soil-covered epikarst without any intervening impermeable seal (liner) and/or leachate collecting system. For instance, the noto- rious Love  Canal hazardous chemical waste dump in the city of  Niagara Falls, New York, is an infill of an abandoned  canal  dug  in  glacial  tills  just  a  few  metres above karstic dolomites and close to the Niagara River. The US Environmental Protection Agency  (EPA) esti- mates that the cost of cleaning up other individual sites it has investigated on karst in the USA will range from
$7 million to $1.2 billion. Figure 11.14 shows a similar situation to Love Canal (though much less extreme), where  there  was  hazardous  chemical  waste  storage  on the same dolomites nearby in Ontario, Canada.
  Modern practice in developed nations calls for the monitoring of groundwater quality during the active life of any landfill, and in perpetuity after it has been filled and closed. Many jurisdictions followed early US  EPA criteria, which required placement of one  monitoring well upgradient of a landfill and three  downgradient of it spaced across the putative path of  any contaminant plume. The late J.F. Quinlan  campaigned passionately (and trenchantly – e.g.  Quinlan and Ray 1991) against this simplistic  monitoring design which, as Figure 6.39 clearly  attests, may be grossly misleading where any conduit  karst development is known or suspected. He and  colleagues were successful in establishing a new standard for groundwater monitoring in karst and  frac- tured-rock aquifers – American Society for  Testing and

Materials   (ASTM),   Standard   D5717-95   (1996).   This calls for thorough site characterization, including location and study of all natural springs that might be draining the potential fill site, measurement of their hydrographs and chemographs and dye tracing to  establish their likely contributing areas. Only then can  the distribution of monitoring wells (if needed in  addition  to  the  springs) and  the  frequency  of  sampling for water quality be decided. These points  are picked up in US EPA karst wellhead protection guidelines published in 1997.
  Disposal of intermediate- and high-level nuclear wastes are particularly problematic. Most nations plan to  bury them somewhere. Canada, Sweden and others  have in- vestigated disposal in chambers excavated far below the water table in granitic plutons, but found that even there fracturing may permit channelled flow. The  USA spent much time and money considering  chambers above the water table in volcanic tuffs at  Yucca Mountain in the Nevadan desert, but is  experiencing great difficulty in establishing the long-term safety of this setting. Attention therefore turned to disposal deep within salt bodies where access conduits might be expected to anneal after closure, sealing in the  waste. The Waste Isolation Pilot Project (WIPP) near  Carlsbad, New Mexico, utilizes excavated chambers 650 m underground within a salt and anhydrite formation that is ~900 m thick. It has a design capacity of
180 000 m3 of storage and, since beginning in 1999, has
accepted >2400 shipments of intermediate transuranic waste (protective clothing, tools, etc.) from American nuclear weapons plants. Hill (2003) shows that there has been vigorous evaporite karst activity (solution troughs, breccia pipes) within 10–20 km of the site in the  same formations, and that groundwater flow in overlying dolo- mite and intrastratal dissolution within the  formations also pose threats to its long-term stability.  There have been too many accidents associated with solution mining (section 12.3) for us to be confident that disposal in salt is a responsible concept.
11.5 GROUNDWATER VULNERABILITY, PROTECTION AND RISK MAPPING
The foregoing discussion has illustrated how the quality of karst groundwaters can be seriously compromised by agricultural, industrial and urban activities. It follows, therefore, that if the considerable values of karst ground- waters for human water supply and aquatic  ecosystems are to be preserved, then strenuous efforts are required on the part of local authorities to protect and appropriately manage recharge areas. The urgency of  this imperative was increasingly recognized in the closing decades of the 20th  century  and  in  many  places methods of mapping




aquifer vulnerability, hazard and risk were being actively developed and groundwater protection guidelines were being formulated (e.g. Quinlan et al. 1991, US EPA 1993, 2000, Lallemand-Barres 1994, COST Action 65 1995, Doerfliger et al. 1999, Civita and De Maio 2000,  Daly et al. 2002, Ettazarini and El Mahmouhi 2004,  Perrin et al. 2004).
  A practical attempt to improve water quality in a karst agricultural catchment was made in Kentucky by imple- menting a code of best management practices  (BMPs). Results after about 3 years of implementation were repor- ted by Currens (2002): the BMPs were judged to be only partly successful when six water quality indicators were compared with pre-BMP values, and it  was concluded that future BMP programmes should  emphasize buffer strips around sinkholes, excluding stock from streams and karst windows, and withdrawing land from production.
  The drive to develop an improved approach to ground- water quality management in Europe was spearheaded by a programme of cooperation in science and  technology (COST). The first of these initiatives  concerned with karst was COST Action 65 (1995),  which dealt with
hydrogeological aspects of groundwater protection in carbonate rocks. It was then followed up by COST Action 620 (2004), which was tasked with the development  of an improved and consistent approach to the protection of karst groundwaters. This programme drew together karst specialists in hydrogeology, geomorphology,  environ- mental chemistry and microbiology and  reviewed the approaches used in 15 participating European countries. The European approach to  vulnerability, hazard and risk mapping when applied  to groundwater is based on an origin–pathway–target model. It applies to both ground- water resource and  source protection. As explained in COST Action 620, ‘origin’ is the term used to describe the location of a potential contaminant release; the ‘target’ is the water  that requires protection; and the ‘pathway’
includes everything between the origin and the target (Figure 11.15). For resource protection the target is the surface of the water table, whereas for source protection  it is the water in the well or spring that is used for potable supply.
  A distinction is made in COST Action 620  between intrinsic and specific vulnerability mapping. Four factors are used to assess intrinsic vulnerability: overlying layers (O), concentration of flow (C), precipitation  regime (P)
and karst network development (K). The O factor  may comprise up to four layers – soil, subsoil, non-karst rock and unsaturated karst rock. The C factor  recognizes the complexity of recharge through the unsaturated zone and the potential for runoff to bypass surface protective layers. Thus intrinsic vulnerability of groundwater to contamina-

tion takes into account the inherent geological, hydrologi- cal and hydrogeological characteristics of an area, i.e. the characteristics of the system that control its response to an input of contaminant, but is independent of the nature of the contaminants and the contamination scenario.
  Specific vulnerability mapping combines two different groups of data:

1. information about the physical and chemical beha- viour of the contaminants;
2. information about the physical and chemical properties of the layers through which the contaminants pass.

  Using  the  properties  of  the  contaminants  and   the layers,  the  principle  of  the  method  is  to  determine the effectiveness of processes that play a role in the attenua- tion (retardation and degradation) of the contaminant. A process likely to act on the concentration  of a contami- nant can be potentially effective if the conditions are met in a given layer, although the extent to which the process will, in practice, be effective also depends on the hydrau- lic conductivity  and thickness  of the layer. Specific vulnerability assessment is therefore concerned with the properties of the contaminant (or group of contaminants), its mass and  critical concentration in addition to the intrinsic  vulnerability of the area. Figure 11.10 shows some of the relationships between physical and chemical
properties of layers and the effectiveness of various
processes.   Figure   11.10   also   shows   the   relationship between physical and chemical properties  of various contaminants and the effectiveness of  specific attenua-
tion processes. Figure 11.16 provides hypothetical exam- ples that illustrate the diversity of specific attenuation for several contaminants and geological settings. See COST Action  620  (2004)  for  more  specific  evaluation  of  the behaviour of a wide range of contaminants,  including micro-organisms, in carbonate-karst groundwaters.
  In the context of groundwater contamination, a hazard
can  be  defined  as  a  potential  source  of  contamination resulting from human activities taking   place mainly at the land surface (COST Action 620  2004). Conse- quently, the hazard inventory starts from a differentiation between three main types of land use:  urban/infrastruc- tural, industrial and agricultural. Mathematical algorithms were developed under COST Action 620 to calculate the potential degree of harmfulness for each hazard, with five Hazard Index Classes being defined for mapping purposes.
It was also proposed that the protection of groundwater resources should be based on a comprehensive risk analysis, the term ‘risk’ being used for the likelihood of a specific adverse consequence that can be expressed as  the  probability  of  groundwater  contamination  to  an





Figure 11.15 (Upper) The European approach to groundwater vulnerability mapping. This is based on an origin-pathway-target conceptual model with the contamination assumed to originate at the land surface. For water resource protectction, the spring or well is the target. Reproduced from COST Action 620 (2004) Vulnerability and Risk Mapping for the Protection of Carbonate (Karst) Aquifers, Final report (COST Action 620), Report EUR 20912. Directorate-General Science, Research and Development, European Commission, Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg, 297 pp. (Lower) Organisation of vulnerability mapping using geographical information systems. Reproduced from Neukum, C. and Ho¨tzl, H. (2005) Standardisation of vulnerability map, in Water Resources and Environmental Problems in Karst (eds Z. Stevanovic´ and P. Milanovic´),  National Committee of the International Association of Hydrogeologists of Serbia and Montenegro, Belgrade, pp. 11–18.





Figure 11.16 An illustration of specific attenuation classes for different water contaminants in a range of possible karst settings. Reproduced from COST Action 620 (2004) Vulnerability and Risk Mapping for the Protection of Carbonate (Karst) Aquifers, Final report (COST Action 620), Report EUR 20912. Directorate-General Science, Research and Development, European Commission, Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg, 297 pp.


unacceptable  level.  Risk  was  considered  to  depend  on three elements: (i) the hazards and the probability that a hazardous event could occur; (ii) the vulnerability of the geological sequence; and (iii) the consequences for  the groundwater (Figure 11.15). Risk intensity (the potential intensity of the relevant impact reaching groundwater) was separated  from  risk  sensitivity  (which considers flow conditions and potential  economic and ecological value of the damage).
   Epikarst  development,   Protective  cover,   Infiltration conditions,    aquifer     Karstification    (EPIK) and ‘PI’ are similar schemes that are also  prominent in Europe (Doerfliger et al. 1999; Goldscheider et al. 2000). ‘VURAAS’

is a variant especially designed for alpine conditions (Chichocki and Zojer, 2005). ‘KARSTIC’ (Davis and Long 2002) is a variant for karst areas of an older vulner- ability mapping scheme, ‘DRASTIC’ (Aller et al. (1987), that was designed for standard Darcian aquifers through- out the USA; it is being tested there currently. Neukum and Ho¨tzl (2005) discuss the international standardization of these various karst vulnerability  mapping methods. Many examples of their application  can  be  found  in Stevanovic´  and  Milanovic´  (2005).  A five-level rating system of groundwater sensitivity has also been devised for application in Kentucky (Ray et  al.  1994),  with hydrogeological   sensitivity   defined   as  the  ease  and




speed with which a contaminant can move into and within a groundwater system.
  Whatever the protocol adopted for the protection of the quality of infiltrating water in a recharge area, a pathway of sufficient length must be achieved to permit the necessary time for die-off of potential pathogenic organ- isms  between  sites  where  contamination  may  originate and sources of potable water supply.  Although at least
30 days must be allowed for this (Figure 11.11), in practice it is difficult to define effective dimensions  of protection areas. This is because of the aquifer  hetero- geneities and the complex processes of   contaminant transport  in  karstified  media  that  we  have discussed above, even assuming that the basic  facts about catch- ment areas and flow-through times to springs and wells under a range of recharge conditions in a given area have already been determined. Thus a  combination of retire- ment of land from active  production, best management practices (including riparian protection of point-recharge sites such as  dolines and stream-sinks), and effective water quality monitoring and treatment at water sources is required.  Milanovic´ (2004) discusses zoning criteria that might  be used to protect karst water resources and emphasizes the need for flexibility, because of the differ- ing local circumstances that are presented. With that  in mind he recommends a hierarchical zoning approach.

1. Protection area of a spring or intake for drinking water. This requires the highest protection and restric- tion. Fenced boundary located at least 50 m from the intake or spring.
2. Immediate protection area. This requires very severe protection and restriction. It comprises the area with concentrated infiltration that directly connects to  the spring (or well) by within 24 h via karst  conduits, involving flow velocities that may exceed 5 cm s—1.
3. Protection area. The area contains all stream-sinks permanently or  temporarily  active in  the  catchment, but located outside Zone 2, that have  direct under- ground connections with the tapping structure (spring or well) but need a few to 10 days to reach it. If there are some swallow holes within the  general  area  of Zone  3  that  have  direct  connections to the tapping structure in less than 24 h, they should be set apart in protected enclaves and treated as Zone 2 inliers.
4. External   protection   area.   This   zone   includes   any remaining area between the external boundary line of Zone 3 and the main watershed of the catchment for the spring. From Zone 4 there are no proven direct under- ground connections to the  spring (or water intake structure) demonstrated by  tracer tests. Flow through time is much longer and flow velocities are low (e.g.

<1 cm s—1). An isolated stream-sink within this  zone could be accorded protection as a Zone 3 enclave.

  If there is an area of impervious rock within the catchment that contributes allogenic streamflow to the spring, then the entire non-karst area should be treated as Zone 2 or 3 depending on the flow transmission  time. Flow-through times considered should be those  experi- enced under flood conditions when velocities are greatest. Doline fields will be Zone 2 or 3 even where dye tracing has not been used to prove their connections to the spring. Implementation of best management practices  for live- stock and agriculture in general will be required.
11.6 DAM BUILDING, LEAKAGES, FAILURES AND IMPACTS
11.6.1 Dam construction on carbonate rocks
One of the most important techniques for managing and utilizing karst water resources is through the construction of reservoirs and dams. These permit the water to be stored and then used for flood control, urban and  rural water supply, irrigation and generation of  hydroelectri- city. A large number of dams have been built on karstic limestones and dolomites for these purposes all over the world. Flood control has been particularly important on branches of the Mississippi, where the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) was very active in the first half of the 20th Century. Storage to  sustain paddy fields, counter prolonged dry seasons or general drought was more im- portant in China, around the Mediterranean and in Iraq, Iran and other semi-arid areas. Hydroelectric power gene- ration was an early priority in alpine sites and is now the principal goal of  perhaps the majority of the larger, higher dams. Few nations that constructed them escaped serious problems due to karst leakage, leading to consi- derable overruns  in cost or to outright abandonment in some instances. These are summarized in many engineer- ing design and  construction reports. The TVA main report (1949) is still pertinent; Soderberg (1979) gave a more recent   review of their work. Therond (1972), Mijatovic  (1981), Nicod (1997) and Milanovic´ (2000, 2004)  have discussed European experience, which gen- erally has been with geologically more complex  moun- tainous sites.
  Therond (1972) identified seven different major factors that may contribute to the general problem. These  are: type of lithology, type of geological structure, extent of fracturing, nature and extent of karstification, physiogra- phy, hydrogeological situation and the type of dam to be built. For each factor, clearly, there are a  number of




significantly different conditions. In Therond’s estima- tion, these together yield a combination of 7680 distinct situations that could arise at dam sites on carbonate rocks! It follows that dam design, exploration and  con- struction must be specific to the particular site,  and be continually re-evaluated:

‘There is perhaps no phase of engineering or construction which lends itself less readily to rule-of-thumb or hand- book methods than does (dam) foundation’ (TVA 1949,
p. 93). ‘When dealing with karstic foundations all geolo-
gic features must be evaluated no matter how small  or insignificant they appear’ and ‘design as you  construct’ (Soderberg 1979, p. 425).

  Milanovic´ (2000) suggests that there have been  three principal settings for dams on carbonate rocks.

1. In the narrow gorges typically created where large allogenic  rivers  cross  them  in  steep  channels.  Here rates of river entrenchment have usually been  faster than karst development, with the result that karstifica- tion is not a major problem beneath the  channels. It may however be hazardous in the gorge walls which will form the dam abutments.  Limestone gorges are particularly attractive sites   because the rock is mechanically strong enough to support the structure, while the narrow aperture  reduces the amount of material required to build the visible dam.
2. Dams and reservoirs in broader valleys where the karst evolution has been as fast as or faster than river entr- enchment. The TVA sites are examples. This  can cause many problems beneath the dam as well  as in the abutments and upstream in valley sides  and bot- toms. It is particularly hazardous where the valley is hanging at its mouth, as is common in  alpine topo- graphy, because the natural (pre-dam)  groundwater gradient is steepened there.  Unfortunately, this will also be an optimum  site   for hydroelectric power dam location because the reservoir volume, fall height and gradient of the   penstock  are  all  maximized there.
3. In poljes to control flooding and store water for dry- season  irrigation.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult setting because under natural  conditions   the dry- season water table will be deep below the polje floor in highly karsted rock. The reservoir  floor must be sealed (with clay, shotcrete, PVC, etc.) to retain water but the seals can be blown by air  pressure as flood- waters rise in the caves  underneath. Ponors must be plugged or walled off by individual dams rising above the reservoir water  surface, and estavelles must be fitted with one-way valve systems. Much success has

been achieved in the poljes of former Yugoslavia but the Cernic´a project there and Taka Polje in Greece are two examples that were abandoned after expensive study.

  Many dams are more than 100 m in height and some exceed 200 m. A first, obvious danger of dam construc- tion is that by raising the water table to such extents, an unnaturally   steep   hydraulic   gradient   is   created   with unnatural rapidity across the foundation and  abutment rock, and an unnaturally large supply of  water is then provided that may follow this gradient. This is a hazar- dous undertaking because, unless grout curtains penetrate well into unkarstified rock, the  increased pressure will drive groundwater movement under the dam and stimu- late dissolution. Dreybrodt et  al. (2002, 2005) have approached this problem with realistic modelling scenar- ios for limestone and  gypsum. In the limestone case solutional conduits are  shown to propagate to break- through dimensions  (turbulent flow – sections 3.10 and 7.2) beneath a 100 m deep grout curtain under a dam in approximately 80 years. Remedial work would then be essential. Table  11.1 provides details of leakage from dams in karst  before and after remedial works, and Figure 11.17  shows one example of increasing leakage over time at a dam in Macedonia.
  The Hales Bar Dam, Tennessee, is a notorious example of a simple and immediate response to raising the water table, because there was leakage directly under the dam where   hydraulic   gradient   is   greatest.   Building   plans called for dam construction in a period of two  years at a cost of $3 M. Because of initial foundation problems in karst, this was extended to eight years and $11.5 M. Two weeks  after  filling  (November  1913)  the first serious leaks appeared. Expensive remedial treatments continued for 30 years before leakage was reduced to an acceptable level (TVA 1949). Camarasa Dam, Spain (Table 11.1 and Figure 11.18) provides  another example of unexpected leakage via both the foundation and abutments.
  However, this is by no means the end of potential problems. Not only may modern fissures and conduits be flushed and enlarged at accelerated rates, but long-dormant relict karst and even sediment-plugged  palaeokarst may be reactivated. Therond (1972) cited  an instance where raising the water level to þ75 m induced only 1.6 m3 s—1 of leakage downstream, but when the level was raised to þ85 m leakage increased to  an unacceptable 8 m3 s—1. Evidently,  sediment-filled  conduits (undetected in the exploration) were flushed  and reactivated. This empha- sizes that conditions of hydraulic conductivity estimated by even the most  detailed investigation during the site exploration stage   may  have  to  be  radically  revised



Table 11.1   Leakage from reservoirs reduced after remedial works. Reproduced from Milanovic´,  P.T., Water Resources Engineering in Karst © 2004 CRC Press, Taylor and Francis

Dam/reservoir
After first filling (m3 s—1)
After remedial works (m3 s—1)
Keban (Turkey)
26
<10
Camarassa (Spain)
11.2
2.6
Mavrovo (FYR Macedonia)
9.5
Considerably reduced
Great Falls (USA)
9.5
0.2
Marun (Iran)
10
Considerably reduced
Canelles (Spain)
8
Negligible
Slano (Yugoslavia) (34 m3 s—1)*
8
(3.5) Increase till 6
Ataturk (Turkey)
>11
?
Visˇegrad (Bosnia)
9.4
Remedial work runs
Busˇko Blato (Bosnia) (40 m3 s—1)*
5
3
Dokan (Iraq)
6
No leakage
Contreas (Spain)
Hutovo (Herzegovina) (10 m3 s—1)*
3–4
3
? 1
Gorica (Herzegovina)
Sˇpilje (FYR Macedonia)
2–3
2
No remedial works No remedial works
El Cajon (Honduras)
1.65
0.1
Krupac (Yugoslavia)
1.4
Negligible
Charmine (France)
0.8
0.02
Krusˇcˇica (Sklope) (Croatia)
0.8
0.35
Mornos (Greece)
0.5
Considerably reduced
Piva (Yugoslavia)
0.7–1
No remedial works
Maria Cristina (Spain)
20% of inflow
?
Perucˇa (Croatia)
1
No remedial works
Sichar (Spain)
20% of inflow
?
La Bolera (Spain)
0.6
?



582
580
578
576
574
572
570
568
566
564
562
560







+
++     +
++
+
+
+

+
+
++


1987  1989	1991  1995

280	300	320	340	360	380	400
Lake discharge at spring I6 (l/s)

Figure 11.17  Increasing leakage at Spring I6 below the Sˇpilje Dam, Macedonia, related to water level in the reservoir behind the dam. Milanovic´, P.T. (2000) Geological Engineering in Karst: Dams, Reservoirs, Grouting, Groundwater Protection,Water Tapping, Tunnelling, Zebra, Belgrade, 347 pp.






Figure 11.18 Camarasa hydroelectric dam, Noguera, Spain. The dam is built on thick, massive dolomites, dipping at 17○ in the upstream direction and with an aquiclude stratum of marls at shallow depth beneath them. The dam is a gravity arc concrete structure 92 m in height and 377 m in length at the crest. It and the abutments were grouted  to the marls via  north and  south grout tunnels. When the reservoir filled 25 new springs with an aggregate flow of ~12 m3s—1 were created, which is an excep- tional amount. Reproduced from Therond, R.,   Recherche sur l’etancheite des lacs de barrage en pays karstique, Eyrolles, 1972.
following  new   evidence  that   comes   to  light   as   the reservoir fills. The Kalecik Dam in Turkey  illustrates this. Extra grouting was undertaken after  springs broke out downstream following water impoundment, but water losses continue (Turkmen et al. 2002).
  While leakage through dam foundations and abut- ments is most feared, it is quite possible that there may  be lateral leakage elsewhere in a reservoir. Problems with karst can arise even where the dam itself is  built

on some other rock, if karst rocks are inundated upstream of it. Montjaques Dam, Spain, was built to inundate  a polje. It failed by leaking through tributary passages and the scheme was abandoned (Therond 1972).
  In tackling dams on karst the first essential is drilling of  exploratory  boreholes  (with  rock  core  extracted  for inspection), and mining of adits (galleries big  enough for human entry and inspection) in the abutments. These may later be used for grouting. Surface,  downhole and interhole geophysics (Milanovic´ 2000)  can amplify the picture but are not in themselves sufficient because they will rarely detect smaller  cavities, or even large ones below ~50 m or so. Even  intensive drilling and mining may be inadequate. At  the Keban Dam site in Turkey, despite 36 000 m of  exploratory drilling and 11 km of
exploratory adits, a huge cavern of over 600 000 m3 was
not detected; ‘expect the unexpected!’ (Milanovic´ 2000). Grout curtains are essentially dams built within the rock. ‘Due to karst’s hydrogeological nature, grout  cur- tains executed in karstified rock mass are more complex and much larger than curtains in other geological forma- tions’ (Milanovic´ 2004, p. 81). For  example, Ataturk Dam in Turkey has a grout curtain surface area of 1.2 × 106 m2, a length of 5.5 km and  extends up to 300 m in depth. The design and  density of grout curtains are discussed by Milanovic´  and other authors listed here. A widely adapted principle  is that the depth (h) of the curtain under the dam  should be h ¼ H/3 þ c, where H
is the height of the dam and c is a constant based on site conditions. It ranges between 8 and 25. Typically, in limestone gorges with little karst development in the floors (setting 1 above) the relation will be 0.3–1.0H, in simple river valleys (setting 2), 0.5–2.5H. In hanging valleys  it  can  reach  4H,  and  is  6H  or  more  in  poljes (setting 3). The surest principle is to grout  entirely through the limestone into underlying  impermeable and insoluble strata where this is   possible.  Curtains  in abutments can also be  terminated laterally against such strata (the ‘bathtub’ solution).
  The normal practice is to excavate all epikarst and fill any large caverns discovered by the adits and bores, then place a main curtain beneath the dam, in the abutments and on the flanks (Figure 11.18). A cut-off trench  and second,  denser  curtain  may  be  placed  upstream  in  the foundation  if  there  are  grave  problems  there.  In the main curtain a first line of airtrack grout holes  will be placed on centres never more than 8–10 m  apart  and filled  until  there  is  back  pressure.  A  second, offset line of holes is then placed and filled between them. Third and fourth  lines  may  be  used  until the spacing reaches a desirable minimum that is  normally not more than 2 m. Adits in the abutments  that are used to inject grout




should be no more 50 m apart vertically. Standard grouts are  cement   with   clay   (particularly   bentonite,  a   clay that expands when wetted), plus sand and gravel  for large cavities. Mixtures are made up as slurries  with differing proportions of water. Ideally, the goal  of all grouting is to reduce leakage of water to one Lugeon unit (Lu ¼1 L min—1 m—1 of hole at 10 bars  water pressure) under a dam and 2 Lu in the  abutments. In  practice, in karsted  limestones it  is  often difficult to inject grout where permeability is   <5.0 Lu.  Correlation  between Lugeon measured during exploration and the amount of grout that will be  required can be very poor also; at Granc´arevo Dam,   Herzegovina,  consumption  ranged from 1.5 to 1500 kg m—1 in different holes that had recorded only ~1.0 Lu before grouting began (Milanovic´ 2000).
  The  Normandy   Dam,   Tennessee,   provides   a   good example of exploration and grouting at a  comparatively simple site. It is an earth-fill dam 34 m in height, footed on horizontal limestones. In preliminary exploration, 4400 m of core holes were drilled and  then, in an 80 m wide problem zone, 25 cm diameter holes were drilled on 50- cm centres for inspection by downhole TV camera. The epikarst was then removed along a cut-off trench 6–12 m in depth. Beneath it 100-cm grout holes were emplaced on 120-cm centres (i.e. overlapping), and 12-cm holes were high pressure  grouted upstream and downstream of this line. The main grout curtain was then emplaced on 3-m centres  and to a depth of 25 m. All holes that accepted grout were reinforced by one to three further holes. The treatment was successful (Soderberg 1979).
  All  springs  and piezometers  must  be monitored  care- fully as the reservoir fills behind a completed  dam. Operators should be prepared to halt filling and  drain the reservoir as soon as serious problems  appear. In extreme cases the reservoir floor and sides may be sealed off, e.g.  by  plastic  sheeting.   Experience shows that remedial measures after a dam  has been completed and tested are much more costly than dense grouting during construction.
  Despite such intense effort dams still fail to  achieve design levels in karst. A good example is the Lar Dam, Elbruz Mountains, Iran. This is a 105 m high  earth-fill dam in a hanging valley at 2440 m a.s.l. The geology is complex.  The  natural  water  table  was  >200 m beneath the dam, draining to major springs 8 km distant and 350 m lower in elevation. A sequence  of international engineering firms tackled it beginning  in  the  1950s. During the first attempt to fill the reservoir, leakage via the springs rose to 60–80% of the inflow. It was drained
and re-grouted, with 1000–40 000 kg m—1 of grout being
injected in the worst places. A cavern of >90 000 m3 was

also discovered and filled. Water losses remain unaccep- tably high.
  Dams and reservoirs may considerably alter the water regime  of  rivers  and  springs  in  karst,  as  explained  by Milanovic´ (2000, 2004). In the case of a 105 km reach of the Cetina River in Croatia, for example,  there are five hydroelectric power plants, five reservoirs and three long tunnels and pipelines. Bonacci and Roje-Bonacci (2003) show that their effect in the  upper 65 km has been to redistribute the hydrological regime throughout the year, with low flows increasing  and high flows decreasing although the mean annual flow remains the same. In the 40 km reach downstream  of Prancˇevic´i Reservoir, the
original 100 m3 s—1  flow of the Cetina has been reduced
to a ‘biological minimum’ of only one-tenth of that volume because of its diversion through two tunnels (9.832 km  long)  and  pipelines  that  cut  through  a  large bend in the river to the Zakucˇac power station  situated near sea level at the mouth of the river.
11.6.2 Dam construction on gypsum and anhydrite
Numerous  case  histories  are  provided  by  A.  N.  James (1992) that illustrate the wide range of serious  diffi- culties that have been encountered by building dams on evaporite rocks. These include the rapid enlargement of existing conduits and the creation of new ones, because hydraulic gradients are excessive (Figure 11.19); the settl- ing   or   collapse   of   foundations   or   abutments   where



Figure 11.19  Penetration distances or progress of the dissolu- tion  front  for  ~L99  in  massive  gypsum,  calculated  for  initial fissure widths ranging 0.21–1.0 mm. Time elapsed since initia- tion  is   in  years.   The   hydraulic  gradient   is  0.2   and water temperature is 10○C. (Inset) The form of the  dissolution taper into the fissure that is obtained with theoretical calculations such as these. Adapted from James, A.N. and Lupton, A.R.R. (1978) Gypsum and anhydrite in foundations  of hydraulic structures. Geotechnique, 28, 249–72.




gypsum is weakened by solution; heave of  foundations where anhydrite is hydrated, and attack by sulphate-rich waters upon concrete in the dam itself:

CaCO3  þ 2H2SO4  ¼ Ca2þ þ SO2— þ CO2  þ H2O
In their model analysis, Dreybrodt et al. (2002) obtained kinetic breakthrough beneath a 100 m deep grout curtain in gypsum in 20–30 years, the conduits enlarging to give unacceptable rates of leakage within the ensuing five years.
  In the USA experience has been gained in simple geo- logical,   low-relief   terrains   in   west   Texas   and   New Mexico, where it is possible to avoid truly  excessive hydraulic gradients and the problems of  complex struc- ture. At one celebrated site, McMillan  Dam, gypsum is present only in the abutments, further reducing the diffi- culties, and no caves were detected when it was built in 1893. Nevertheless, the reservoir  drained dry via caves through the left-hand abutment within 12 years. Attempts to seal off the leaking area  by a coffer dam failed because new caves developed  upstream of it. Between

1893 and  1942  it  is  estimated  that  50 × 106 m3   of  dis- solution channels were created (James and Lupton 1978). McMillan Dam is now abandoned, as are nearby Avalon Dam and Hondo Dam.
  Dams can be built successfully in gypsum terrains where relief is low and geology simple (or where there are gypsum interbeds in carbonate strata), but comprehensive grouting is necessary and an  impermeable covering over all gypsum outcrops is  desirable (Pechorkin 1986). Periodic draining and regrouting will probably be needed also.
  Dams in mountainous country appear to be especially hazardous.  In  California,  St  Francis  Dam  was  built  in 1928 on  conglomerate  containing  clay with  a   high frequency of gypsum veinlets (A. N. James  1992). Shortly after filling an abutment collapsed  catastrophi- cally and 400 people were killed downstream. Collapse was   attributed   to   dissolution   of the gypsum which weakened the mechanical structure and permitted lubri- cation of the clay. This is an instance of failure in a rock that would not be  classified as karstic at all, merely having a low proportion of gypsum (<5%?) as fracture filling.




12

Human Impacts and Environmental Rehabilitation

‘Nature to be commanded must be obeyed’
Francis Bacon, Novum Organum (1620)

12.1 THE INHERENT VULNERABILITY    OF KARST SYSTEMS
Natural environmental change and human impacts on the environment  have  occurred  concurrently  since  the  Last Interglacial about 125 000 years ago. Homo sapiens is an integral part of the ecosystem, at first minor because our earliest impacts were sustainable hunter–gatherer  activ- ities. The earliest cultivators began to change that. Nicod et al. (1996) provide a detailed historical  review  of human–karst  relationships,  and  consider  uses of karst and associated impacts from classical   Greek and Roman times until present. It was only  when  there  was extensive  deforestation  and  widespread use  of fire  that our impacts  began to  leave a permanent imprint. In the past 8000 years,  with  the  rise  of  settled  agriculture  and the  building  of towns, such activities started to have significant  effect on natural ecosystems. Many of the impacts on karst are reviewed in special issues of Catena (Williams 1993) and Environmental Geology (1993, Vol.
21) and  in  an  increasing  number  of  international  con- ference proceedings.
  We can distinguish human-induced environmental change  from  natural  environmental  change  by  the  rate of change (e.g. of water-table lowering) and the type of change   (e.g.   landform   modification   by   quarrying), which is often more rapid and different to that encoun- tered in natural systems. Human-induced environmental change is transmitted through karst,  often far from the

initial point of impact, by hydrological processes that largely operate underground and out of sight; thus their impact often is not obvious until it is well advanced. For example,   water   extraction   via   boreholes   may   cause springs to dry up (Figure 11.2). Activities on  adjacent non-karst terrains also often impinge on karst, because allogenic runoff transmits polluting and   clogging effects. Figure 12.1 illustrates this point and shows the particularly complex ramifications of such  activities  as urbanization  and  quarrying.  Sets  of  human activities whether undertaken on karst or on  non-karst terrains upstream can lead to major effects  that result in karst ecosystem degradation. Dam  building has particularly large impacts as noted in  section 11.6, and even when built beyond the outflow  boundary of karst can still affect it as a result of backflooding.
  Experience shows that karst environments are particu- larly fragile and vulnerable to damage compared with most  other  natural  systems.  The  reason  for  this  is  the nature of the karst hydrological system. Efficient  drai- nage of the surface down numerous widened  joints, dolines and stream-sinks rapidly transmits surface pollu- tion underground and readily evacuates soils  stripped from the surface. Filtration of diffuse recharge is minimal because limestone soils are usually thin; transmission of recharge is essentially unfiltered  because subterranean conduits have large dimensions  and rapid transmission provides minimal opportunity  for die-off of pathogenic


Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd




  HUMAN ACTIVITIES

EFFECTS		IMPACTS ON KARSTS

Adjacent Non-Karst
Terrain
 
Karst
Terrain



Deforestation

        Agriculture

Urbanization and industry


   Loss of biota Reduced evapotranspiration Increased runoff and erosion
Increased sediment discharge



   Impoverished ecology


Soil degradation and erosion Sedimentation of caves


Quarrying and mining

Tourism and recreation

Military activities


Water exploitation
– dams (upstream)

– groundwater pumping
– dams (downstream)


Acid rain
Waste water discharge

Rock and mineral removal Chemical wastes
   Wear and tear Reduced allogenic recharge
Water-table lowering Inundation



Water quality deterioration

Landform destruction




  Soil collapse Spring dessication Sea water intrusion
Drowned karst systems


 ECOSYSTEM DEGRADATION


Figure 12.1 Human activities, their effects and impacts on karst terrains. Activities on adjacent, upstream non-karst areas often have an impact on karst as a result of transmission by allogenic drainage into karst. Less frequently an activity on the downstream side also has an impact, such as backflooding from dams. Reproduced from Williams, P.W. (Ed.), Karst terrains; environmental changes and human impacts. Cremlingen-Destedt, Catena Verlag, Catena Supplement 25, 268 pp. © 1993 Elsevier.


organisms. Once thin soils are lost, their replacement time is very long, because there are only small quantities of insoluble residues in karst rocks that might form  the inorganic basis of a new soil cover. Whereas  inorganic residues might be released at a rate of 50 t km—2 a—1, soil erosion  in  deforested  country  can  easily be one or two orders of magnitude greater. Soil losses have occurred for generations in some temperate  and tropical karsts and
have led to very severe environmental degradation, in the Gunung Sewu of Java for example. Even in karst lowlands where wet rice paddy field agriculture  (supported by irrigation from karst springs) has  operated sustainably for centuries, recent changes brought about by population increase, intensification in upland cultivation, deforesta- tion, quarrying,  agricultural chemicals and competition for water resources have resulted in severe stress on the resource base and threaten the continued viability of the system,  e.g. Urich (1993), Urich and Reeder (1996) provide  ample evidence for this from karst areas of the Philippines. Even relatively benign activities such as tourism and recreation can also have  severe effects  on

karst. Tourist caves in particular are vulnerable because of the focused intensive nature of the visitation. The tourist impact of CO2 exhalation and lighting was so severe on ancient cave art in Lascaux Cave in France, for example, that this World Heritage site was closed in  order to preserve the paintings (section 12.8).
  The message is clear: karsts are highly vulnerable  to overuse and misuse, have a major subterranean  compo- nent that requires specialist knowledge to manage prop- erly, and once damaged can be extremely  difficult to restore. As a consequence of recognizing  this problem, considerable effort has recently been made by countries of the European Union to protect the quality and quantity of  groundwater  resources,  especially    karst water resources (COST Action 620 2004), as  discussed in Chapter 11. The World Commission on Protected Areas of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) has also drawn up guide- lines for the protection of caves and karst (Watson et al. 1997) and for sustainable  tourism in protected areas (Eagles et al. 2002).




12.2 DEFORESTATION, AGRICULTURAL IMPACTS AND ROCKY DESERTIFICATION
12.2.1 The Kras – stony ground
As described in Chapter 1, the curious name ‘karst’ itself derives from the impact of early forest clearance and farming on rugged limestone terrains in the northern Dinaric coastal region that created a ‘kras’ terrain of bare, stony epikarst largely devoid of trees or shrubs. Gams (1991b) describes and illustrates in detail the process followed since classical Greek times in trans- forming the originally wooded but stony region into farmland. Deciduous forests were cut and burnt by  the Illyrians to gain pastures. In Roman times tall pines were logged for shipbuilding. In the succeeding   centuries grazing by goats and sheep prevented  woodland regen- eration on the rocky hillsides and  there was severe soil loss by washing into the  epikarst and onwards under- ground. The ‘rocky  desertification’ had become suffi- ciently intense that   in AD 1150  the  government  in Trieste appointed  forest guardians to restrict cutting for firewood, and  prohibited the breeding of goats. Strik- ingly, the Karst is responding well to modern rehabilita- tion; local regions that showed as little as 5% tree cover in administrative maps of AD 1805 now have more than 40% (Gams 1993).
12.2.2 Modern primary deforestation
The majority of the world’s forests today are secondary or later growths upon land that has been cleared of trees at  least  once  for  the  timber  and/or  farming.  There  are few areas where true ‘primordial’ forest has  remained uncut on karst lands until recent times. Two  such areas are the rugged coastal rainforests of British  Columbia and the adjoining Alaskan ‘panhandle’, and  some  simi- lar  but  smaller  areas  on  the  western  South Island of New Zealand and in the interior of Tasmania. These are especially significant because some of the primary clear- cutting  has been  accompanied  with impact studies to explore for Best Management  Practices; see Kiernan (1984) – Tasmania; Harding (1987) and BC Ministry of Forests (1994) – British  Columbia; and Baichtal and Swanston (1996) – Alaska.
  Harding  and  Ford  (1993)  summarized  the  results  of one detailed impact study. This was on very steep slopes and plateaus in the mountains of northern  Vancouver Island, where forests on a thick to  massively bedded limestone could be compared with  those on adjacent volcanic rocks that are insoluble. The area was glaciated and has veneers of glacial till. Shallow epikarst of post- glacial age is well developed on the  limestone. The

natural forest is coniferous (western hemlock, cedar and fir) with trees that are centuries old and have basal diameters of 1–2 m. Growth is significantly greater  on the limestones, where the large trees can root deep into the epikarst. Eight sites in virgin forest (limestone or volcanics) were compared with 16 sites logged between 1970 and 1983, and one on limestone logged as early as 1911.  Areas  that  were  deliberately  burned  after   the cutting (to provide some ash to encourage  regrowth) were also compared with logged but  unburned areas. It was found that there was an average 40% soil loss on the limestone slopes, compared with negligible losses on the control volcanics. Percentage bare rock on the lime- stone increased from ~2% in the forest to ~25% on the logged terrain (Figure 12.2).  There were statistically significant  differences   between  burned  and  unburned sites,  burning  always   being  more  deleterious.  After 75 years of natural recovery the limestone area cut over in AD 1911 had only 20% of the volume of wood to be found on equivalent  uncut areas. The British Columbia forest industry  standard cycle period for tree harvest– plant–harvest is 80 years, but it is evident that this cannot be realized on much of the karst because of the soil losses. In Ontario, Canada, there are very extensive tracts of karstified limestone and dolomite plains, including areas where there is little detrital till cover because of glacial- lake  washover. These were densely forested with large white pine until clear-cut between 100 and 160 years ago. All soil and litter was lost over wide areas. In them the forest has been able to re-establish itself naturally  (no deliberate planting) by rooting into the epikarst, although the trees are now much smaller or of undesirable species. In contrast to the situation that will prevail on almost all other rocks, therefore, even the complete  loss of soil
and litter from limestone or dolomite surfaces will  not prohibit the re-establishment of forest if there is a well- developed epikarst. This is because much soil and litter, plus other nutrients and water, are retained in the epikarst
cavities. It is a paradox that surface soil erosion is much more severe on karst rocks than it is on others, yet vegetal recovery on the severely eroded sites can be more complete.
  In Ontario and elsewhere the aboriginal hunter– gatherers did not leave all forest on karst untouched. Where drainage of the epikarst was particularly good (e.g. close to escarpment edges) it was common practice to set fires to burn the trees in order to encourage  the proliferation of shrubs and grasses in the  undergrowth. These attracted deer and other game animals. The result
is that there are some extensive tracts of alvar vegetation –
open grasslands or dwarf juniper shrubs mixed with flowering herbs (Enyedy-Goldner 1994).






Figure 12.2 On micritic limestones in the Benson River valley, northern Vancouver Island, in July 1986. (Upper left) The epikarst, soil, forest floor litter and uncut forest exposed in a small quarry wall. (Lower left) A fresh clear-cut, recently burned. The epikarst is beginning to emerge from the soil cover. Uncut forest in rear. (Right) Dipslopes of 25○ that were logged and burned in 1970. The epikarst with rinnen- and rund-karrenis is exposed.


12.2.3 The impact of historic farming practices
The neolithic and later clearances described by Gams (1991a)  in  the  Classic  Karst  occurred  everywhere  else around the Mediterranean, the Fertile Crescent  and into northern Europe. The pioneer of groundwater hydrology in the USA, Oscar Meinzer, once remarked  that ‘.. . in places the Bible reads like a water supply  paper’, a reference to the significance of karst springs in the spread of small farming and pastoralism. Jericho  was a site of very early crop irrigation, for example, built on a spring
yielding 10 × 106 m3 a—1. Where the ground sloped or
soil was thin there was ready soil loss. In these regions and their equivalent in eastern Asia or middle America, it is   commonplace   to   see   epikarst   prominences   rising 0.5–1.0 m above the remaining soil, with the tips of the

exposed  rocks  often  sharpened  by  rillenkarren  cut  into them (Figure 12.3). Vines, olives and fruit trees  were planted in holes amongst the rocks. Today,  individual banana trees are planted in tiny collapsed caves on some Bahamian islands. In the very rugged (and impoverished) highlands of Mexico each karren hole  with a fistful of surviving soil or litter will have a corn plant in it, even where slopes are 35○; the same being  true in parts of Guizhou, China.
  Farming on karst thus was never easy because of the need to retain soil and accessible water. Technology was limited  to  human  power  or  that  of  harnessed  animals. Within those limitations there was much  modification of  the  form  and  function  of  epikarst  and, especially, of dolines. Loose stones were cleared,  epikarst pinnacles were broken up and attempts made  to level over them





Figure 12.3   ‘Stone teeth’ emerging from soil following deforestation in the highlands of Papua New Guinea.


using terra rossa carried in. Slopes were terraced to retain soil and water, especially around the sides of dolines where  there  may  be  flow  at  the  soil–rock   interface throughout a summer drought (Figure 5.28). Doline floors received particular attention because they  usually con- tained a deeper natural fill of residual soil, to which the erosion losses during deforestation added  a few tens of centimetres or more. Irrigation water  could be directed into them by gravity. Thus in many polygonal karsts and upland regions they became the  kitchen gardens of the small farmers. Other doline  bottoms were puddled with clay to render them impermeable (at least for a few years) in order to convert them into ponds for livestock. Effort was always most intensive in the wet rice regions because of the need to maintain standing water in the paddy fields in face of the threat of soil collapse and abrupt drainage into epikarst  or shallow caves. Uvalas and small poljes were much favoured there because of their proportionally greater extent of flat floor. Modification often resulted in the  temporary blockage of important sinks, however, causing unwanted flooding.
  Dry  stone  walls  and  other  enclosures  are  distinctive features of most European farmed karst  areas and are seen in a few elsewhere. Walling began with the classical Greek colonizations but the process  peaked with the greatly increased population density  and intensification of agriculture of  the  17th  and   18th  centuries  AD

(Figure 12.4). The order of 100 kg of stones (and some- times much more) might be removed per metre square of land. Where loose stone was not available for walls, shallow, irregular stone pits might be dug to the bottom of the epikarst and a little below. Now degraded,  they have sometimes been mistaken for solution or  collapse dolines. There was much cultural variation of form and style. Nicod (1990) and Gams (1991b) give  detailed accounts of walling in France and Dalmatia respectively. Krk Island, Croatia, is especially celebrated for its walls and terraces, all built by hand labour.
  Many of the poorer karst uplands that were once inten- sively  farmed  have  now  been  abandoned  because  their maintenance is not economic. This is especially  true in Europe, some parts of Malaysia and China. In  southern
France, Corsica and Sardinia they are reverting to garri-
gue, an aromatic but unproductive scrub ecology. In areas of  Belize,  Guatemala  and  Mexico,  in  contrast,  modern population  pressure  is  pushing  traditional  small farmers back onto land that was abandoned during the collapse of the Mayan Empire (AD ~1000–1100) and then reverted to tropical forest for many centuries  afterwards. Furley (1987) examined the precise effect over 10 years of soil disturbance by such forest   clearance and shifting cultivation on cone karst in  Belize. The nutrient and physical properties of the soil were so severely affected, including soil-depth thinning on the upper slopes, that he






Figure 12.4 (Upper) A small field in a doline surrounded by a dry stone wall set in a rocky semi-desertified karst landscape in the Dinaric region. (Photograph by M. Bakalowicz.) (Lower) Small terrace fields in the Dinaric karst with dry stone walls built from stones cleared from the soil.


concluded the magnitude of change resulting from  just one cycle of shifting cultivation is so considerable that it throws into question the sense of permitting its long-term continuation in cockpit karst areas.
12.2.4 Mechanized farming and ‘rocky desertification’
In the 20th century, especially after 1945, the coming of bulldozers  and  other  heavy  equipment  has  transformed

much of the subdued types of karst topography in nations where land prices are high, such as central and southern Europe, Israel, Japan and the Ryukyu Islands. Levelling of ground and filling of shallow dolines has been wide- spread.  Hillslopes  are  terraced  by  machine.  Bulldozers have torn off epikarst to be ground into  gravel, then returned and compacted it with added  topsoil; rates of recharge to the underlying karst must  be significantly reduced.




  The  great  vineyards  of  Burgundy  and  Bordeaux  are on weak and porous limestones beneath varying  depths of cover gravels, sands and silts. Karstification  contri- butes significantly to the efficient drainage that enhances the quality of the crop. In Bordeaux, for  example, the
terroir where the wine, Graves, is produced is a typical
cryptokarst beneath shallow cover; the Medoc terroir (Margaux, Chateau Latour, Lafite, Mouton-Rothschild, etc.) has Eocene carbonate rocks with shallow poljes clogged  with  sands  from  the  last  marine  transgression, and Entre-deux-Mers is a mantled  polygonal karst. All have been subjected to levelling  or other mechanical treatments to aid mechanised  tending and harvesting of the grapes. Audra (1999)  reported that consequences have included soil erosion, rapid formation of suffosion dolines, blockage and  pollution of the aquifers, and backflooding.
  War has also contributed in Europe. Areas of the French   chalk   were   densely   tunnelled   and   trenched, 1914–1918, altering the natural karst  drainage. Karst plateaus of the Venetian Fore-Alps  were also sites of sustained trench warfare. Shell fire  there  created  an ‘instant  epikarst’  of  craters  2–10 m  in diameter and up to 3.5 m deep. Subsequently, dissolution has exploited the explosion fracturing in  many of them, converting them into functioning small dolines (Celi 1991).
  Tropical karst lands have seen the introduction of commercial plantations for citrus, bananas, pineapples and other fruits, cacao, coffee, palm oil, etc. for export to the First World. Floodplains of allogenic rivers and floors of border poljes were early targets because they require little   levelling   work   (e.g.   Sibun   River,   Belize;   Fig- ure 9.34). There has been expansion into interior poljes and large uvalas such as the ‘glades’ of  Jamaica, with concomitant terracing, flood-control damming and chan- nelization. Soil erosion has  increased and many springs have become polluted. In  the Chinese, Indonesian and Philippines karsts there  are ingenious admixtures of the historic subsistence  and modern commercial practices; Figure 12.5 shows  an example from Gunung Sewu, Indonesia (Urushibara-Yoshino 1991).
  Rocky desertification caused by deforestation is as old  as  the  Classic  Karst  itself,  as  we  have   shown. However, it can be said to have reached a  peak during the ‘Great Leap Forward’ in China in  1958, and in subsequent campaigns there. The Great  Leap Forward called for production of iron in small  blast furnaces throughout the land. Communal farmers  were ordered to strip all trees for conversion into  charcoal for the furnaces. Huntoon (1991) studied the  results on sample
stone forest and peak cluster karsts in the south of  the country. One commune reported burning 3000 m3    of



Figure 12.5 The wet and dry season utilization of dolines (‘cockpits’) and small poljes in the Gunung Sewu karst,  Indo- nesia. Reproduced from Urushibara-Yoshino, K., Miotke, F.-D., Kashima, N., et al. (1999) Solution rate of limestone in Japan. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Series A, 24(10), 899–903.
wood per day for charcoal there. Even the roots of  the trees  were  grubbed  up,  destroying  the  last  vestiges of binding strength in the soil (Figure 12.6).  Yuan (1996) reported that typical soil losses in the   karst   ranged from  200  to  2000 t km—2 a—1.  Conditions deteriorated further during the Cultural   Revolution  (1966–1976)
and immediately following decollectivization in 1979. Loss of the ‘green reservoir’ on the karst peaks and slopes   has   increased   flood   amplitudes   and   lowered water tables. Reforestation (natural and by  planting) is now encouraged everywhere but rural    demands for domestic firewood create many conflicts.  There is a search for fast-growing trees that will  resprout when chopped  off  just  above  the  roots   (see  http://www. edu.cn/desert/rockdesert.htm).





Figure 12.6 Rocky desertification in peak cluster karst near Wuxuan, Guangxi Autonomous Region, China. The villagers in the left foreground wisely chose not to strip the hillside above their homes, thus avoiding flooding and soil erosion. (Photograph by Peter Huntoon, with permission.)

12.3 SINK-HOLES INDUCED BY DEWATERING, SURCHARGING, SOLUTION MINING AND      OTHER PRACTICES ON KARST
12.3.1 Induced sink-hole formation
It is probably true to write that, after groundwater pollu- tion, induced  sink-holes  are  the most  prominent  hazar- dous effect of human activity in karst regions. Agriculture, mining and quarrying, highways and railways, urban and industrial construction all contribute. Induced sink-holes generally  develop  more  rapidly  than most natural ones, appearing and enlarging in   timespans  ranging  from seconds to a few weeks. This is faster than most societies can  react  with  preventive  or damage-limiting measures, so that such sink-holes  are  widely  described  as  ‘cata- strophic’.  Although  in  a few instances the hazardous collapse is of surface bedrock directly into a cave under- neath, in 99% of reported cases or more it occurs in an overburden of unconsolidated cover sands, silts or clays,
i.e. it is a suffosion or cover-collapse doline; ‘subsidence sink-hole’ is the widely used alternative term. There are two end-member processes:

1. ravelling, the grain-by-grain (or clump-by-clump) loss of detrital particles into an underlying karst cavity

that is transmitted immediately by grain displace- ment upwards to the surface, where it appears as  a funnel that gradually widens and deepens;
2. formation of a soil arch in more cohesive clays  and silt–clay mixtures over the karst cavity that  then stopes upwards until it breaks through to the surface (section 9.5, Figure 9.25).

The large majority of suffosion sink-holes appear to have formed by a mixture of the two processes, with the soil above an early arch subsiding by downfaulting, suffosion then  sapping  the  fault-weakened  mass  to  create  a  new arch and repeat the cycle. From the human perspective, pure  soil-arch  collapses  (or  ‘dropouts’)  are the most dangerous because they can appear  without warning at the surface. There has been much  loss of life as a consequence.
  The contact between a solution-indented karst surface and overlying cover deposits is the ‘rockhead’. Using ground-penetrating radar (GPR) through 2–20 m of cover, Wilson and Beck (1988) estimated that the frequency of karst cavities at the rockhead capable of swallowing ravelled debris varied from 12 000 to 730 000 km—2   in
the counties of northern Florida, i.e. the rockhead  there is a dense epikarst of solution pits, pipes and shafts. The




potential for suffosion if the delicate balance of its natu- ral drainage is disturbed is obvious.
  Induced sink-hole formation thus has attracted a good deal  of  attention  in  recent  decades.  Hundreds  of  thou- sands of new subsidences have been reported worldwide, ranging from 1 × 1 × 1 m holes to features  > 100 m in
length or diameter and tens of metres deep. In the USA the  abrupt  appearance  of  the  Winter  Park  sink-hole  in 1981 (Figure 12.7) led to creation of the Florida Sinkhole Research Institute and to periodic conferences with Pro- ceedings that offer many case studies of collapses, plus groups of papers devoted to their geophysical detection, methods of remediation,  appropriate building design, legal regulation, etc. (Beck 2005, and earlier Proceedings edited  by  Beck).  Waltham et al. (2005) present a com- prehensive and excellent review within one volume.
12.3.2 Groundwater abstraction and dewatering
Dewatering of unconsolidated cover deposits on karst is the most important cause of induced sink-hole formation worldwide. The buoyant support of the water is removed, weakening mechanical stability (section 9.3). Abstraction may be for water supplies, for irrigation, draining a volume of rock for mining or quarrying, or many  other purposes. It is most hazardous when the cover is drained entirely so that the water table is depressed  below the rockhead into the karst strata. However, sink-holes may also form readily where the lowering is limited to some level within the overburden.
  Florida offers many examples of agricultural  impacts because there are large plantations of citrus  fruits and other tropical crops. To protect these from  occasional hard frosts in winter it has been the  practice  to  water heavily  on  cold  nights  (ground  water temperature is 12○Cþ). The appearance of small  new suffosion and drop-out sink-holes is highly  correlated with pumping nights. Irrigation is common every night as well on many golf courses during dry periods. Not a few underlain by limestone  have  suddenly found themselves with more than the mandatory 18 holes. Collapses are common on corrosion plains and in the bottoms of poljes when these are pumped for irrigation during dry seasons in tropical and mediterranean regions. With or without human inter- vention, the rapid rate of dissolution of gypsum can yield major problems. For example natural ground collapse over gypsum in northeast England resulted in about
$1.5 M  worth  of  damage  in  the  interval   1984–1994 (Cooper 1998).
  Mining and quarrying tend to have the greatest impacts because they dewater to the greatest depths, usually  far below the rockhead. In many coal mining areas of China

the coals are overlain by or interfinger with limestones or gypsum. Tens of thousands of sink-holes, often of large size, have been reported. Table 12.1 gives the  example of Enkou Mine, Hunan, where the average rate of sink- hole production was ~750 a—1 over an eight years span during which the water table was progressively lowered 90 m.  Dewatering  to  —220 m   in  limestones  that  are
heavily weathered at the top and overlain by 2–30 m of glacial and marine sediments is planned in order to develop  a  kimberlite  pipe  for  diamonds  in   northern Ontario. Approximately 300 km2 will be affected, includ- ing two large rivers: we shall watch  this development with interest.
  A notorious case of drop-out doline development was reported by Jennings (1966) and Brink (1984) in the Far West Rand, South Africa. A major pumping programme was initiated to dewater dolomite and dolomitic lime- stone over gold-bearing conglomerates. Pumping com- menced in 1960, and between 1962 and 1966 eight collapse dolines exceeding 50 m wide and 30 m deep formed in the mining area. In the worst incident (Decem- ber 1962), a three-storey crusher plant with 29 occupants was lost in a few seconds at the West Dreifontein Mine. According to Brink, after 25 years of pumping a total of 38  people  had  lost  their  lives  in  collapsing  sinks,  and damage to buildings and structures amounted to  tens of millions of Rand. The depressions are the  result of soil-arch collapse in 20–40 m of regolith   overlying dissolution-widened joints which lead  downwards into large caverns. Geophysical exploration  for new cavities proved to be nearly useless. Arrays of simple telescopic benchmarks  were  set  out  in  the  hope of detecting the stoping arches before they breached the surface. Wagener and Day (1986)  discussed construction techniques on these rocks.
12.3.3 Surcharging with water
In the case of surcharging it is the addition of water  at particular points that causes ravelling of overburden into karst cavities. It will therefore be especially potent where the unsurcharged water table is below the rockhead, but can also be effective with water levels in the overburden. In modern cities such point-located  surcharging will be widespread unless precautions are  taken, caused by drainage from individual downspouts on buildings, leaks from water supply and sewer pipes,  leaking stormwater management ponds, parking lots,  etc. Sink-hole forma- tion is fastest where the overburden is thin, and is chiefly by  ravelling.  Sink-holes tend to be smaller than those associated with substantial dewatering, being mostly less than 10 m  in diameter. Nevertheless, there are many






Figure 12.7 The Winter Park suffosion doline, Florida. This feature developed during a 72-h period in May 1981, consuming a dwelling, part of a road, automobiles, etc. It developed in 30 m of sands and clayey sands burying densely karstified limestone and is believed to have been induced when the water table was lowered 6 m within the sands. The feature was 106 m in diameter and 30 m deep. The lower photograph (August 1984) shows the doline after remedial action, including restoration of the water table to its original elevation.



Table 12.1   Relationships between water extraction, water-table drawdown and accumulated induced sink-holes at Enkou Coal Mine, Hunan, China (Data from Lei et al. 2001)



Period
Pumping rate (m3  h—1)
Lowering of water table (m)
Accumulating total of sink-holes
1974
1270
14.24
317
1976
3388
48.67
1329
1979
3868
62.25
4924
1982
4130
90.42
5811



reports of building foundations being undermined and collapsed (Figure 12.8), and damage to roads and railway tracks  due  to  neglect  of  soakaways  or  other  means  of dispersing stormwaters. Natural surcharging occurs  on river floodplains, corrosion plains and poljes when  they are inundated and is often accompanied by collapse and suffosion as the waters recede (section 9.3)
  General raising of the water table can also create col- lapse or subsidence by destroying the cohesion of  sus- ceptible  clay  soils.  However,  this  is  comparatively rare in karst areas. The load or  vibration from heavy equip- ment can induce small   collapses locally, especially beneath it. In historic  times plough-horse teams have dropped; in modern times many tractors, haulage trucks,

drilling rigs and military tanks have fallen. Rock blasting from quarries or foundation cutting, etc. often causes collapses of small to intermediate scale.
12.3.4 Solution mining
Salt  mining  has  induced  many  collapses  and   subsi- dences over the centuries. Normally this will  involve significant thicknesses of overlying  consolidated rocks. Suffosion in superficial  unconsolidated deposits thus is not usually  predominant, as it is in the dewatering and surcharging situations considered above.
  Traditionally,  extraction  has  been  by  one  of   two methods:





Figure 12.8   Subsidence of a timber-frame house into a collapse sink-hole, Phillipsburg, New Jersey. The sink-hole was created  when a water main leaked, surcharging soil-mantled epikarst. (Photograph by Rick Rader, with permission.)




1. conventional  mining  via  shafts  and  adits,  removing the product by hand or machine at the workface, as in a coal mine, etc.;
2. by pumping the water from natural salt springs (‘wild brine’).

Recently, where feasible these have been replaced by solution mining, in which water is injected via one  set of boreholes and extracted as brine via another,  i.e. no workers or equipment are committed  underground. The planimetric extent and volumes of  cavities that will be created in the salts by both the  wild brine and the injection methods are always   uncertain  and  can  be hazardous.
  The most celebrated historic examples of induced subsidence in the English-speaking world are in the county  of  Cheshire,  England,  where  wild  brine  mining began  in  Roman  times  and  adit  mining  of  salt became important with the beginning of the  Industrial Revolu- tion. Large areas of the surface have now subsided, over both open mines and solution mines, with much property damage, although catastrophically   rapid   collapse   of ground  is  comparatively  rare  due  to local geological conditions (Cooper 2001).
  There was a spectacular collapse at the Bereznikovsky No. 3 Mine (Urals, Russia) in 1986. At the time this was the world’s largest potash mine, a pit-and-stall mine  in mixed potash–salt–anhydrite–marl strata at ~425 m depth, overlain by limestones containing much groundwater, and upper marls and shales. Leakage from the limestone began in January 1986 at rates of 10–30 m3 h—1,  increasing  to
~100 m3 h—1 by March when the mine was abandoned. It
then filled progressively with water, dissolving the stalls (salt pillars) left to support the roof. Evidently  upward stoping soon began because at midnight 24–25 July there was an abrupt collapse of the surface  accompanied by explosive release of compressed gases that hurled rocks of decimetric sizes several hundred metres from the crater.
During the next few weeks the cavity stabilized as an arch collapse measuring 100 × 50 m in the bedrocks and 50– 60 m deep to the waterline. Andrejchuk (2002) gives an outstanding analysis.
  This   was   an   inadvertent,   but   perhaps   expectable, collapse over a deliberately mined void.  Corporations drilling exploratory and extractive oil wells do not expect to  be  involved  in  salt  solution  mining  as  well  but  this has   happened   in   many   instances   in recent decades. Figure 12.9 is an interpretation by  Johnson (1989) of the events leading to a catastrophic collapse, Wink Sink, in Texas in June 1980. It was 110 m in diameter and 24 m deep to a debris floor below the  waterline. It is attri- buted to leakage down a borehole drilled as long ago as

1928 to explore for oil in Tansill and Yates  dolomites beneath the Salado Salt Formation. The Salado hosts the WIPP hazardous waste disposal facility  nearby in New Mexico (section 11.4).
12.3.5 Hazard prediction, detection and regulation
Understandably,   individuals   and   organizations   of   all kinds will wish to assess the risk of subsidence  and collapse in karst terrains. It is recognized that  accurate prediction  of such hazards in advance  of,  say, a major de-watering, is very difficult because of  the complex multivariate nature of the problem.  Accordingly it is becoming standard practice to take  highly generalized, semi-quantitative and probabilistic   approaches rather than attempting precise site-specific  predictions. Risk then can be defined as:

risk ¼ magnitude of hazard
       × probability in a given time × given area

Tolmachev et al. (1986, 2005) and Ragozin et al. (2005) have   utilized   such   approaches   in   evaluating   risk   of natural suffosion sink-hole formation under  structures such as railbeds or new chemical plants in the extensive covered karsts of the Russian Plain. The  occurrence of such sink-holes is assumed to be  random (Poisson) in time. Historical records are used to obtain mean frequen- cies,  and  the  risk  assessment  then becomes a matter of specifying the extent of the  area to be considered and the amount of time (e.g.   the  planned  lifetime  of  a factory). A refinement is  to  specify  a  scale  of  damage. Tolmachev  et  al.  (1986) adopted four levels, ranging from trivial   damage  to  total  destruction; the  British National  Coal Board recognizes seven. There are many similar schemes in use in different parts of the world.
  However, such methods require good historical re- cords of collapses but these are not often available and,  in any case, will be of little use where, for example, a major new dewatering is being proposed. Song (1987) tackled the prediction problem here by compiling records of >18 000 dewatering suffosion collapses in southern China between 1974 and 1986, mostly around coal mines, and proposed the following experimental approach:

 aR 1 
R ¼	S	ð12:1Þ
1
where R is the uncorrected radius of the area that will be at hazard, R1  is the radius of effects noted in a first





Figure 12.9   Schematic cross-sections to show the interpreted relationship between an oil well drilled in 1928 in west Texas:
(a) borehole leakage creating a dissolution cavity in intercepted salt; (b) stoping in overlying rocks; and (c) the abrupt appearance of ‘Wink Sink’ in 1980.


experimental withdrawal pumping, S1 is the depth of drawdown during that experiment, and S is the intended final depth of drawdown. Variables R2 and S2 are radius of effects and depth of drawdown in a second experiment:

 S1 R 2 

between the open surface and a suddenly drained  inci- pient cavity over the karst will trigger some collapse by a vacuum suction mechanism. Anikeev (1999) considered the case where there is a comparatively impervious clay between the rockhead and the main overburden. This is
common on many corrosion plains or in areas of recent

a ¼ S R

ð12:2Þ

marine  transgression  such  as  Entre-deux-Mers  (sec- tion 12.2). He found that rapid drawdown in the  over-

The corrected radius of the area at hazard, R0, is given by

R0 ¼ X þ ðR — X ÞK1=K2	ð12:3Þ
where X is the distance between the pumping point and the boundary of karst rock, K1 and K2 are the numbers of subsidences  produced  in  the  two  experiments.   Song (1987) was unable to undertake these experiments at an appropriate scale but did publish interesting tables illus- trating the natural variability that is found (Table 12.2). Others have suggested more precise geotechnical solu- tions, with their focus primarily on cases where there is rapid drawdown by pumping (i.e. much faster than would occur naturally). Tharp (2001) proposed that such draw- down induces hydraulic fracturing, which then becomes the  chief  process  in  development  of   the  compound ravelling and arch collapse form that is the most common type of cover subsidence sink-hole. In contrast, He et al. (2001)  suggested  that  the  air   pressure  differential

burden will induce spalling from arches in the clay. These three examples are representative of the range of ongoing investigations today.
  A wide range of surface and airborne mapping  tech- niques, ground-based and downhole geophysics have been brought in to play to attempt to detect  karst hazards beneath cover deposits; see Waltham et  al. (2005) for comprehensive discussion.  Black-and-white and infrared aerial photographs are basic tools; the infrared may detect vegetation stress (drought) above an unseen stoping cavity. Satellite radar can record slow subsidences, year by year. There is  much focus on ground-based geophysical detection  when dangerous rockhead conditions are sus- pected  within small areas such as construction sites. Section 6.2 introduced some methods; Table 12.3 gives a  summary. Seismic methods are standard. They use hammers, explosives, etc. to generate shock waves  that are recorded at arrays of geophones. Anomalies in wave transmission  rates  may  signal  cavities,  etc.   Depth



Table 12.2   Dewatering, drawdown and subsidence in covered karst around some  Chinese coal mines (Modified from Song, L. (1987) Pumping subsidence of surface in some karst areas of China, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Karst and Man, Lubljana, pp. 49–64)



Site
Depth of drawdown (m)
R radius of drawdown (m)
L – radius of area with collapses (m)


L/R
Dalinjing
80
950
800
0.8
Yehuaxiang
109
3000
2300–2600
0.9
Tiantanjing
204
830
630
0.7
Qiaotonha
280
10 000
10 000
1.0
Jinjiang
1200
600
175
0.3



penetration is only about one-third of the geophone spread but can be partly overcome by downhole (cross- hole) applications. Cross-hole electrical tomography is a new development that appears more promising but is ex- pensive. Electrical resistivity/conductivity traverses are similar in concept to surface seismic but instead  utilize induced electrical pulses to detect the anomalies, e.g. air- filled cavities have very high resistance,  saturated clays are very low. Depth of penetration is better and some large vadose  caves  have  been  found  as deep as 50 m. Small features are poorly depicted. High-resolution gravimetry (microgravity) is quick and  thus cheap; it can detect shallow cavities beneath comparatively flat surfaces, but requires many  corrections there and is unsatisfactory in rugged   terrain. Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) fires high-frequency electromagnetic pulses from a device little larger or more cumbersome than a domestic  vacuum cleaner, and records anomalies in the return  reflections. It was developed for the detection of buried pipes, cables, etc. Wilson and Beck (1988) had great success in detect- ing rockhead hazards as deep as —30 m below coversands in northern Florida, but GPR  cannot penetrate clays in

most instances. It is now widely used in combination with one of the other methods. All of them must be treated as indicative but not definitive. If it is believed that they
have detected a threatening feature, it must be explored by boreholes. Exploration by boreholes alone (no prior geo- physics) is economically unfeasible in most  instances; Zisman (2001) showed that > 2000 borings  per hectare would be needed for a 90% certainty of detecting a cavity 2–3 m in diameter. The rapid  increase in induced sink- hole formation that marked the 20th Century is causing many governments to introduce regulations. Dewatering in particular may be closely controlled; in Florida dewa- tering operations are  required to establish a ‘Zone of Influence’ and  compensate other stakeholders within it. All Florida insurance companies must include subsidence in their standard policies now. Elsewhere in the USA these are optional extras, or are ignored with the legal implica- tion  that there is no cover. The UK mandates that subsidence must be included in property insurance,  but there is often a large deductible charge. Insurance com- panies there make use of national geohazards  maps at 1:50 000 to assess risk and set premiums.


Table 12.3 Recommended methods for the geophysical location of specific dissolution features in karst (Reproduced from Waltham, A.C., Bell, F. and Culshaw, M. (2005) Sinkholes and Subsidence: Karst and Cavernous Rocks in Engineering  and Construction. Praxis, 382 pp © 2005 Praxis)

Karst feature                           Dimensions                                      Recommended methods                     Factors to consider


Pipes and hollows, with clay fill


Depth:diameter < 2:1 Depth < 30 m


Conductivity traversing Magnetic


Coil separation, cf. depth Local magnetic gradient

Pipes and hollows, with sand fill

Depth < 5 m	Ground-penetrating radar	Conductivity of cover and fill, and cover thickness

Small open caves	Depth:diameter < 2:1	Conductivity traversing	Coil separation, cf. depth Depth < 30 m	Microgravity	Density and nature of fill
                         Depth > 30 m	Cross-hole seismic	Borehole spacing Large open caves	Depth < 10 m	Ground-penetrating radar	Ground conductivity
Conductivity traversing	Cavity infill
Depth > 10 m	Gravity and microgravity	Cavity infill, terrain relief Cross-hole seismic	Borehole spacing




12.4 PROBLEMS OF CONSTRUCTION ON AND IN THE KARST ROCKS – EXPECT    THE UNEXPECTED!
Karst processes and landforms pose many different problems for construction and other economic develop- ment. Every nation with karst rocks has its share of embarrassing failures such as collapse of buildings or construction of reservoirs that never held water. It is probably true to write that the global cost of extra preventive measures or of unanticipated remedial mea- sures in karst terrains now amounts to some billions of dollars (US) each year. The problems encountered can be classified by the extent of the impact of con- struction or other development upon karst features already existing at a site. There may be no impact,  as in the case of construction in the path of a  potential landslide. There can be small- to large-scale  impact where foundations for bridges, buildings, roads  and railways are placed upon karst without much  effect upon the local water table. Large-scale impact is  more common if the water table is raised or lowered.  This may become extreme in the construction of  tunnels, mines and dams, as we have emphasised  above  and  in Chapter   11.   Careless   road   construction can  locally overwhelm sink-holes and caves with detritus and alter karst drainage patterns;  James (1993) described the dramatic example of an  access road to a gold mine in Papua New Guinea.
12.4.1 Rock slide-avalanche hazards in karst
A landslide or rock slide-avalanche is the catastrophi- cally rapid fall or slide of large masses of  fragmented bedrock such as limestone (Cruden 1985). ‘Landslide’ is
more widely used but is also applied to slides of uncon- solidated rocks. Rock slides take place at penetrative discontinuities, the mechanical engineering term for any kind of surface of failure within a mass. Once initiated, there is powerful momentum transfer within the  falling mass and it may partially ride on a cushion of compressed air that can permit it to run for some hundreds of metres
upslope on the other side of a valley (van Gassen  and Cruden 1989).
  Carbonate rocks and gypsum are especially prone for two reasons.

1. While faults and joints are the only important  pene- trative discontinuities in most other rocks, in  karst strata there is also major penetration via  bedding planes. In fact they are particularly   favoured as surfaces of failure because of their great extent.



Figure 12.10 Types of landslides (or rock slide-avalanches) in carbonate rocks. ; is the internal angle of friction of the  rock. Failures on dip and overdip slopes are termed ‘slab slides’.


2. Large  quantities  of  water  may  pass  rapidly  through the rock via its karst cavities to saturate or lubricate interlaminated or underlying weak or  impermeable strata such as clays. The forces that resist catastrophic failure within a particular rock  are defined by an
internal angle of friction. Minimum angles for rela-
tively hard carbonates without shale interbeds  range from 14○ to 32○.

  The principal settings of landslides in karst rocks are shown in Figure 12.10. Slab slides are  particularly common because they are bedding-plane  failures.  They are  especially  frequent  and  dangerous  in the overdip situation. Rotational failures within  massive carbonates are comparatively rare but there are large ones in dolo- mites in the Mackenzie Mountains,  Canada. Toppling cliffs are common in all rocks; see  Cruden (1989) for formal analysis. Toppling or rotational failures are quite common along escarpment  fronts where the permeable karst rock rests on a weak but impermeable base such as a shale; Ali (2005) describes 12 limestone failures of up to 800 × 106 t each along a 20 km frontage near the city of Sulaimaniya in northern Iraq, caused by spring sapp- ing at the contact with underlying shales.
  Downslope detachment and creep of karst rock forma- tions resting on slick but impermeable strata beneath them (Figure 12.10) may proceed slowly for long periods and then suddenly accelerate into a landslide, usually  as a consequence of heavy rains or an earthquake. At  the Vajont Dam disaster of 1963 in the Italian Alps,  in which 2000 lives were lost, rise of water level in  a




reservoir may  have contributed  by  increasing  porewater pressures on the slide plane. The Ok Ma Landslide (Papua New Guinea) was a slide of ~ 36× 106 m3 of fractured massive limestone on clay dipping into a river valley that
was induced by removal of the toe of a previous slide in order to install a dam for a gold mine.
  Steeply dipping carbonates predominate in the Rocky Mountains of Alberta. On average, there have been one or two rock slides in each 100 km2 there since regional deglaciation ~10 000 year ago. The volumes of rock detached and the areas that they bury are found to approximate a Poisson distribution. The largest slide contained 30 × 106 m3 of limestone; it buried an area of
~3 km2 to a mean depth of 14 m in a timespan of  only

100 s. This was the Frank Slide, which occurred one night in AD 1904, crushing the small town of Frank and taking 70 lives. On the Yangtse River, China, there are a total of
283   old   landslides   (in   bedrocks   and/or   alluvial   and colluvial deposits) along that part of its course that will be inundated by the Three Gorges Dam,  approximately 15% of them being in limestone (Lu 1993).
12.4.2 Setting foundations for buildings, bridges, etc.
Setting foundations where there are soils, etc., covering maturely dissected epikarst can encounter many pro- blems. Figure 12.11 illustrates the range of different methods that are used to overcome them by compacting





Figure 12.11 Illustrations of some of the principal types of foundation treatments in a soil-mantled karst. Based upon figures in Sowers, G.F. (1984) Correction and protection in limestone terrace. in Sinkholes: their Geology, Engineering and Environmental Impact (ed. B.F. Beck), Balkema, Boston, pp. 373–8.




the soil or pinning the footings to (comparatively)  firm bedrock. Under large or heavy structures the majority of these methods can be very expensive.   Reinforced concrete slabs (‘rafts’ floating on the soil  following its mechanical compaction) are now much  used as alterna- tives under buildings. For roads on  mantled epikarst or spanning infilled solution and  suffosion dolines strong synthetic plastic sheeting, strips or meshes (‘geofabrics’) are being substituted because they are cheaper: their long- term reliability is not yet established, however. Much has been written on these  subjects; see Beck (2005) and Waltham et al. (2005) for recent surveys.
  Building calamities remain frequent worldwide. A cele- brated example was the collapse of ‘Corporate Plaza’, a major downtown redevelopment with an adjoining multi- storey parking garage, in Allentown,  Pennsylvania, one night in February 1994. It was destroyed by arch collapse sink-holes in glacial deposits resting on karstic dolomites. The buildings were footed on columns with 2.5 m bases placed 1.5–1.8 m into the  glacial drift;  no attempts  had been made to anchor them to solid bedrock or to spread
the loads (Dougherty 2005).
12.4.3 
Tunnels and mines in karst rocks
Tunnels and mine galleries (adits or levels) will be  cut through rocks in one of three hydrogeological conditions:
(i)  vadose;  (ii)  phreatic  but  at  shallow  depth  or  where discharge is limited, so that  the tunnel serves  as a transient drain that permanently draws down the  water table along its course, as in Figure 5.7b; (c) phreatic, as a steady-state drain, i.e. permanently  water-filled unless steps are taken drain it (Figure  5.7a). Long tunnels in mountainous country may start in the vadose zone at each end but pass into a transient zone, or even a steady-state phreatic zone, in their central parts.
  Vadose  and  transient  zone  tunnels  are  cut  on  gentle inclines to permit them to drain gravitationally. It was by this means that lead–zinc ore bodies within  interfluves in the hilly country of Bohemia and  Derbyshire were drained below the natural water tables in the 15th and 16th centuries in order to mine them. A modern example is the water-supply tunnel of the city of Yalta in the Crimea. It passes through faulted limestone  as a transient phreatic drain, and is 7 km in length with a fall of 50 m. Ground-

3   —1

Cavities entirely within bedrock can also pose dangers

water discharges were ~1000 m h

in the first year,

3   —1

if they are at very shallow depth or if the planned

declining to ~350 m h

over the next several years.

structural load is considerable. For typical strong  lime- stones with caves, Waltham et al. (2005)  recommend  a minimum of 3 m bedrock  above a cavity  5 m wide, 7 m for widths >10 m (and see Figure  7.50); for chalk and gypsum, at least 5 m of rock  above a cave 5 m wide. Severe difficulties were encountered in footings for four piers in limestone for a  motorway viaduct in Belgium, increasing its overall  cost by 15%. One pier had to be shifted 15 m onto stronger rock. A standard programme of exploratory  drilling had missed cavities 3 m wide (Waltham et al. 1986).
  Construction on gypsum requires particular care. Gutierrez (1996) and Gutierrez and Cooper (2002) discuss the rich example of Calatayud, a town of 17 000 persons in the Ebro Valley, Spain. It is built on a fan of gypsiferous silts interfingering with floodplain alluvium, and underlain by a main gypsum formation ~500 m thick. The existing buildings are 12th century to modern in age. Many (of all ages including recent) display subsidence  damage  that ranges  from  minor  to  very  severe  (Figure 12.12). The primary cause is believed to be dissolution of the gypsum bedrock, which is abetted by  local compaction of over- burden accumulated since  the town was founded in AD 716, collapse of some abandoned cellars and dissolution of the silts. Al-Kaisy (2005) describes similar problems at Tikrit, Iraq. Numerous case studies concerning evaporite- related  engineering and environmental problems in the USA are presented by Johnson and Neal (2003).
  
Where the tunnel or mine is a deep transient drain or is
in the steady-state  phreatic zone, gravitational  drainage will not suffice, e.g. if the tunnel is below sea level. Three alternative strategies can then be adopted. The first is to pump from the tunnel itself, when  necessary.  The  first steam   engines   were   developed   to apply this simple strategy below sea level in the  coastal tin mines of Cornwall, UK.  It  continues  to   be  the  most  popular method in smaller mines and some short, shallow tunnels. It  is  prone  to  failure  if  the pumps fail and to disaster (for the miners) if  large water-filled cavities are inter- cepted, causing catastrophic inrushes of water.
  The second means is to grout the tunnel and then  to pump any residual leakage as necessary. It is the essential method for transportation tunnels.  Traditionally, tunnel surfaces were rendered impermeable by applying a sea- lant (e.g. concrete) as  they became exposed. This does not deal with the  catastrophic inrush problem. The first undersea tunnel  was the Severn Railway Tunnel, cut in the 1860s in  thick to massively bedded limestones beneath the Severn River estuary of Britain. It used the cut-and-seal method. At the halfway point (~5 km from shore beneath  a saltwater estuary) a large freshwater spring was  encountered. It flooded the tunnel, delaying completion for one year. It has been necessary to pump the site continuously ever since.
  Modern practice is to drill a 360○  array of  grouting holes  forward  horizontally,  then  blast  out  and seal a






Figure 12.12 (Upper) Subsidence of buildings in Calatayud, Spain. Damage is mapped on a four-part scale, from None to Very Severe. Reproduced from Gutierrez, F. and Cooper, A.H. (2002) Evaporite dissolution subsidence in the historical city of Calatayud, Spain: Damage Appraisal and Prevention. Natural Hazards, 25, 259–88. (Lower) Moderate damage in the main square of the town.


section of tunnel inside this completed grout curtain. This largely deals with the hazard of catastrophic inrush, i.e. a flooded cavity should be first encountered by a  narrow bore drill hole that can  be  sealed  off   quickly. For example, the cooling water intake tunnel  for Bruce B atomic power station, Ontario, was an 8 m diameter tunnel extending 600 m from shore   beneath   Lake Huron.  It  followed  a  corallian  limestone formation just below the lake bed. Grouting forward proceeded in 20 m sections and the tunnel was cut in 8 m sections, i.e. there was 60% overlap of successive grout curtains. A cavity

was encountered that could not be grouted because it was too large. It was sealed off and the tunnel was then deflected around it without serious difficulty, but at substantial extra cost. Milanovic´ (2000) and Marinos (2005) discuss tunnel protection thoroughly, with  many examples.
  Grouting is not feasible in the extracting galleries of a mine. Here, a third and most elaborate strategy is to dewater the mine zone entirely, i.e. maintain a cone  of depression about it for as long as the mine is worked. A good modern example of the method is provided by the




development   of   lead–zinc   mines   at   Olkusz,   Poland (Wilk 1989). The ores are contained in filled  dolines and cavities in a dolomite palaeokarst at a depth of 200 to 300 m below Quaternary sands that were in  hydro- logical contact with the bedrock. Potentially, this was a very hazardous situation. An area of 500 km2   was sur- veyed around the potential mine. It contained 70 natural springs and 600 wells. A further 1700 exploration bore-
holes were drilled. Piezometers were installed in 300 wells and bores in order to conduct pumping tests. From the latter it was estimated that 300 × 106 m3 s—1 of ground- water would have to be pumped to establish the cone of depression for the mine. The cone was  pumped out via
vertical wells plus drainage adits with high capacity pumps that were cut beneath each extraction level before ore  extraction  began.  By  these  means,  maximum  local inrushes  of  water  were  held  to  1.5 m3 s—1,  within the capacity of the pumps.
  As expected, dewatering the Olkusz mine dried up springs and wells. It induced many suffosion dolines  in the overlying sands, one of them in the mill-tailings pond which, as a result, discharged 30 × 103 m3 of sludge into a
sector of the mine. In addition, a paper mill 6 km north of the mine had disposed of highly contaminated waste water into  the  local  sands  aquifer.  With  the  drawdown these contaminants were drained into part  of the mine water, ruining it as a source of replacement water for the springs.
12.5 INDUSTRIAL EXPLOITATION OF KARST ROCKS AND MINERALS
12.5.1 Limestone and dolomite
Limestone and dolomite are the world’s principal mined or quarried rocks and are used for a wider range of purposes than any other rocks. To begin with, most stone sculpture   and   interior   decorative   stonework   such   as stairs uses the highest quality limestone, i.e. with fewest imperfections. The preferred stone is true marble (section 2.3) because of its homogeneous crystalline composition and colour. However, any well-textured  limestone or dolomite that will take a good polish is  marketed as ‘marble’ in many nations.
  Limestone blocks are used for the construction of entire buildings, normally with cheaper grades of  stone (more porous and friable) plus marble facings  where desired. An early example was the use of a  gleaming white limestone for facing the sandstone  masses of the pyramids at Giza, Egypt. The Sphinx is of a local lime- stone. More significant, perhaps, was the fact that lime- stone is the predominant local rock in Crete and Greece. Cretan palaces of the Minoan age  and the Hellenic

temples  and  public  buildings  of  Greece  used  it  almost exclusively (Figure 12.13). The Romans  followed with their buildings and statuary; at Rome  itself a locally available lake travertine was especially favoured because it was soft and easy to cut. It is  comparatively porous and friable and thus the classical buildings of Rome have not worn so well as those of Athens.
  Classical use set the taste for building throughout much  of  Western  history.  In  a  majority  of  nations  the principal palaces, churches, parliament buildings, etc. of the 12th to 19th centuries use limestone, e.g. St Peter’s, Rome and St Paul’s, London. Entire cities such as Bath and Venice are built of it. Although much  was taken from open quarries, underground stone mines that selec- tively removed the best quality limestone  beds (cut to standard sizes by saws) were also  common; there are many tens of kilometres of galleries in the Jurassic oolites around Bath and >350 km in  Champagne and Alsace. Often, the stone was transported considerable distances. Eighteenth and 19th  century buildings in Budapest and Vienna used ‘Aurisina marble’ from Trieste; see Cucchi and Gerdol  (1985) for a thorough review of limestone masonry,  with the Aurisina as an example. Limestone and  dolomite were the principal choices for the great public buildings in the USA and Canada. Nowadays, however, the use of whole stone for building is uncom- mon in western countries. Concrete blocks with thin facings of the rock have replaced it.
  Marble is equally prized in the Oriental cultures, e.g. the  Taj  Mahal,  India.  The  Chinese  and  Japanese  built with wood, but limestone and marble were used  for courtyards and stairs in the imperial palaces.  Temple builders   of   the   Western   Hemisphere   (Aztec, Inca, Maya, Toltec) used any local stone. In  many instances this was limestone. The Mayan structures of the Yucatan Peninsula, for example, are of  soft,   very  permeable Tertiary and Quaternary limestones  that have stood up surprisingly well to 800–1200 year  of burial beneath secondary jungle (Figure 12.14).
  However,   many   fine   historic   buildings   worldwide, some  of  them  now  cultural  World  Heritage sites, are suffering the ravages of human impact through acid rain. An example from Beijing is shown in Figure 12.14. The processes of weathering of building stone, and repair and conservation measures are  now the subject of much study. See Trudgill and  Inkpen (1993) for a discussion of the processes and  effects, and Viles (2000) for tech- niques used in its detailed investigation.
  At a more humble level, limestones are widely used to build dry stone walls, as noted in section 12.2. As field or garden walls these are features of rural landscapes in places as far apart as Galway Bay and Okinawa.





Figure 12.13   The Parthenon at Athens, the most celebrated building in Western architecture, is built of massive limestone with marble facings and sculpture, and stands on a denuded epikarst surface, now rounded down by the tread of countless visitors.

  In bulk terms, the overwhelming modern use of lime- stone and dolomite in most of the developed world is as aggregate, coarsely ground to rubble or gravel sizes  to serve as the foundations for road and rail beds, buildings,

parking lots, etc. A quarry that is cutting good stone for facings or very pure limestone for cement may condemn less   desirable   intervening   beds   to   aggregate.   As   an example, about 100 × 106 t of limestone and  dolomite






Figure 12.14   (Upper) Fac¸ade of a Mayan temple at  Chichen Itza, Mexico. It is built of soft Tertiary limestone facings with trash stone filling behind, a common method  worldwide. Note that weathering discolouration is distinctly less beneath project- ing lintels that offer some protection from rain. The building was buried in second growth forest for ~800 year. (Lower) Detail of sulphation breaking up ornamental carving of the Ming dynasty on an outside staircase in the Winter Palace, Beijing, China.



are quarried each year in the UK. Roughly 40% of this    is used for roads, 40% for other aggregate needs and 10%  for  cement.  Agriculture  (for  lime),  iron  and  steel production (for flux), paints and plastics industries (for fillers) are the other chief users. Only the tiny proportion of  0.2%  is  now  used  for  building  stones  or facings (Gunn 2004b).
  High purity, low-Mg, limestone is the principal ingre- dient  of  Portland  cement.  It  is  pulverized  and  fired  at 1400–1650○C with proportions of iron compounds  and silica for additional strength. Gypsum is then  added for quick setting. Mixed with fine-grained  aggregate such as sand it forms concrete, which is  now the world’s principal building material. In western countries, modern concrete consumption averages between 0.1 and 0.5 t per person per year. Concrete is a karstifiable rock, as growth of stalactites from cracks in bridges everywhere  attests; see   Reardon   (1992)   for   a  comprehensive  review  of cement–water interaction.
  Historically, in the European and Oriental cultures limestone was burned in kilns to produce ‘quick  lime’ (CaO – section 2.3) as a calcium fertilizer. In long-settled rural areas the landscapes are dotted with small extraction pits as a consequence; these are  sometimes mapped as dolines! With  the  availability   of  powerful  grinding machinery, pulverized limestone is now replacing burned lime.
12.5.2 Gypsum and anhydrite
Gypsum is used as a whole rock for statuary and interior decorative facings. It is too soft and soluble to be suitable for exterior use in most climates. It is most prized when it is lustrous and macrocrystalline, pure white (‘alabaster’) or pink (‘selenite’). As such, it was used in the baths of Minoan palaces, and can be found as small sculptures in tourist shops everywhere in the world today.
  The principal use of gypsum is as Plaster of Paris. With a proportion of silt or sand added, it is used for interior wall and ceiling plaster work, mouldings, etc. In  North America it is most often made up as plaster board, to be cut to size during construction. As noted above, pulver- ized gypsum is also an important ingredient of cement.
12.5.3 Oil and natural gas
Approximately 50% of the current production and known reserves of pool oil and natural gas are contained in carbonate rocks. Roehl and Choquette (1985) and Moore (2001) have provided detailed reviews.
  Carbonate reservoirs display a wider range of con- ditions than do reservoirs in the clastic rocks. The most




productive oil wells on record (105 m3 daily from 36 wells at Agha Jari in Iran) are from limestone; at the other extreme are tight, normally siliceous, limestones that will not  yield  at  all  unless  artificially  fractured  and  treated with acid.
  There are three principal types of oil or gas traps. Structural geological traps may be in limestone, dolomite, chalk or even marl. They are especially productive if naturally fractured. Carbonate caprocks above salt diapirs or anticlines belong to this category. Lithological  traps are intraformational, being individual beds or sequences of beds with good storage porosity that is  attributed to regional eogenetic or mesogenetic  processes of dissolu- tion and recrystallization.
  Geological unconformities are the third category of traps. They may merge laterally or vertically with either of the other types. It is recognized that 40% or more of recoverable hydrocarbons in carbonates are trapped at unconformities which, in most cases, will be of karst origin (i.e. they are now palaeokarst). The most  simple examples, which may involve the least amount of karsti- fication, are buried coral reefs. They are always targeted during exploration for oil. Many are  dolomitized, with large amounts of vuggy porosity plus occasional dedolo- mite patches containing large open  voids. Maximovich and Bykov (1976, p. 47) recorded  36 buried pinnacle reefs along a 100 km transect at the western edge of the Ural Mountains, of which 19 were  productive. Craig (1987) gave an excellent account of a one billion barrel oilfield in west Texas that was a coral island karst sub- sequently buried and dolomitized. Breccias are a second type of unconformable trap.  Some are created by the collapse, and (perhaps) wave  erosion, of epikarst and shallow caves during marine  transgressions onto past karst terrains but they are  more commonly due to deep inter- or intraformational dissolution that generated stop- ing upwards. Edgell (1991), for example, argues that deep dissolution of Proterozoic basinal salt deposits around the Persian Gulf   created major traps in the overlying, younger rocks, chiefly by brecciation.
  The third and most complex type of unconformity  is the buried but preserved karst terrain. This may be  one single epikarst zone created during a brief marine emer- gence that attained high karstic porosity under  humid climatic conditions (section 2.10). In contrast,  subaerial exposure under tropical semi-arid conditions may lead to the surficial porosity being much reduced  by calcrete infilling, which creates an impermeable seal that traps oil beneath it (Moore 2001). Many productive oilfields con- sist of a number of small karst weathering unconformities of either type stacked up in longer depositional sequences (Fritz et al. 1993). The greatest unconformities, however,

are  more  rugged  karst  terrains  buried  in  their  entirety, with or without some trimming by marine erosion during the submergence. The Liuhua Field in  the South China Sea appears to be a polygonal karst (Yuan et al. 1991) but with  chaotic  (breccia?)  facies   as well. The El Paso Field, Texas,  features  a  30 year depositional unconformity that includes many   collapsed  caves (Wright et al. 1991). The Rospo  Mare Field on the Adriatic coast of Italy (Figure  2.18) was a one billion barrel strike in a palaeokarst  with well-developed epi- karst and closed depressions  (Soudet et al. 1994). The Renqiu Field in the Bohai  geological basin south of Beijing is interpreted as a buried tower karst; local relief in it is as great as 800 m, however, so there will also be fault displacement.
  The world’s first drilled oil well (as opposed to a dug
well)  was  in  southern  Ontario  in  AD   1857.  It  explored Silurian dolomites that had subsided and   fractured where  salt  was  dissolved  beneath  them,  i.e.  a breccia trap. This was sealed tight by a cover of glacial clay. It can be described as an ancient palaeokarst   feature enhanced by Quaternary glacial action. It   yielded a prolific flow of oil when drilled to a depth of a mere 60 m.
12.5.4 Carbonate-hosted ores and other economic deposits
Almost every metallic ore and most kinds of non-metallic economic deposits have been extracted from karst in the past. Historically, karstic traps were perhaps the principal sources for most of them until the dawn of the Industrial Revolution. Nicod (1996) has reviewed the history in Europe and the Middle East. Lead was worked cold from palaeokarst exposures in Turkey as early as ~8000 year BP. The first copper for bronze came from small karstic traps around the Mediterranean and the first iron from the Caucasus ~3500 year BP. Natural caves were explored for hydrothermal precipitates on the walls; in England  the Romans mined Treak Cliff Caverns for fluorite  and Speedwell Caverns for lead.
  The deposits are found in the three different  settings illustrated in Figure 12.15. Surficial placer deposits (or supergene) are of clastic detritus,  precipitates or both that have accumulated in karst   depressions   such   as dolines,  uvalas  and  poljes  on  the  modern  surface.  A subtype  is  the  subrosion  trough on evaporites that may enlarge into a substantial sedimentary basin. The deposits may be allogenic and transported to these traps by fluvial,
sheetwash, colluvial, aeolian or marine processes, or weathering residues of local origin. There may be greater or lesser diagenetic alteration once the deposit is in  the trap; e.g. finely divided iron tends to aggregate  into






Figure 12.15 The contrasted settings of some economic ore deposits in karst. (Upper) Types of placer and buried placer bauxites (Ba´rdossy 1989). (Lower) The Carlin and Hardie Footwall gold deposits, Nevada. Hot acidic fluids from nearby volcanic intrusions ascended the Hardie Fault Corridor and discharged along the contact between more permeable silty limestones and overlying dense micrites. Teal, L. and Jackson, M. (1997) Geologic overview of the Carlin Trend gold deposits and descriptions of recent discoveries. Society of Economic Geologists Newsletter, 31, 13–25.


pisolites or nodules. The second setting is the former surficial placer (all origins) that has subsided and  been buried by later strata, as is the case with most bauxites in Hungary for example. The third setting is  where hypo- gene precipitates are emplaced deep underground in the karst rocks as consequences of invasion by hydrothermal waters, intrusion of magmatic fluids, or discharge of H2S gas and mixing processes  close to the water table as explained in section 7.8.
  Bauxite  is  the  ore  of  alumina,  concentrated  as   a weathering residuum. The deposits are red, porous  and

earthy, interlayered with other continental sediments. Average composition is 35–50% Al2O3 plus lesser Fe2O3, trace minerals and earth. Individual deposits  are rarely more than 20–30 m in thickness. Deposition  may have taken place above the water table or below  it, the former being more favourable. The oldest   known bauxites are from basal Cambrian strata and the youngest are Quaternary. There is an obvious  geographical asso- ciation with warm climates (D’Argenio and Mindszenty 1992).   Approximately   10% of global  production  is obtained from karst  sites, the balance from laterites.




The mineral is named after Les Baux, France, where mining began in karst depressions in the 1860s. It is the prime modern example of economic karst placer deposits, both in surficial and buried settings. World production of
karst bauxite is now ~30 × 106 t a—1; Jamaica produces
10–13 × 106 t  of  this  and  China  9–10 × 106 t,  both  pri- marily   from   surface   placers.   Hungary    produces
~2 × 106 t from buried placers. It requires 6 t of ore to
produce 1 t of aluminium; the chief residue is a hazardous alkaline red mud.
  Most of the world’s major economic tin deposits  are found in very large, deep closed depressions  formed at the contact between carbonate rocks and granitic stocks and bosses that intruded them.  Differential weathering leaves the bosses, etc. standing above the limestones. In tropical humid climates, deep weathering of the granites and  adjoining  skarn  zone   of highly metamorphosed carbonates generates acidic  runoff which dissolves a rugged epikarst with depressions and pinnacles and fills hollows with colluvial wastes and precipitates, including the  tin  and  wolframite (Figure 12.16). Major cassiterite deposits in Malayasia were found amongst ‘stone teeth’ on the corroded rockhead surface of the Kinta valley and were significant in the establishment of the capital city, Kuala Lumpur, which now has exhausted open pits in its
suburbs (Fig. 12.16). About 14 000 km2  of peninsular
Malaysia has been alienated for mining in this way (Yeap 1987). Indonesia, the Philippines and many  sites in southern China have also been important and  some remain so.
  Placer  coal  in  surficial  subrosion  troughs  and  lesser basins is important in Russia, Poland, Missouri  (USA), and in association with bauxite as buried  placers in Hungary and China. The other notable  organic deposit is phosphate from bird droppings; this can accumulate to substantial depths in epikarst surfaces on tropical islands such as Nauru (Bourrouilh-Le Jan  1989). Major placer iron ores (siderite, limonite, haematite and goethite) are mined in Russia and  Vietnam. Moulding sands, pottery clays and kaolin for porcelain are also being mined from infilled karst depressions today (Bosa´k et al. 1989). More exotic is the extraction of placer diamonds from dolines or deep  epikarst in Siberia and South Africa (Filippov 2004a),   and  rubies  and  sapphires  from  dolines  in Myanmar and Sri Lanka.
  The world’s principal sources of lead and zinc are in hypogene karst deposits in carbonate rocks (Sangster 1988, Dz˙ulynski and Sass-Gutkiewicz 1989). Mississippi Valley Type (MVT) deposits are associated with  inter- stratal dissolution of evaporite beds that create  breccia zones or chambers in the carbonates (Figure  7.29), or mazes of open galleries in faults, joints or bedding planes.

All become filled or partly filled with precipitated pyrite, galena, sphalerite and secondary (gangue) minerals such as fluorite, barite and coarse crystalline dolomite. Hydro- carbons are often associated with them, indicated by  a
strong odour. The Nanisivik (Baffin Island, Canada) deposits  illustrated  in  Figure  10.21  are  an  example  of very hot fluids ascending boundary faults in a  horst structure in dolomite and migrating out into the body of the rock where there were palaeokarst target  voids of Precambrian age (Ford 1995).
  Breccia pipes may host many different precipitates. Amongst the most celebrated are the uranium ores of Tyuya Muyun, Khirgizstan, and the Hualapai Reserve on the north side of Grand Canyon, Arizona. ‘Carlin’  gold (named  for  the  Carlin  Trend,  Nevada,  and  shown  in Figure  12.15)  is  an  example  of  more  widely dispersed precipitation within fractures and bedding planes that are dissolved open only to limited  extents by ascending volcanic fluids trapped and  dispersed beneath aquitard strata (Korpas and Hofstra 1999).
12.6 RESTORATION OF KARSTLANDS AND REHABILITATION OF LIMESTONE QUARRIES
The foregoing discussion has indicated the numerous ways in which human occupation and use of karst resour- ces (space, scenery, soil, vegetation, water, rock, caves, minerals, etc.) can have a deleterious impact on karst and its ecosystems. Here we consider some of the measures that can be taken to contain and repair  unacceptable damage. This  is  important,  because   karst  has  many economic, scientific and human  values  as  discussed  in the   IUCN   guidelines   for   cave and karst protection (Watson et al. 1997).  However, where karst areas have been used for atomic bomb tests, as the British did along the northeast margin  of the Nullarbor Plain (Gillieson 1993), or the  Americans on Bikini and Eniwetok atolls and the  French on Mururoa and Fangataufa atolls, the physical damage and dispersal of plutonium isotopes present effectively insuperable restoration problems.
12.6.1 Restoration of karst watersheds
Basic principles for karst rehabilitation are the same  as for catchment restoration in general, but with the added consideration that the measures undertaken must also assist  subterranean  restoration.  It  is  important,  first,  to identify the objective of the rehabilitation, because  full ecosystem restoration requires much more  comprehen- sive measures than, say, water-quality restoration. Partial rehabilitation and water-quality management is all that is usually needed in an agricultural landscape, but we must






Figure 12.16   (Upper) Placer tin mining in a depression at the contact of granite and marble. New Lahat Mine near Ipoh, Kinta valley, Malaysia. Note bedrock bosses revealed by the excavation. (Lower) Abandoned placer mining quarry near Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, being reclaimed for urban development and recreation.

recognize that this may be impossible to achieve in areas of extreme population pressure, where rocky desertifica- tion may already have occurred. Some rehabilitation gains may also be at the cost of some further  environ- mental damage.
  
The Burren in western Ireland is an example of a karst that was semi-desertified by deforestation and severe soil erosion   following   settlement   that   commenced   4500– 6500 year ago (Drew 1983). But despite the  millennia of impacts in a small area (367 km2), the  Burren still




contains   more   than   half   Ireland’s   species   of   native vascular plants and a rich archaeological heritage. Drew and Magee (1994) explained that between 1981 and 1991 about 4% of the area was reclaimed, i.e. land  was converted from scrub or rocky pasture into  uniform, seeded, manageable fields, most of the land  being used to provide silage, but that the resulting gains in agricul- tural productivity were at some expense to  the  wider natural    and    cultural    environment    (Figure   12.17). For  example, there has  been a loss  of environmental variety as scrub and semi-natural  grassland, limestone pavement and ancient field   boundaries have been replaced by uniform grassland fields. The great increase in fertilizer and silage use is also likely to pose a threat to groundwater quality in the area. The message, therefore, is that we must consider the wider costs of reclamation/ rehabilitation as well as the  potential benefits before undertaking  reclamation/rehabilitation, and be prepared to make adjustments to the style and location of proposed changes  in order to reduce environmental costs. We should  also monitor the effects, to see if the desired outcome is being achieved. When hydrological  restora- tion is involved, attention must be given to both quantity and quality characteristics of the waters, and monitoring must be undertaken at karst springs.
12.6.2 Water quantity and drainage networks
As  we  saw  in  section  12.2,  deforestation  increases  the total volume of runoff because natural evapotranspiration losses are reduced. This can amount to as much as another 700 mm runoff in a temperate  region with 2000 mm annual rainfall. Human activities  usually also reduce infiltration because of compaction  of soils with heavy machinery and sealing of surfaces by roads and buildings. The extra water surplus and more rapid runoff results in hydrograph peaks that arrive earlier and rise much higher than before; thus increasing flooding both on the surface and underground, as  discussed  in  section  12.4.  Conse- quently,  management of water quantity requires major replanting, in extreme cases may require construction of floodwater detention dams, and surfaces may have to be deeply ploughed to restore permeability. In some  cases choked dolines and stream-sinks may require unblocking. Appropriate management responses depend  on the final objectives and extent of the environmental damage.
12.6.3 Water quality
Removal of natural vegetation cover, agricultural  activ- ities and human habitation always reduce water quality. In any environment this presents a significant  problem,

but  in  karst  it  becomes  critical  because  most  drainage disappears underground; thus the insidious  effects of chemical and particulate pollution can go  unnoticed in the place where the problem originates, but can emerge at distant sites downstream. Spatially  concentrated point- source  pollution usually stems  from settlements, e.g. septic tank effluent, industrial  and sewage discharges, pig- and dairy-shed waste  waters, and rubbish tip lea- chate. In a karst context  garbage dumps in dolines are another frequent culprit,  as noted. Spatially diffuse or non-point-source  pollution arises from widespread soil erosion, fertilizer  and pesticide runoff and waste from grazing livestock.
  Creeping water-quality deterioration often occurs progressively   over   several   generations   as   population increases, land use intensifies and new or more agricul- tural chemicals are  used; thus the  original reference for natural water quality is lost and  forgotten and commu- nities tolerate poor water  because  they  have  known  no better.   Many   agricultural communities are oblivious to the damage their practices inflict on water quality, and so the first step in making improvements is to raise their awareness and harness their cooperation.
  Some of the measures that can be used to protect water quality were discussed in section 11.5. Improvement  of water quality once deterioration has  set  in  is   more difficult,  but  the  measures  needed  are  essentially the same as those practiced in surface catchments. The first requirement is to prevent   contaminants getting into waterways, for instance by  ensuring that waste-water discharges are directed into  community water treatment plants. However, even  when satisfactorily treated for bacteria, etc., the treated water may still require discharge into wetlands if nutrient stripping is required to prevent eutrophication of  receiving water bodies. A different approach is  required for diffuse-source pollutants, the most effective preventive measure being to ensure natural filtration   of   runoff   by   thick   vegetation   along   water courses and in dolines. Many jurisdictions now  require 10–50 m   buffer   zones   of   undisturbed   ground   around doline  perimeters.  This  will  reduce  the suspended load reaching streams and will  biologically strip some nutri- ents, but will have little effect on pathogenic organisms. The more comprehensive the implementation of surface revegetation, the greater the improvement of water qual- ity. Land abandoned  following rural depopulation can show remarkable  spontaneous secondary regrowth of woodland species,  as seen in the Slovenian karst for example; so passive measures can sometimes be effective in both ecological and water-quality rehabilitation.
  Proactive water-quality management requires objec- tive assessment of changes accomplished. The best place





Figure 12.17 The sequence of direct, indirect and possible changes to the Burren karst consequent upon intensive land reclamation. Reproduced with permission from Drew, D. and Magee, E., Environmental implications of land reclamation in the Burren, Co. Clare: a preliminary analysis. Irish Geography 27(2), 81–96 © 1994 Geographical Society of Ireland.



to monitor the effectiveness of karstland rehabilitation practices  is  in  streams  and  especially  at  karst  springs. The  condition  of  natural  water  as  assessed  by both biological and chemical indicators is the best  measure of the ecological health of a catchment.  However, Rice and Hartowicz (2003) point out that  springs have a naturally low biotic diversity and that  research on the use of these biota for assessing  groundwater quality at springs is not as advanced as it is for using biota to assess water quality of surface streams. Nevertheless, they con- clude that using biota is a more reliable means of assess- ing emerging groundwater quality than chemical analysis of periodic grab samples.
12.6.4 Quarrying
Open-pit   quarrying   presents   most   challenging   resto- ration problems, because it represents an  extreme case of human impact on karst – large  volumes of it are removed entirely. No one doubts the importance of con- crete  and  cement  to  modern  society and therefore the importance of having access to the resources afforded by limestone quarries. Nevertheless, they are often associated with total   destruction of ecosystems,  smothering  of nearby places by dumping of overburden and distribution of tailings and dust, and severe groundwater pollution by silt  and oil; so their impact can spread well beyond the immediate confines of the quarry site. For these reasons a guiding principle when siting new quarries is that  they should be located only on the outflow margins of karsts, because that will at least protect upstream  areas from significant water pollution and water-transmitted ecosys- tem damage, although if quarries are deep so that water tables are lowered, the  cones of depression will extend upstream as well as downstream. When limestone extrac- tion ceases large holes are left, often with deep lakes with steep sides that present significant safety hazards.
  Although  natural  processes  may  partially  and  slowly rehabilitate quarries by softening and revegetating slopes, appearances can be enhanced and processes  accelerated by human intervention aimed at replicating natural land- forms and improving the quality of runoff and infiltrating waters. The key elements found in the natural landforms of the region are first identified and  then replicated as far as possible using restoration  blasting and replanting with native species. Natural  looking slope profiles with spurs and swales, mantled  with appropriate grain-sized rock fragments, for  example, can be relatively easily created (Figure 12.18). The aim is to mimic natural slopes and  to  provide a substrate that will permit successful replanting by native species. The resulting well-vegetated slopes yield clean runoff and have habitat value.  Major





Figure 12.18 (Upper) The typical topography of an abandoned limestone or dolomite quarry, emphasizing development of artifi- cial epikarst and dolines. Reproduced from Gunn, J. (1993) The geomorphological  impacts  of  limestone   quarrying, in Karst Terrains: Environmental Changes and Human Impact (ed. P.W. Williams). Catena Supplement, 25, 187–97. Designed blasting to create gullies and talus slopes will improve the restoration. (Low- er) Layout and construction details of treatment of stream-sinks and infiltration areas, Lune River Quarry rehabilitation, Tasmania. Reproduced from Gillieson, D. (1996) Caves: Processes, Devel- opment and Management, Blackwell, Oxford, 324 pp.
contributions in this field have been made by Gunn and his co-workers (Gunn 1993, Gunn and Bailey 1993, Gunn et al. 1997, Hobbs and Gunn 1998) and have been reviewed by Hess and Slattery (1999) and Bradshaw (2002).  Filter  systems  using  natural  materials  also  can be designed around sites of infiltration (Gillieson  and Household 1999) in order to improve the quality of point recharge. This is a karst-specific form of  riparian zone management (Figure 12.18).
  There are other adaptations. Where a lake is  created by quarrying or mining it will often be redeveloped for recreational purposes. A spectacular   example is the adaptation of some old tin mines (deep open pits) around




Kuala Lumpur into ornamental lakes with theme  parks and adjoining residential complexes; the tallest surviving karst pinnacle overlooking one lake is now topped with a fairy  castle  (Figure  12.16).  Unfortunately, amongst the most frequent adaptations  will be the use of the aban- doned holes for ‘sanitary’ landfills. In many nations today there is more profit to be made in putting 1 t of garbage back into the hole than there was in taking the rock out in the first place! Landfills threaten permanent pollution of aquifers down gradient. The long-term stability of engi- neered seals (clay liners, etc.) and/or geofabrics to con- tain them is nowhere proven. If the pit extends below the water table  it warrants pumping in perpetuity – which will not occur.
12.7 SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF KARST
12.7.1 Agriculture
Sustainable management of rural systems depends more on the management of human behaviour than on the management of the physical environment. Urich  (1989, 1993) has reminded us of this in the context of wet rice cultivation in the Philippines. The social and  cultural values and survival imperatives of the people occupying the land will more than anything else determine whether a given karst area can be managed sustainably. The more subsistence the economy, the more obvious this becomes. The   more   severe   the   population pressure, the more survival rather than  sustainability becomes the focus of daily life. People in need apply conservation measures if they perceive a short-term material advantage, otherwise they cannot risk changing well-tested traditional practices and threatening  their food supply and very existence. Most regions  that have succumbed to or are currently succumbing to rocky desertification were or are regions of peasant economy where population pressure has driven devegetation, cultivation of steep slopes, major soil ero- sion and serious water-quality deterioration. Only  alter- native forms of livelihood or external aid will permit the pressure on the land to be reduced long enough to enable steep hills to be revegetated and to give  karst rehabili- tation a chance. Rural to urban  population drift around the Mediterranean has seen spontaneous recovery of the woodland vegetation in many karsts. Having achieved a viable ecosystem, even if somewhat species-impoverished compared with its natural state, then sustainable manage- ment becomes a possibility. But whether it can succeed depends again  upon the willingness and ability of the local people to try new techniques and make it work.
  The difficulty of achieving a sustainable  agricultural system in some karst regions can be  illustrated by the

case of south China, where karst covers 500 000 km2 and is occupied by > 100 million people of whom about one-third are considered very poor. In this karst, the population is increasing at an annual rate of 1.3 to  2% and maximum population density reaches 280 people km—2. Considerable experience of the area led  Song (1999) to conclude that the following measures must be
adopted if sustainable agriculture is to be achieved:

1. serious control of population increase;
2. environmental education of the inhabitants;
3. terracing of slopes < 25○ to improve soil conservation and provide more cultivatable land;
4. improvement of energy supplies by conservation and development of new sources (solar, biological, etc.);
5. reforestation of karst, especially slopes > 25○, with species of ecological and economic value;
6. improved  utilisation  of  water  resources   including rainwater.

Even  the  last  measure  is  difficult,  because  in  Guangxi Province alone over 60% of 1252 reservoirs  that were built are dry because of karst leakage.  Energy  is  also  a major  problem  because  the  traditional rural source is wood, but domestic fuel  requirements exceed natural regrowth by about 80%. Unfortunately, similar problems to those faced in south  China are rife in Third World agricultural economies based on karst, with many serious and looming problems throughout southeast Asia and the Caribbean in particular.
12.7.2 Forests
Nevertheless,  progress   is   being   made   in   raising   the awareness of authorities to the particular problems asso- ciated with management of karst in many  situations. Forest management is now quite well  understood and appreciated in reforestation areas of   Europe,   North America   and   Australasia,   as   noted   in section  12.2. Gillieson (1996) reviewed some of  the measures being taken. Following two decades of research and campaign- ing by P. and K. Griffiths and associates, the Province of British Columbia in Canada  released Karst Inventory Standards and Vulnerability   Assessment Procedures (2000) and a Karst  Management Handbook for British Columbia (2003)   (www.for.gov.bc.ca/hfp/fordev/karst/ karst-final-Aug1-web.pdf).
  The recommended best management practices  in the British Columbia handbook are designed to promote sustainable  forest  practices  on  karst,  while  minimizing impacts to timber supply and operational costs, with the aim of achieving the following objectives:




1. maintain the capability of karst landscapes to regen- erate healthy and productive forests after harvesting;
2. maintain the high level of biodiversity associated with karst ecosystems, including surface and subsurface habitats;
3. maintain the natural flows and water quality of karst hydrological systems;
4. maintain the natural rates of air exchange between the surface and subsurface;
5. manage and protect significant surface karst features and subsurface karst resources;
6. provide recreational opportunities where appropriate.

There are, of course, many forests on karst that  should never be logged because of their outstanding  universal conservation value, but where sustainable  forestry is deemed appropriate, the above objectives  are endorsed by us as eminently achievable and  appropriate. The handbook also provides guidance on how the significance of karst features can be assessed and how best manage- ment practices might be applied.  Effective implementa- tion, however, always depends on the human factor.
12.7.3 The protection, management and restoration of caves
Caves are fragile landforms. No matter how careful they may be, cave explorers trample silt and clay floors into broken mud, dirty the walls and speleothems,  perhaps breaking the latter by accident while passing  constric- tions. Historical use of torches and lanterns  (burning animal  fat  or  coal  oil)  blackened  the  ceilings. Spe- leothems were commonly taken as   souvenirs, while there are plenty of instances of their  being deliberately smashed in acts of vandalism. Many nations now attempt
to protect caves by various means. Wild caves (the large
majority that are not developed for show to tourists, etc.) may be gated or entry to them otherwise regulated; and there  is  often  rationing  of  numbers  of  caving  visitors. Organizations or individuals sometimes buy  caves out- right. Explorers are becoming increasingly  careful. Oil lanterns and carbide lamps have been  replaced with electric bulb and LED lights. It is  becoming mandatory to take out all waste, including  excrement.  Restoration has   been   attempted   for   many decades; the  authors wielded scrubbing brushes in caves of the Mendip Hills, England, in the 1950s and  1960s, for example, and produced scientifically based guidelines for cave manage- ment in the 1970s. Broken speleothems can be repaired with careful use of epoxy  glues. The IUCN has issued sets of guidelines for protection and restoration (Watson et al. 1997).
  
Understandably, management interest has focused upon show caves for tourists. There are now approxi- mately 650 of them worldwide, with an estimated gross
annual   income   of   ~US$2.5   billion.   The   number   of visitors ranges from a few thousand per year in  remote places to 0.4–1.0 million per year in  high-profile resort areas such as Mammoth Cave  National Park, USA, or Guilin, China. The quality of the development for visitors (lay out and construction of paths, type and placement of lights, etc.) ranges from  the very good (e.g. Carlsbad Caverns) to the frankly awful. Natural air circulation in many  has  been  seriously disturbed by opening artificial entrances,  which may cause desiccation. Some caves have even  been reamed out with tunnel boring equip- ment. The need for better design of installations and for management of the numbers of visitors became apparent when  it  proved  necessary  to  close  the  famous  painted caves  of  Lascaux,  France,  in  1963  because  the lighting and the CO2 from visitors was seriously  damaging the paintings by growth of moulds. An  International Show Caves Association was formed in 1989 and there are now effective national organizations  in many countries; e.g. the Australasian Cave and  Karst Management Associa- tion (http://ackma.org)   publishes  a  quarterly  journal, while  in  the  USA   the National Caves Association (www.cavern.com) hosts biennial meetings with Proceed- ings that report  the latest research and development findings.
  The important questions, for both wild caves and show caves, are: How fragile are they? What is their carrying capacity (i.e. how many visitors per hour, per day, etc)? Heaton (1986) suggested that caves fall into three simple groups:

1. high energy, where the natural energy flows will  far exceed those of visitors, such as large river caves that flood frequently and are thus flushed clean;
2. intermediate energy, where smaller streams, seepage, airflow, etc. will supply roughly the same magnitude as the energy output from quite large numbers of visitors;
3. low energy, where the natural energy flow is  extre- mely low – these are cul-de-sac caves with no streams, near-constant temperatures and weak air  circulation, such as the ice crystal chamber of Figure 8.18 where the crystals are melted by body heat if  one or two visitors stay for more than a few minutes.

  Cigna has made important contributions by addressing these questions from a scientific management perspective (see e.g. Cigna 1993, Cigna and Burri 2000, Kranjc 2002). Ideally, before developing a show cave, its natural




dynamic   parameters   will   be   established   by   physical measurement  and  its  ecosystem  and  important species will be established by biological survey. Fossil, archaeo- logical and indigenous cultural  values may also require assessment. Physical dynamic  parameters are, princi- pally, air temperature, relative  humidity, atmospheric CO2, water flow and water quality. The natural range of each parameter over a   hydrological year  should  be determined. The goal  then will be to develop the cave so that the upper limit of the variable with the least range (e.g. air temperature) will not be exceeded during visits. This may be critical for the maintenance of cave organ- isms. This procedure was more or less followed at Grotta Grande del Vento  (or  Grotta  Frasassi)  in  Italy  under Cigna’s  supervision; it is a mixed meteoric-H2S cave by  genesis, possessing large chambers with superlative calcite speleothem formations that require careful protec- tion. Similar procedures have been followed in New Zealand where biota (especially cave glow worms)  are fragile and of special significance.
  Every visitor to a cave radiates heat and moves inside his or her cloud of exhaust gases, vapor and shed parti- culates  such  as  dust  and  lint  (Michie  1997).  The  heat energy introduced by one visitor is ~0.1–0.2 kWh (100– 200 joules s—1) when standing or walking. The  annual visitor heat input to  a cave, E  (joules s—1),  thus can be approximated by

E ¼ 170 × t × 3600 × N	ð12:4Þ

where t is the average duration of a visit and N is the total number of visitors (Villar et al. 1984). At Grotta Grande del Vento, with ~500 000 persons staying ~1.5 h each, it amounts   to   4:6 × 1011 joules s—1    (128 MWh).   This   is
considerable, indicating that the effects in an intermediate energy cave may be large. There can also be longer term warming, as Figure 12.19 from Grotta di Castellana, Italy, clearly shows. This may reduce the relative humid- ity, drying and dulling the appearance of many spe- leothems, disturbing the biota, etc.
  Since the closure of Lascaux much attention has been paid to visitor-generated CO2 concentrations in cave atmospheres. These are estimated by:

CðTÞ¼ ð1:7 × 104 × N × tÞV	ð12:5Þ
CðTÞ is the change of CO2 concentration (ppm, vol.) at time T, and V is the volume of the cave or chamber being considered (Villar et al. 1986). Measurement during visiting hours in many show caves has established  that there are usually increases of CO2  significantly above the standard atmospheric value of ~350 ppm.  Figure 12.19



Figure 12.19 (Upper) Mean air temperature profile measured along the tourist route in Grotta Castellana, in 1958–1960 (open squares) compared with 1982 (dots). (Lower) Daily numbers of visitors compared with daily mean CO2 concentrations in Ancona Hall, Grotta Grande del Vento. Reproduced from Cigna,
A. A., Environmental management of tourist caves: the examples of Grotta di Castellana and Grotta Grande del Vento. Environ- mental Geology 21, 173–180. © 1993 Springer-Verlag.

shows the Grotta Grande del Vento example for part of 1983;  CO2   is  generally  about  double  the  standard,  the impact of weekend visitors is quite clear, as is the effect of opening an airlock to permit gravitational drainage of the dense gas one day in August that year. Concentrations Ç 1000–2000 ppm are commonly found  in some other show caves and as much as 5000 ppm in heavily visited caves in China. There may be  condensation corrosion derived from this CO2 excess  as a cave cools after the visitors have left.  Condensation processes in a tourist cave in New Zealand have been measured by de Freitas and Schmekal (2003).
  Conversely, there is concern that radon (222Rn) released from the decay of   234U and 238U in the enclosing rocks
and mineral deposits such as galena may harm cave guides and others who must spend many hours each year in caves, especially where there is low energy with little air  flow  to  clear  accumulations.  Radon-222  is  a  noble




gas (i.e. inert) but it decays to particulate 218Po, 214Po and 214Bi, which may adhere to aerosols and so build up in the lungs. This has been a major cause of lung cancer in uranium miners and workers in nuclear facilities.  Most nations now define Working Limits for annual uptake of 222Rn and its derivatives by individuals, and show caves are tested for concentrations from time to time. In most instances the latter will be well below danger levels but in caves with lead, zinc or uranium  ores in veins there may be danger. Gunn (2004c) gives details.
  The  most  obvious  impacts  of  development  in  many show caves are the deleterious effects of the  lights. Standard electric lamps with a broad emission spectrum (orange or ‘warm’ light) will warm surrounding air and nearby rock surfaces. Speleothems can then dry and lose their lustre, or even switch growth from  stalactite  to helictite  or  evaporite.  Yet  more  disfiguring is the accu-
mulation of lampenflora on brightly illuminated sur-
faces. These are filamentous green and blue-green algae, plus   mosses   and   ferns   where   growth   becomes   well established. They can appear within the first two  or three years of illumination, even deep inside a  cave, and are very common in the older  developments. Use of narrow spectrum ‘cool’ lights emitting at wavelengths between 500 and 620 nm reduces the problem. The algae can be destroyed by steam or  scrubbing with water.
Solutions  of  bleach  or  calcium  hypochlorite  (CaClO—)
are also effective, but it is essential to use dilute solutions (< 2%) and keep them away from any cave fauna.
12.8 SCIENTIFIC, CULTURAL AND RECREATIONAL VALUES OF KARSTLANDS
By focusing on only two of its facets, this book provides no more than a glimpse of the wider environmental significance of karst. Karst rocks are important in almost every aspect of our lives. The calcium carbonate cycle is fundamental to the CO2 concentration of our atmosphere; carbonate rocks host water supplies and building materi- als of immense value to many millions of people; lime- stones hold the key to the sea-level history of the Earth for  at  least  the  past  1 Ma;  speleothems  contain   the palaeoenvironmental record of the continents over  a similar period; cave systems and associated aquifers pro- vide the habitats of troglobitic ecosystems that are barely investigated; and karst supports a morphology  that is a microcosm of geomorphology as a whole.  Carbonate karst  rocks  that  cover  about  10–15%  of  the ice-free continental land thus have a value very much greater than their limited area might suggest.
  The ravages of 20th century industrialization consumed and polluted much of the world’s karst, including the

‘classic’ terrain between Italy and Slovenia, although there have been notable recent attempts at its restoration. The trend of despoliation seems likely to continue in the present century, but accompanied by stronger national and international  attempts  at  conservation.  Goldie   (1993) provides an example from the UK, where national legisla- tion is helping to protect limestone pavements. However, it seems inevitable that limestone quarries will expand and karst groundwater resources will be still  more heavily exploited in the years ahead with dire consequences for water supplies, spring flows and subterranean ecosystems. Caves are immensely  important as nature’s vaults. Whether in the ‘Old  World’ or the ‘New’, they contain irreplaceable and  datable records of biological, climatic and landscape  history. Palaeontological discoveries in European caves since the eighteenth and nineteenth cen- turies (e.g. see Reliquiae Diluvianae by Buckland, 1823) revealed some  of our first evidence for environmental change, because they found in the modern temperate zone remains  of rhinoceros, hyaena, hippopotamus, etc; ani- mals that are more associated with Africa. Ancient rock drawings of animals and hunting scenes (Figure  12.20) provided other clues to the ecology of past  times, as well as being superb examples of the  artistic ability of our forebears. Most famous amongst  locations where these can be seen are Altamira Cave  near Santander in northern Spain, and many caves in southern France such as Lascaux and Cussac in the  valley of the Dordogne, Niaux Cave in the  Pyre´ne´es and Grotte Chauvet in the Arde`che Gorge. Some of their paintings may date back to 32 000 years  BP. The entrance to Grotte Cosquer on the Mediterranean  coast is now 37 m beneath the sea; its paintings are  dated to two periods between 18 500 and 27 000 years BP. Measured on any scale, these are inter- nationally important sites of cultural heritage, but  sadly they face conservation problems of great  complexity, being prone to inadvertent damage by the  very tourists
who go to admire them.
  It was in these caves that the intricate and conflicting demands  of  tourist  cave  development  and  conservation was first appreciated. As we have noted,  Lascaux  Cave had  to  be  closed  in  1963  to  protect  the prehistoric art from lampenflora and crystal  growth, because the com- bination of lighting and  respiration of visitors caused deterioration of the famous cave paintings that they had come to enjoy. A meticulously constructed replica cave (Lascaux II) was  built alongside to absorb the visitor demand.  Subterranean ecological attractions have also been found to be vulnerable. Thus the Glowworm Cave in New  Zealand was temporarily closed in 1973 because the  heat energy input of tourism reduced the humidity of  the air, stressing the glow worms and drastically





Figure 12.20   Painting of bison, Grotte de Niaux, Arie`ge, France.

reducing their numbers. Scientific investigation has since established principles for management and the situation is restored. The importance of conserving representative karst areas for science and recreation has been recognized in many countries by the designation of national  parks and reserves. Of great value amongst those  recently preserved is the Gunung Mulu National Park of Sarawak in northern Borneo. It contains magnificent  humid  tro- pical  karst  with  its  ecosystem  intact  –  both  below  and above  ground  –  a  feature  of  immense significance at a time when tropical forests  around the world are being destroyed. Rising  precipitously above the forest are the spire-like  pinnacle karren of Mount Api (Figure 9.12), one of the best known examples of this landform in the world.  And piercing the mountain are huge allogenic river caves, including Good Luck Cave with its enormous void of Sarawak Chamber (Figure 7.51). But there is still much to do in conserving karsts of universal value, especially in the Third World. The internationally impor- tant type-site of ‘cockpit karst’ in Jamaica, for example, remains under threat because of unresolved issues of land tenure and inadequate local protective legislation (Chenoweth et al. 2001) and rapid tourist developments threaten the wonderful drowned caves of the Yucatan coast. However, progress is being made in systematically assessing the World Heritage potential of different karst regions, as in the Asia–Pacific region for example (Wong et al. 2001).
  
If any geomorphologist were asked to nominate a short list of the great landscapes of the world, the  cele- brated tower karst of southern China would certainly rank high upon it. This landscape has been an enduring source of inspiration, entrancement and  curiosity for travellers, artists and scientists of many  dynasties from before Xu Xiake’s time in the 17th century to the present. We remain equally captivated by its beauty and mystery. It would be our first choice on a World Heritage list of karst. The great karsts of China also contain some of our most important sites for the study of human evolution. The discovery of ‘Peking Man’ or Homo erectus pekinensis in the late 1920s drew the attention of world science to excavations in cave deposits   at   Zhoukoudian,   about   40 km   southwest   of Beijing. From New Cave at Zhoukoudian the  regional transition from H. erectus to archaic H.  sapiens appears to be around 400 a and archaic H.  sapiens is dated to
>269 a (Shen et al. 2004). Elsewhere in China, hominid remains found in caves are known back to about 1.9 year (Zhu et al. 2003). Yet still older deposits of ape-like hominoids   Australopithecus   that   preceded   the   genus Homo have been found in breccias in Sterkfontein Cave in South Africa dating back to 3.3 to 3.6 a, in addition to remains of H. habilis from about 2–1.7 a  (Martini et al. 2003). Australopithecus and H. erectus  have been exca- vated in similar circumstances in  nearby Swartzkrans Cave. In northern Namibia, karst breccias have yielded a Miocene hominid dating from  about 13 T 1 a (Conroy




et al. 1992). The oldest hominin fossil in Europe is  H. antecessor, many remains of which were found in  sedi- ments of a doline and cave complex at Atapuerca in Spain and palaeomagnetically dated at >780 a (Pare´s and Pe´rez- Gonza´lez 1995). See Berger (2001) for a  discussion of hominid/hominin terminology.
  Teeth and mandibles of the largest known primate, Gigantopithecus blacki, have also been found in caves in China and Vietnam (Schwartz et al. 1995). When stand- ing erect, this Orangutang-like creature may have  been about 4 m tall. The world’s largest bird,  Dinornis max- imus, the now extinct giant Moa, was of up to 240 kg live mass and is represented in many  cave deposits in New Zealand, sometimes alongside  the great extinct eagle Harpagornis, with a wingspan  at least as large as the Condor (Worthy and Holdaway 2002).
  Fortunately the establishment of a series of karst World Heritage sites is underway. The establishment of an international network of Geoparks has also been proposed   for   important   sites   that   do   not   meet   the broader World  Heritage  requirements.  In  a   recent review, Hamilton-Smith (2004) noted that  worldwide there are about 50 World Heritage sites that are located upon or feature karst phenomena. Nine of  these were inscribed specifically for their cave and  karst features (Puerto-Princesa, Philippines; Gunung Mulu, Malaysia; Desembarco del Gramma-Cabo Cruz,  Cuba; Carlsbad Caverns and Mammoth Cave, USA;  Plitvice  Lakes, Croatia;    Aggtelek    and    Slovak    Karst,   Hungary– Slovakia;  Skocjanske  Jame,  Slovenia; Ha Long Bay and Phong Nha Ke Bang,  Vietnam). Twenty-six sites

were inscribed for other natural reasons, but contain significant karst features (including the Canadian Rockies and Nahanni, Canada; Pyrenees-Mont Perdu, France–Spain; Tsingy de Bemaraha, Madagascar; Western Caucasus, Russian Federation; Pamukkale, Turkey); and nine sites were inscribed for cultural reasons, but contain important karst features (including Zhoukoudian,   China;   Altamira,   Spain;   Caves   of   the Ve´ze`re, France). Work is continuing through the efforts of the IUCN to ensure that there will be a representative coverage of the great karsts of the world within the World Heritage system. A new cluster of  sites embracing the great karsts of south China has  been proposed and we eagerly await its inscription.
  In addition to conservation at a global level, there are many karst features worthy of protection at a natio- nal level, and efforts should be made to ensure their future using the local national park system and possibly the new Geopark concept. Groups associated with the International Association of Geomorphologists, Inter- national Association of Hydrogeologists and the Inter- national Speleological Union are amongst the best placed  organizations  to  ensure  that  this  is  achieved.  It is essential that this be done, because we are constantly reminded of the immense importance of caves as protected repositories of natural and cultural history. The recent discovery of a new human species, Homo floresiensis, in Liang Bua Cave in Flores Island, Indo- nesia,  is  a  case  in  point  (Morwood  et  al.  2004).  Who knows what other discoveries await us in the intriguing world of karst?




References



Abel, O. & G. Kyrle (eds.) (1931) Die Drachenhohle bei Mixnitz, Speleologisches Monographes 7, 8 and 9, Wien.
Adams, A.E. and MacKenzie, W.S. (1998) A Colour Atlas  of Carbonate Sediments  and  Rocks  under  the   Microscope, London, Manson.
Adams, A.E., MacKenzie, W.S. and Guilford, C. (1984) Atlas of Sedimentary Rocks under the Microscope, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 104 pp.
Adams,  R.  and  Parkin,  G.  (2002)  Development  of  a  coupled surface-groundwater-pipe network model for the  sustainable management of karstic groundwater. Environmental Geology, 42, 513–17.
Agostini, S.,  Forti,  P.  and  Postpischl,  D.  (1994)  Gli   studi sismotettonici e paleosismici effetuati nella Grotta del Cervo di Petrasecca nel periodo 1987–1991. Memoires  Instituto Italiano di Speleologia, 2(5), 97–104.
Ahnert,    F.    (1996)    The    point    of    modelling    geomorpho- logical sysyems, in Geomorphology Sans  Frontie`res  (eds
B. McCann and D.C. Ford), J. Wiley & Sons,  Chichester, pp. 91–113.
Ahnert, F. and Williams, P.W. (1997) Karst landform  develop- ment in a three-dimensional theoretical model. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplementband, 108, 63–80.
Aitken, J.D. and Cook, D.G. (1969) Geology, Lac Belot, District of Mackenzie. Geological Survey of Canada: Map 6.
Akerman, J.H. (1983) Notes on chemical weathering, Kapp Linne, Spitzbergen, Proceedings 4th International Conference on Permafrost, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, pp. 10–15.
Alexander, E.C., Broberg, J.S., Kehren, A.R., et al. (1993) Bellechester Minnesota lagoon collapse, in Applied Karst Geology (ed. B. Beck), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 63–72.
Alexeev, S.V. and Alexeeva, L.P (2002) Ground ice in the sedimentary rocks and kimberlites of Yakutia, Russia. Perma- frost and Periglacial Processes, 13(1), 53–9.
Al-fares W., Bakalowicz M., Guerin R. and Dukhan M. (2002) Analysis of the karst aquifer structure of the Lamalou  area (Herault, France) with ground penetrating radar.  Journal of Applied Geophysics 51(2–4), 97–106.

Alhajjar, B.J., Chesters, G. and Harkin, J.M. (1990)  Indicators of chemical pollution from septic systems.  Ground Water, 28(4), 559–68.
Ali,  S.S.  (2005)  Effect  of  slides  masses  on  ground   water occurrence in some areas of Sharazoor Plain, N.E.  Iraq, in Water Resources and Environmental Problems in Karst (eds Z. Stevanovicˇ and P. Milanovicˇ), International  Association of Hydrogeologists, Belgrade, pp. 215–22.
Al-Kaisy, S.A.S. (2005) Using of groundwater to reduce the problem of cavitation under the foundations in gypsiferous soil in the site of Tikrit University, North Iraq, In in  Water Resources and Environmental Problems in Karst  (eds Z. Stevanovicˇ and P. Milanovicˇ), International  Association of Hydrogeologists, Belgrade, pp. 697–704.
Alkattan, M., Oelkers, E.H., Dandurand, J.-L. and Schott (1997) Experimental studies of halite dissolution kinetics, 1. The effect  of  saturation  state  and  the  presence  of  trace  metals. Chemical Geology, 137, 201–19.
Allen, J.R.L. (1972) On the origin of cave flutes and scallops by the  enlargement  of  inhomogeneities.  Rassegna  Speleologica Italiana, 24, 3–23.
Allen, J.R.L. (1977) Physical Processes of Sedimentation,  4th impression, George Allen & Unwin, London, 248 pp.
Aller, L., Bennet, T., Lehr, J.H., et al. (1987) DRASTIC: a Standardized  System  for  Evaluating  Groundwater  Pollution Potential using Hydrogeologic Settings. Office of Research and Development, US Environmental Protection  Agency (EPA- 600/2-87/035).
Alley, N.F., Clarke, J.D.A., Macphail, M. and Truswell,  E.M. (1999) Sedimentary infillings and development of   major Tertiary palaeodrainage systems of south-central  Australia. Special Publications of the International Association of Sedi-
mentologists, 27, 337–366.
Allison, R.J. and Goudie, A.S. (1990) Rock control and  slope profiles in a tropical limestone environment: the Napier Range of Western Australia. The Geographical Journal,  156(2), 200–11.
Allred, K. (2004) Some carbonate erosion rates of southeast Alaska. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 66(3), 89–97.


Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Derek Ford and Paul Williams
# 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd




Alsharhan, A.S. and Kendall, C.G. St. C. (2003) Holocene coastal carbonates and evaporites of the southern Arabian Gulf and their ancient analogues. Earth-Science Reviews, 61, 191– 243.
Alsop, G.I. Blundell, D.J. and Davison, I. (eds) (1996) Salt Tectonics. Special Publication 100, Geological Society  Pub- lishing House, Bath.
American Society for Testing and Materials (1995) Standard Guide for Design of Ground-Water Monitoring Systems in Karst and Fractured-Rock Aquifers, D 5717 – 95, Annual Book of ASDTM Standards, pp. 435–51.
Anderson, G.M. (1991) Organic maturation and ore precipit- ation in southeast Missouri. Economic Geology, 86(5), 909–26.
Anderson, N.L. and Hinds, R.C. (1997) Glacial loading and unloading: a possible cause of rock-salt dissolution in the Western Canadian Basin. Carbonates and Evaporites,  12(1), 43–52.
Andre, B. and Rajaram, H. (2005) Dissolution of limestone fractures by cooling waters: early development of  hypogene karst systems. Water Resources Research, 41(1),  W01015 10.1029/2004WR003331.
Andre´, M.-F. (1996a) Vitesses de dissolution are´olaire  postgla- ciaire dans les karsts polaires et haut-alpins – de  l’Arctique scandinave aux alpes de Nouvelle-Guine´e.  Revue d’Analyse Spatiale Quantitative et Applique´e, 38–39, 99–107.
Andre´,   M.-F.   (1996b)  Rock  weathering  rates   in   arctic  and subarctic environments (Abisko Mts., Swedish  Lappland). Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 40(4), 499–517.
Andre´, M-F. (2001) Tors et roches moutonne´es en laponie Sue´doise: antagonisme ou filiation ? Ge´ographie physique et Quaternaire, 55(3), 229–42.
Andrejchouk, V. (2002) Collapse above the world’s largest potash mine (Ural, Russia). International Journal of Speleology, 31(1/4), 137–58.
Andrejchouk, V.N. and Klimchouk, A.B. (2001) Geomicrobiol- ogy and redox geochemistry of the karstified Miocene gypsum aquifer, Western Ukraine: The Study of Zoloushka Cave. Geomicrobiology Journal, 18, 275–95.
Andrejchouk, V. (1999) Collapses above Gypsum Labyrinth Caves and Stability Assessment of Karstified Terrains,  Prut, Chernovtsy, 51 pp. [In Russian]
Andreo, B., Carrasco, F., Bakalowicz, M., et al. (2002) Use of hydrodynamic  and  hydrochemistry  to  characterise  carbonate aquifers. Case study of the Blanca-Mijas unit (Ma´laga, southern Spain). Environmental Geology, 43, 108–19.
Andrews, L.M. and Railsback, L.B. (1997) Controls on stylolite development: morphologic, lithologic temporal evidence from bedding-parallel and transverse stylolites from the U.S. Appa- lachians. Journal of Geology, 105, 59–73.
Andrieux, C. (1963) Etude crystallographique des pavements polygonaux des croutes polycristallines de calcite des grottes. Bulletin de la Societe Francaise de Mineralogie et de  Cris- tallographie, 86, 135–8.
Anikeev, A. (1999) Casual hydrofracturing theory and its appli- cation for sinkhole development prediction in the area of Novovoronezh Nuclear Power House 2 (NV NPH–2), Russia,

in Hydrogeology and  Engineering Geology  of  Sinkholes  and Karst (eds B.F. Beck, A.J. Pettit, and J.G. Herring),  A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 77–83.
Annable, W.K. (2003) Numerical analysis of conduit evolution in karstic aquifers. Univ. of Waterloo PhD thesis, 139 pp.
Anthony, D.M. and Granger, D.E. (2004) A Tertiary origin  for multilevel caves along the western escarpment of the Cumber- land Plateau, Tennessee and Kentucky, established bt cosmo- genic 26Al and 10Be. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 66(2),
46–55.
Antonioli, F., Bard, E., Potter, E.-K., et al. (2004) 215-ka history of sea level oscillations from marine and continental layers in Argenterola  Cave  speleothems,  Italy.  Global  and  Planetary Change, 43(1–2), 57–78.
Appelo, C.A.J. and Postma, D. (1994) Geochemistry,  Ground- water and Pollution, Balkema, Rotterdam, 536 pp.
Arandjelovic, D. (1984) Application of geophysical methods to hydrogeological problems in Dinaric karst of Yugoslavia, in Hydrogeology  of   the   Dinaric  Karst  (ed.   B.F.   Mijatovic), International  Contributions   to   Hydrogeology    4,   Heise, Hannover, pp. 143–59.
Arandjelovic, D. (1966) Geophysical methods used in  solving some geological problems encountered in construction of the Treblinisca water power plant (Yugoslavia).   Geophysical Prospecting, 14(1), 80–97.
Arfib, B., de Marsily, G and Ganoulis, J. (2002) Les  sources karstiques coˆtie`res en Me´diterrane´e: e´tude des me´canismes de pollution saline de l’Almyros d’He´raklion  (Cre`te), observa- tions et mode´lisation. Bulletin de la  Societe Geologique de France, 173(3), 245–53.
Ashton, K. (1966) The analyses of flow data from karst drainage systems. Transactions of the Cave Research Group of  Great Britain, 7(2), 161–203.
Association Francaise de Karstologie (1981) Formations Carbo- nates Externes, Tufs et Travertins. Bulletin de l’ Association Geographique France, Memoire 3.
Astier, J.L. (1984) Geophysical prospecting, in Guide to the Hydrology of Carbonate Rocks (eds P.E. LaMoreaux,  B.M. Wilson and B.A. Memon), Studies and Reports in Hydrology No. 41, UNESCO, Paris, pp. 171–96.
Atkinson,  T.C.  (1977a)  Carbon  dioxide  in  the  atmosphere  of the unsaturated zone: an important control of  groundwater hardness in limestones. Journal of Hydrology, 35, 111–23.
Atkinson, T.C. (1977b) Diffuse flow and conduit flow in  lime- stone terrain in the Mendip Hills, Somerset (Great  Britain). Journal of Hydrology, 35, 93–110.
Atkinson,  T.C.  (1983)  Growth  mechanisms  of  speleothems  in Castleguard Cave, Columbia Icefields, Alberta, Canada. Arctic and Alpine Research, 15(4), 523–36.
Atkinson, T.C. (1985) Present and future directions in karst hydrogeology. Annales de la Societe Ge´ologique de Belgique, 108, 293–96.
Atkinson, T.C. and Rowe, P.J. (1992) Applications of dating to denudation chronology  and  landscape evolution,  in  Uranium Series Disequilibrium. Applications to Marine,  Earth and Environmental Sciences (eds M. Ivanovich and R.S. Harmon), Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 669–703.




Atkinson, T.C. and Smith, D.I. (1976) The erosion of limestones, in The Science of Speleology (eds T.D. Ford and C.H.D. Cullingford), Academic Press, London, pp. 151–177.
Atkinson, T.C., Ward, R.S. and O’Hannelly, E. (2000) A radial- flow  tracer  test  in  Chalk:  comparison  of  models  and  fitted parameters, in Tracers and Modelling in Hydrogeology (ed. A. Dassargues), Publication 262, International  Association of Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 7–15.
Aubert, D. (1967) Estimation de la dissolution superficielle dans le Jura. Bulletin de la Societe Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles, No. 324, 69(8), 365–76.
Aubert, D. (1969) Phenomenes et formes du karst jurassien.
Eclogae Geologicae Helvetiae, 62(2), 325–99.
Audra, P. (1994) Karsts alpins. Ge`nese des grands re`seaux souterrains. Karstologia, Me´moires 5.
Audra, P. (1999) Soil erosion and water pollution in an intensive vine cultivation area: The Entre-deux-Mers example (Gironde, France), in Karst Hydrogeology and Human Activities: Impacts,  Consequences  and  Implications  (eds  D.  Drew  and
H. Ho¨tzl), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 70–2.
Audra, P. (2000) Le karst haut alpin du Kanin (Alpes juliennes, Slove´nie-Italie). Karstologia, 35(1), 27–38.
Audra,  P.,  Bigot,  J.-Y.  and  Mocochain,  L.  (1993)  Hypogenic caves in Provence (France): specific features  and sediments. Speleogenesis and Evolution of Karst Aquifers, 1(1), 10 pp.
Audra, P., Camus, H. and Rochette, P. (2001) Le karst des plateaux jurassique de  la  moyenne  valle´e  de   l’Arde`che: datation par pale´omagne´tisme des phases  d’e´volution plio- quaternaires (aven de la Combe Rajeau).  Bulle´tin Socie`te Ge´ologique de France, 172(1), 121–9.
Auler, A.S. and Smart, P.L. (2003) The influence of  bedrock- derived acidity in the development of surface and underground karst: evidence from the Precambrian carbonates of semi-arid northeastern Brazil. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms,
28, 157–68.
Auler, A.S., Smart, P.L., Tarling, D.H. and Farrant, A.R. (2002) Fluvial incision rates derived from magnetostratigraphy of cave sediments in the cratonic area of eastern Brazil. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 46(3), 391–403.
Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M. and Kaufman, A. (2002) Climatic conditions during marine oxygen isotope stage 6 in the eastern Mediterranean region from the isotopic composi- tion  of  speleothems  of  Soreq  Cave,  Israel.  Geology,  30(4),
303–6.
Ayers, J.F. and Vacher, H.L. (1986) Hydrogeology of an  atoll island: a conceptual model from detailed study of a  Micro- nesian example. Ground Water, 24(2), 185–98.
Ayliffe, L.K., Marianelli, P.C., Moriarty, K., et al. (1998) 500 ka precipitation record from southeastern Australia: evidence for interglacial relative aridity. Geology, 26, 147–50.
Ayora, C., Taberner, C., Saaltink, A.B. and Carrera, J. (1998) The genesis of dedolomites: a discussion based on reactive trans- port modelling. Journal of Hydrology, 209, 346–65.
Bachman, G.O. (1976) Cenozoic deposits of southeastern New Mexico and an outline of the history of evaporite dissolution.   Journal   of   Research,   US   Geological   Survey, 4(2), 135–49.

Bachman, G.O. (1984) Regional geology of the Ochoan evapor- ites, northern part of Delaware Basin. New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources, Circular, 184. 24 pp.
Bachman, G.O. (1987) Karst in Evaporites in Southeastern New Mexico, Report SAND 86-7078, Sandia National Laboratories. Back, W., Hanshaw, B.B. and van Driel, J.N. (1984) Role  of groundwater in shaping the Eastern Coastline of the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico, in Groundwater as a Geomorphic Agent
(ed. R. G. LaFleur), Allen & Unwin, London, pp. 280–93. Backshall, D.G., J. Barnett, P.J. Davies, D.C. et al. (1979)
Drowned dolines – the blue holes of the Pompey Reefs, Great Barrier Reef. BMR Journal of Australian Geology and Geophysics, 4, 99–109.
Badino, G. and Romeo, A. (2005) Crio-Karst in the Hielo Continental Sur, in Glacier Caves and Glacial Karst in High Mountains and Polar Regions (ed. B.R. Mavlyudov), Institute of   Geography,   Russian   Academy   of   Sciences,   Moscow, pp. 13–18.
Baedke,  S.J.  and  Krothe,  N.C.  (2001)  Derivation  of  effective hydraulic parameters of a karst aquifer from discharge hydro- graph analysis. Water Resources Research, 37(1), 13–19.
Bagnold,  R.A.  (1966)  An  approach  to  the  sediment  transport problem from general physics. US Geological Survey Profes- sional Paper, 422-I, 37 pp.
Baichtal, J.F. and Swanston, D.N. (1996) Karst Landscapes and Associated Resources: a Resource Assessment. Report PNW-GTR–383,   US   Department   of   Agriculture   Forestry Service.
Bakalowicz,  M.  (1973)  Les  grandes  manifestations  hydrologi- ques des karsts dans le monde. Spelunca 2, 38–40.
Bakalowicz, M., Blavoux, B and Mangin, A. (1974) Apports du tracage isotopique naturel a` la connaissance du fonctionnement d’un systeme karstique-teneurs en oxyge`ne–18 de trois sys- temes des Pyrenees, France. Journal of Hydrology, 23, 141–58. Bakalowicz, M. (1976) Ge´ochimie des eaux karstiques.  Une methode d’etude de l’organisation des ecoulements  souter- rains. Annales Scientifiques de l’ Universite de Besancon, 25,
49–58.
Bakalowicz,   M.   (1977)   Etude   du   degre   d’organisation   des coulements souterrains dans les aquiferes carbonates par une methode hydrogochimique nouvelle. Compte Rendus  Acade- mie des Sciences Paris, Series D, 284, 2463–6.
Bakalowicz, M. (1979) Contribution de la geochimie des eaux a la connaissance de l’aquifere karstique et de la karstification. Univ. Paris-6 These Doctorate Sciences, 269 pp.
Bakalowicz, M. and Mangin, A. (1980) L’aquifere karstique. Sa definition, ses characteristiques et son identification. Memoires de la Societe Geologique de France, 11, 71–9.
Bakalowicz, M. (1984) Water chemistry of some karst environ- ments in Norway. Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift, 38, 209–14.
Bakalowicz, M., Mangin, A., Rouch, R., et al. (1985) Caractere de  l’environnement  souterrain  de  la  galerie  d’entree  de  la Grotte  de  Bedeilhac,  Ariege.  Laboratoire  Souterrain   du C.N.R.S., Moulis, 67 pp.
Bakalowicz, M.J., Ford, D.C., Miller, T.E., et al. (1987) Thermal genesis of solution caves in the Black Hills, South  Dakota. Geological Society of America Bulletin, 99, 729–38.




Bakalowicz, M.J. and Jusserand, C. (1987) Etude de l’infiltration en milieu karstique par les methodes geochemiques et isotopi- ques. Cas de la Grotte de Niaux (Ariege, France). Bulletin du Centre d’Hydrogeologie, Universite Neuchatel, 7, 265–83.
Bakalowicz, M. (1992) Ge´ochemie des eaux et flux de matie`res dissoutes: l’approche objective du roˆle du climat dans le karstoge´ne`se, in Salomon, J.-N. and Maire, R. (eds).  Karst et e´volutions climatiques. Presses Universitaires,  Bordeaux, 61–74.
Bakalowicz, M., Drew, D., Orvan, J., et al. (1995) The  char- acteristics of karst groundwater systems, in COST  Action 65 – Hydrogeological Aspects of Groundwater Protection in Karstic Areas. Final Report, European  Commission Report EUR 16547, Luxembourg (ISBN 92-827-4682-8), pp. 349–69.
Bakalowicz, M. (1995) La zone d’infiltration des aquife`res
karstiques. Me´thodes d’e´tude. Structure et fonctionnement.
Hydroge´ologie 4, 3–21.
Bakalowicz, M. (2001) Exploration techniques for karst ground- water resources, in Present State and Future Trends of Karst Studies (eds G. Gu¨nay, K.S. Johnson, D. Ford and A.I. Johnson), IHP-V, Technical Documents in Hydrology, 49(II), UNESCO, Paris, pp. 31–44.
Bakalowicz, M. (2005) Karst groundwater: a challenge for new resources. Hydrogeology Journal, 13, 148–60.
Bakalowicz, M., Fleyfel, M. and Hachache, A. (2002) Une histoire ancienne: le captage de la source de Ras el A¨ın  et l’alimentation en eau de la ville de Tyr (Liban). La  Houille Blanche, 4(5), 157–60.
Baker, A. and Brunsdon, C. (2003). Non-linearities in drip water hydrology: an example from Stump Cross Caverns, Yorkshire. Journal of Hydrology, 277, 151–63.
Baker, A. and Smart, P.L. (1995) Recent flowstone growth rates: field measurements and comparison to theoretical results. Chemical Geology, 122, 121–8.
Baker,  A.,  Smart,  P.L.  and  Ford,  D.C.  (1993a)   Northwest European paleoclimate as indicated by growth   frequency variations of secondary calcite deposits.   Paleogeography, Paleoclimatology, Paleoecology, 100, 291–301.
Baker, A., Smart, P.L., Edwards, R.L. and Richards, D.A. (1993b) Annual growth banding in a cave stalagmite. Nature, 364, 518–20. Baker, A., Ito, E., Smart, P.L. and McEwan, R.F. (1997) Elevated and variable values of 13C in speleothems in  a British cave
system. Chemical Geology, 136, 263–70.
Baker, A., Genty, D., Dreybrodt, W., et al. (1998) Testing theoretically predicted stalagmite growth rates with Recent annually laminated samples: Implications for past stalagmite deposition. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 62(3), 393–404. Baker, A., Genty, D. and Fairchild, I.J. (2000) Hydrological
characterisation of stalagmite dripwaters at Grotte de Villars, Dordogne, by the analysis of inorganic species and lumines- cent organic matter. Hydrology and Earth System  Sciences, 4(3), 439–49.
Balazs, D. (1973) Relief types of tropical karst areas, in  IGU Symposium on Karst Morphogenesis (ed. L. Jakucs),  Attila Jozsef University, Szeged, pp. 16–32.
Balch, E.S. (1900) Glacie`res or Freezing Caverns. Lane & Scott, Philadelphia, 337 pp.

Baldini, J.U.L., McDermott, F. Fairchild, I.J. (2002) Structure of the 8200-year cold event revealed by a speleothem trace element record. Science, 296, 2203–2206.
Banks, D, Davies, C. and Davies, W (1995) The Chalk as a karstic aquifer: evidence from a tracer test at Stanford  Dingley, Berkshire, UK. Quarterly Journal of Engineering  Geology, 28, S31–S38.
Ba´rdossy,   G.   (1982)   Karst   Bauxites.   Bauxite   Deposits   on Carbonate  Rocks,  Akademia   Kiado-Elsevier,    Budapest- Amsterdam, 441 pp.
Ba´rdossy, G. (1989) Bauxites, in Paleokarst – a Systematic and
Regional Review (eds P. Bosa´k, D.C. Ford, J. Glazek and
I. Hora´cˇek), Academia Praha/Elsevier,  Prague/Amsterdam, pp. 399–418.
Barker, J.A. and Black, J.H. (1983) Slug tests in fissured aquifers.
Water Resources Research, 19, 1558–1564.
Bar-Matthews,  M.  and  Ayalon,  A.  (1997)  Late   Quaternary paleoclimate in the eastern Mediterranean region from stable isotope analysis of  speleothems  at  Soreq   Cave,  Israel. Quaternary Research, 47, 155–68.
Bar-Matthews, M., Ayalon, A., Matthews, A., et al. (1996) Carbon and oxygen isotope study of the active water-carbonate system in a karstic Mediterranean cave:  implications  for paleoclimate  research  in  semiarid   regions.  Geochimica
et Cosmochimica Acta, 60(2), 337–47.
Barner, W.L. (1999) Comparison of stormwater management in a karst   terrane   in   Springfield,   Missouri   –   case   histories. Engineering Geology, 52, 105–12.
Barrows, T.T. and Juggins, S. (2005) Sea-surface  temperatures around the Australian margin and Indian  Ocean during the Last Glacial Maximum. Quaternary  Science Reviews, 24, 1017–47.
Barton, N. and Stephansson, O. (eds) (1990) Rock Joints, A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 994 pp.
Baskaran, M. and Krishnamurthy, R.V. (1993) Speleothems  as proxy for the carbon isotope composition of atmospheric CO2.
Geophysical Research Letters, 20(24), 2905–8.
Bastin, B. (1979) L’analyse pollinique des stalagmites. Annales de la Societe Geologique de Belgique, 101, 13–19.
Bastin, B. (1990) L’analyse pollinique des concretions stalagmi- tiques: me´thodologier et resultants en provenance des grottes belges. Karstologia, Me´moires, 2, 3–10.
Batsche, H., F. Bauer, H. Behrens, K., et al. (1970) Kombinierte Karstwasser-untersuchungen in Gebiet der Donauversick erung (Baden-Wuttemberg) in den Jahren, 1966–1969, 1970. Steirische Beitrage zur Hydrogeologie, 22(B90), 5–165.
Bauer, F. (1962) NacheiszeitlicheKarstformen in der osterrei- chischen Kalkalpen, Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress of Speleology, Bari, pp. 299–328.
Bauer, S. (2002) Simulation of the genesis of karst aquifers in carbonate  rocks.  Tu¨bingen  Geowissenschaftliche   Arbeiten, C62, 143 pp.
Bear, J. (1972) Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media,  Elsevier, New York.
Beck, B.F. (ed.) (2003) Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst, Proceedings 9th Multidisci- plinary    Conference,    Huntsville,    Alabama.    Geotechnical




Special Publication 122, American Society of Civil Engineers, 737 pp.
Beck, B.F. (ed.) (2005) Sinkholes and the Engineering and Envir- onmental Impacts of Karst, Geotechnical Special Publication No. 144, American Society of Civil Engineers, 677 pp.
Beck, B.F. and Herring, J.G. (eds) (2001) Geotechnical and Environmental Applications of Karst Geology and Hydrology, Balkema, Lisse, 437 pp.
Beddows, P.A. (2004) Yucata´n phreas, Mexico, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 786–8.
Beddows, P.A., Smart, P.L., Whitaker, F.F. and Smith, S.L. (2002) Density stratified groundwater circulation on the Caribbean coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico, in Hydrogeology   and   Biology   of   Post-Paleozoic   Carbonate Aquifers (eds J.B. Martin, C.M. Wicks, and I.D. Sasowsky), Special Publication 7, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 129–34.
Beede, J.W. (1911) The cycle of subterranean drainage as illustrated in the Bloomington Quadrangle (Indiana), Proceed- ings Indiana Academy of Science, 20, 81–111.
Behrens,  H.  (1998).  Radioactive  and  activable  isotopes,   in Tracing Technique in Geohydrology (ed. W. Ka¨ss), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 167–87.
Bell, K. (ed.) (1989) Carbonatites: Genesis and Evolution, Unwin Hyman, London, 618 pp.
Belloni, S., Martins, B. and Orombelli, G. (1972) Karst of Italy, in Karst: Important Karst Regions of the Northern Hemisphere (eds M. Herak and V.T. Stringfield), Elsevier,  Amsterdam, pp. 85–128.
Benderitter, Y., Roy, B. and Tabbagh, A. (1993) Flow character- ization through heat transfer evidence in a carbonate fractured medium:  first  approach.  Water  resources  Research,  29(11), 3741–7.
Beniawski, Z.T. (1976) Rock mass classification in rock engineering, in Z.T. Beniawski (ed.). Exploration for rock engineering. A.A. Balkema, Cape Town, pp. 97–106.
Benito, G., Perez del Campo, P., Gutierrez-Elzora, M. and Sancho, C. (1995) Natural and human-induced sinkholes  in gypsum terrain and associated environmental problems in NE Spain. Environmental Geology, 25, 156–64.
Benson, R.C., Yuhr, L. and Kaufmann, R.D. (2003) Assessing the risk  of  karst  subsidence  and  collapse,  in  Sinkholes  and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst  (ed. B.E. Beck), Proceedings of 9th Multidisciplinary   Conference, Huntsville, Alabama, Geotechnical Special  Publication 122, American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 31–9.
Berger, L.R. (2001) Viewpoint: is it time to revise the system of scientific naming? National Geographic News, December  4. [http:// news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2001/12/1204_ hominin_id.html]
Berner, E.K. and Berner, R.A. (1996) Global Environment. Water, Air and Geochemical Cycles, Prentice Hall, Upper  Saddle River, NJ.
Berner, R.A. and Morse, J.W. (1974) Dissolution kinetics of calcium carbonate in seawater. IV. Theory of calcite solution. American Journal of Science, 274, 108–34.

Berstad,  I.M.,  Lundberg,  J.,  Lauritzen,  S.-E.  and  Linge,  H.C. (2002) Comparison of the climate during marine isotope stage
9 and 11 inferred from a speleothem isotope record from northern Norway. Quaternary Research, 58, 361–71.
Betson, R.P. (1977) The hydrology of karst urban areas, in Hydrologic Problems in Karst Regions (eds R.R.  Dilamarter and S.C. Csallany), Western Kentucky  University, Bowling Green, pp. 162–75.
Bini, A. (1978) Appunti di geomorfologia ipogea: le forme parietali,    5th    Convention    on    Regional    Speleologia    of Trentino–Alto Adige, pp. 19–46.
Bini, A., Meneghel, M. and Sauro, U. (1998a) Karst  geomor- phology of the Altopiani Ampezzani. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomor- phologie NF, Supplement-Band, 109, 1–21.
Bini, A., Tognini, P. and Zuccoli, L. (1998b) Rapport entre karst et glaciers durant les glaciations dans les valle´es pre´alpines du Sud des Alpes. Karstologia, 32(2), 7–26.
Biondic, B., Dukaric, F. and Biondic, R., 1999) Impact of the sea on the Perilo abstraction site in Bakar Bay – Croatia, in Karst hydrogeology and human activities: impacts, consequences and implications (eds D. Drew and H. Ho¨tzl), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 244–51.
Bird, J.B. (1967) The Physiography of Arctic Canada with Special  Reference  to  the  Area  South  of  Parry   Channel, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 336 pp.
Birk,  S.,  Liedl,  R.  and  Sauter,  M.  (2000)  Characterisation  of gypsum aquifers using a coupled continuum-pipe flow model, in Calibration and Reliability in Groundwater Modelling (eds Stauffer, F., Kinzelbach, W.,  Kovar,  K.   and Hoehn, E.), Publication 265, International association  of Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 16–21.
Bischof G. (1854) Chemical and Physical Geology (translation), Paul & Drummond, London.
Blanc,   J.-J.   (1992)   Importance   geodynamique   des   surfaces d’aplanissement en Provence, in Karst et  Evolutions Clima- tiques (ed. J.-N. Salomon), Presses Universitaires de Bordeaux, pp. 191–207.
Bland, W. and Rolls, D. (1998) Weathering: an Introduction to the Scientific Principles, Arnold, London, 271 pp.
Blavoux,  B.,  Mudry,  J.  and  Puig,  J.M.  (1992).  Water-budget, functioning and protection of the Fontaine-de-Vaucluse karst system (southeastern France).   Geodinamica  Acta,  5(3), 153–72.
Bloom, A.L. (1974) Geomorphology of reef complexes, in Reefs in Time and Space (ed. L.F. Laporte), Special Publication 18, Society   of   Economic   Palaeontologists   and   Mineralogists, Tulsa, OK, pp. 1–8.
Bocker, T. (1977) Economic significance of karst water research in Humgary. Karszt es Barlang, Special Issue, 27–30.
Bo¨gli, A. (1960) Kalklosung und Karrenbildung. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplement-band, 2, 4–21.
Bo¨gli, A. (1961) Karrentische, ein Beitrag sur Karstmorphologie.
Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 5, 185–93.
Bo¨gli, A. (1964) Mischungskorrosion; ein Beitrag zum Verkar- stungsproblem. Erdkunde, 18(2), 83–92.
Bo¨gli, A. (1970) Le Holloch et son Karst, Editions la Baconnie`re, Neuchatel.




Bo¨gli, A. (1980) Karst Hydrology and Physical Speleology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 284 pp.
Bolner-Takacs, K. (1999) Paleokarst features and other climatic relics in Hungarian caves. Acta Carsologica, 28(1), 27–37.
Bonacci, O. (1987) Karst Hydrology: with Special Reference to the Dinaric Karst. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 184 pp.
Bonacci, O. (1993) Karst springs hydrographs as indicators  of karst aquifers. Hydrological Sciences Journal–Journal  Des Sciences Hydrologiques, 38(1), 51–62.
Bonacci, O. (1995) Ground water behaviour in karst: example of the Ombla Spring (Croatia). Journal of Hydrology, 165, 113–34.
Bonacci, O. (2001a) Analysis of the maximum discharge of karst springs. Hydrogeology Journal, 9, 328–338.
Bonacci, O. (2001b) Monthly and annual effective  infiltration coefficients in Dinaric karst: example of the  Gradole karst spring catchment. Hydrological Sciences   Journal,  46(2), 287–99.
Bonacci, O. (2004) Poljes, in Encyclopedia of Caves and  Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 599–600. Bonacci, O. and Bojanic, D. (1991) Rhythmic  karst springs.
Hydrological Sciences Journal, 36(1), 35–47.
Bonacci, O. and Roje-Bonacci, T. (2000) Interpretation of ground- water level monitoring results in karst aquifers: examples from the Dinaric karst. Hydrological Processes, 14, 2423–38.
Bonacci, O. and Roje-Bonacci, T. (2003) The influence of hydroelectrical development on the flow of the karstic  river Cetina. Hydrological Processes, 17, 1–15.
Bonacci, O. and Roje-Bonacci, T. (2004) Plitvice Lakes, Croatia, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J.  Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 597–598.
Bonacci,  O.,  Kerovec,  M.,  Roje-Bonacci,  T.,  et  al.   (1998)
Ecologically acceptable flows definition for the Zˇ rnovnica River (Croatia). Regulated Rivers: Research and Management,
14, 245–56.
Bosa´k, P. (1989) Problems of the origin and fossilization of karst forms, in Paleokarst – a Systematic and Regional Review (eds
P. Bosa´k, D.C. Ford, J. Glazek and I. Hora´cˇek),  Academia Praha/Elsevier, Prague/Amsterdam, pp. 577–98.
Bosa´k, P., Ford, D.C., Glazek, J. and Horacek, I. (eds)  (1989) Paleokarst – a Systematic and Regional Review,  Academia Praha/Elsevier, Prague/Amsterdam.
Bosa´k, P., Pruner, P. and Zupan Hajna, N. (1998) Paleomagnetic research of cave sediments in S.W.Slovenia. Acta Carsologica, 28(2), 151–79.
Bosa´k, P., Bruthans, J., Filippi, M., et al. (1999) Karst and Caves in the Salt Diapirs, SE Zagros Mts., Iran. Acta  Carsologica, 2820, 41–75.
Bosa´k,  P.  (2002)  Karst  processes  from  the  beginning  to  the end: how can they be dated?, in Evolution of Karst:  from Prekarst to Cessation (ed. F. Gabrovsek), Institut za razisko- vanje krasa, ZRC SAZU, Postojna-Ljubljana, pp. 191–223.
Bosa´k, P., Bella, P., Cilek, V., et al. (2003) Ochtina  Aragonite
Cave, Slovakia: morphology, mineralogy and genesis. Geolo- gica Carpathica, 53(6), 399–441.
Bosa´k, P., Mihevc, A. and Pruner, P. (2004) Geomorphological evolution of the Podgorski karst, S.W. Slovenia. Acta Carso- logica, 33(1), 175–204.

Bosch, R.F. and White, W.B. (2004) Lithofacies and transport of clastic sediments in karstic aquifers, in Studies of Cave Sediments: Physical and Chemical Records of  Paleoclimate (eds I.D. Sasowsky and J. Mylroie), Kluwer Academic, New York, pp. 1–22.
Bottrell, S.H. and Atkinson, T.C. (1992) Tracer study and storage in the unsaturated zone of a karstic limestone aquifer, in Tracer Hydrology (eds H. Hotzl and A. Werner), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 207–11.
Bourdon, B., Henderson, G.M., Lundstrom, C.C. and Turner, S.P. (eds) (2003) Uranium-series Geochemistry. Reviews in Miner- alogy and Geochemistry, 52, 656 pp.
Bourrouilh-Le  Jan,   F.G.   (1989)  The   oceanic   karst:  modern phosphate and bauxite ore deposits on the high  carbonate islands (so-called ‘uplifted atolls’) of the Pacific  Ocean, in Paleokarst – a Systematic and Regional Review (eds P. Bosa´k,
D.C. Ford, J. Glazek and I. Hora´cˇek), Academia Praha/Elsevier, Prague/Amsterdam, pp. 443–71.
Boussinesq, J. (1903) Sur un mode simple d’e´coulement des
nappes d’eau d’infiltration a` lit horizontal, avec rebord vertical tout autour lorsqu’une partie de ce rebord est enleve´e depuis la surface jusqu’au fond. Comptes Rendus,   Acade´mie  des Sciences (Paris), 137, 5–11.
Boussinesq, J. (1904) Recherches the´oretiques sur  l’e´coulement des nappes d’eau infiltre´es dans le sol et sur le de´bit des sources. Journal de Mathematiques Pures et Appliquees, 10, 5–78.
Bowen, G.J. and Wilkinson, B. (2002) Spatial distribution of d18O in meteoric precipitation. Geology, 30(4), 315–18.
Boyer, B.W. (1997) Sinkholes, soils, fractures drainage: Interstate 70 near Frederick, Maryland. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, III(4), 469–85.
Boyer, D.G. and Pasquarell, G.C. (1995) Nitrate concentrations in karst springs in an extensively grazed area. Water Resources Bulletin, 31(4), 729–36.
Bozicevic, S. and Biondic, B. (1999) The Plitvice Lakes, in Karst Hydrogeology  and  Human  Activities  (eds  D.   Drew  and
H. Ho¨tzl), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 174–78.
Bradley, R.S. (1999) Paleoclimatology: Reconstructing the Cli- mates of the Quaternary, San Diego, Harcourt Academic Press. 610 pp.
Bradshaw, P. (ed.) (2002) Reclamation of Limestone Quarries by Landform Simulation: Summary of Lessons Learnt from Trial Sites, Department for Transport, Local Government and  the Regions, London.
Brady, B.M.G. and Brown, E.T. (1985) Rock Mechanics for Underground   Mining,   George   Allen   &   Unwin,   London, 527 pp.
Breisch,  R.L.  and  Wefer,  F.L.  (1981)  The  shape  of  ‘gypsum bubbles’, Proceedings of the 8th International  Congress of Speleology, Bowling Green, Kentucky, Vol. 2, pp. 757–9.
Bretz,  J.H.  (1942)  Vadose  and  phreatic  features  of  limestone caves. Journal of Geology, 50(6), 675–811.
Bricen˜o, H.O. and Schubert, C. (1990) Geomorphology of  the Gran  Sabana,  Guyana  Shield,   southeastern    Venezuela. Geomorphology, 3, 125–41.
Bricelj, M. (1997) Results with phages, in Kranjc, A. (ed.) Karst Hydrogeological  Investigations   in   South-western   Slovenia.




Acta Carsologica Krasoslovni Zbornik XXVI/1, Ljubljana, pp. 307–14.
Brink, A.B.A. (1984) A brief review of the South African sinkhole  problem,  in  Sinkholes:  their  Geology,  Engineering and   Environmental   Impact   (ed.   B.F.    Beck),  Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 123–7.
British Columbia Ministry of Forest (1994) Cave/Karst Manage- ment Handbook for the Vancouver Forest Region, Province of British Columbia, Victoria, BC.
British Columbia Ministry of Forest (2003) Karst Management Handbook for British Columbia, Province of British Columbia, Victoria, BC., 69 pp.
Brod, L.G. (1964) Artesian origin of fissure caves in Missouri. Bulletin    of    the    National    Speleological    Society,    26(3), 83–112.
Brook, G.A. (1981) An approach to modelling karst landscapes.
South African Geography Journal, 63(1), 60–76.
Brook, G.A. and Ford, D.C. (1978) The origin of labyrinth and tower karst and the climatic conditions necessary for their development. Nature, 275, 493–96.
Brook, G.A. and Ford, D.C. (1980) Hydrology of the  Nahanni karst, northern Canada the importance of extreme  summer storms. Journal of Hydrology, 46, 103–21.
Brook, G.A. and Hanson, M. (1991. Double Fourier series analysis of cockpit and doline karst near Browns Town, Jamaica. Physical Geography, 12(1), 37–54.
Brook, G.A., Folkoff, M.E. and Box, E.O. (1983) A world model of soil  carbon  dioxide. Earth  Surface  Processes and  Land- forms, 8, 79–88.
Brook, G.A., Burney, D.A. and Cowart, J.B. (1990) Desert paleoenvironmental data from cave speleothems with exam- ples from the Chihuahuan, Somali-Chalbi Kalahari deserts. Paleogeography, Paleoclimatology, Paleoecology, 76, 311–29.
Brook, G.A., Embabi, N.S., Ashour, M.M., et al. (2003)  Qua- ternary environmental change in the western desert of Egypt: evidence  from  cave  speleothems,  spring  tufas   and playa sediments. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie,  Supplment-Band,
131, 59–87.
Brooks, S. and Gebauer, D. (2004) Indian subcontinent, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 442–45.
Brown, M.C. (1972) Karst Hydrology of the Lower Maligne Basin,  Jasper,  Alberta,  Cave  Studies  13,  Cave   Research Association, California, 97 pp.
Brown, M.C. (1973) Mass balance and spectral analysis applied to karst hydrologic networks. Water Resources Research, 9(3), 749–52.
Brown, R.H., Konoplyantsev, A., Ineson, J. and Kovalevsky, V.S. (eds) (1972) Groundwater Studies, Studies and  Reports in Hydrology 7, Unesco, Paris.
Brush, D.J. and Thomson, N.R. (2003) Fluid flow in  synthetic rough-walled fractures: Navier–Stokes, Stokes, and local cubic law simulations.  Water  Resources  Research,   39,  1085, doi:10.1029/2002WR001346.
Bruthans, J. and Zeman, O. (2003) Factors controlling exokarst morphology   and   transport   through   caves;   comparison   of carbonate and salt karst. Acta Carsologica, 32(1), 83–99.

Buchtela, K. von (1970) Aktivierungsanalyse in der Hydrogeo- logie. Steirische Beitrage zur Hydrogeologie, 22, 189–98.
Buckland, W. (1823) Reliquae Diluvianae, Oxford.
Budel, J. (1982) Climatic Geomorphology, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NY.
Bull, P.A. (1977a) Boulder chokes and doline relationships, Proceedings of the 7th International Congress of Speleology, Sheffield, pp. 93–96.
Bull, P.A. (1977b) Laminations or varves? Processes of fine grained sediment deposition in caves, Proceedings of the  7th International Congress of Speleology, Sheffield, pp. 86–87. Bull, P.A. (1978) Surge mark formation and morphology. Sedi-
mentology, 25, 877–86.
Bull, P.A. (1982) Some fine-grained sedimentation phenomena in caves. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 6, 11–22.
Bull, P.A. and Laverty, M. (1982) Observations on  phytokarst.
Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 26, 437–457.
Burdon, D.J. and Papakis, N. (1963) Handbook of Karst Hydro- geology, Institute for Geology and Subsurface Research/FAC, Athens.
Burdon, D.J. and Safadi, C. (1963) Ras-el-Ain: the great spring of Mesopotamia. Journal of Hydrology, 1, 58–95.
Burin, K., Spassov, K., Kolev, D., et al. (1976) Two experiments in tracing karst underground waters with bromine, using neutron activation analysis in Bulgari,, Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Underground Water Tracing, Institute of Karst Research,  Postojna,  Ljubljana,  B159, pp. 35–45.
Burney, D.A. and Burney, L.P. (1993) Modern pollen deposition in cave sites: experimental results from New York State. New Phytology, 124, 523–35.
Burri,  E.,  Castiglioni,  B.  and  Sauro,  U.  (1999)  Karst   and agriculture in the world. International Journal of Speleology, 28B(1/4), theme issue; 5–185.
Busche, D. and Erbe, W. (1987) Silicate karst landforms of the southern Sahara. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, N.F. Supplement-Band, 64, 55–72.
Busche, D. and Sponholz, B. (1992) Morphological and micro- morphological aspects of the sandstone karst of eastern Niger. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geomorphologie, N.F.  Supplement-Band,  85, 1–18.
Busenberg,  E.  and  Plummer,  L.N.  (1982)  The  kinetics   of dissolution of dolomite in CO2——H2O systems at 1.5○ to 65○ C and 0 to 1 atm PCO2. American Journal of  Science, 282, 45–78.
Busenberg, E. and Plummer, L.N. (1986) A comparative study of the dissolution kinetics of calcite and aragonite, in Studies in Diagenesis (ed. F.A. Mumton). US Geological Survey Bulletin, 1578, 139–168.
Butler,  J.J.  (1998)  The  Design,  Performance  Analysis  of  Slug Tests, Lewis, Boca Raton, 252 pp.
Cabrol, P. (1978) Contribution a` L’e´tude du  concretionnement carbonate des grottes du sud de la France morphologie, genese, diagenese. C.E.R.G.H., Univ. Montpellier, tome XII, 275 pp.
Cabrol, P. and Mangin, A. (2000) Fleurs de pierre: Les plus belles concretions des grottes de France, Delachaux et  Niestle´, Lausanne, 191 pp.




Cai, Z., Tang, W. and Maire, R. (1993) Le ge´ographe chinoise Xu Xiake. Karstologia, 21(1), 43–50.
Cailleux, A. and J. Tricart (1963) Initiation a l’etude des sables et des galets, 3 vols, Centre Doc. Universitaire, Paris, 765 pp.
Calaforra, J.M. and Pulido-Bosch, A. (1999) Gypsum karst features as evidence of diapiric processes in the Betic Cordil- lera, Southern Spain. Geomorphology, 19, 251–64.
Campy, M. (1990) L’enregistrement du temps et climat dans les remplissages karstiques: l’apport de la se´dimentologie.  Kar- stologia Me´moires, 2, 11–22.
Cardona, F. and Viver, J. (2002) Sota la sal de Cardona, Espeleo Club de Gracia, Barcelona, 128 pp.
Carew, J.L., Mylroie, J., Wehmiller, J.F. and Lively, R.S. (1984) Estimates of late Pleistocene sea level high stands from San Salvador,  Bahamas,  Proceedings,  2nd  Symposium  on   the Geology of the Bahamas (ed. J.W. Teeter), pp. 153–75.
Carozzi, A.V.,  Scholle,  P.A.  and  James,  N.P.  (eds)   (1996) Carbonate Petrography: Grains, Textures Case   Studies, Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists Pub- lications, Denver, 700 pp.
Carter,  W.L  and  Dwerryhouse,  A.R.  (2004)  The  underground waters of northwest Yorkshire (Part 2). The  underground waters of Ingleborough. Proceedings of the Yorkshire Geolo- gical Society 15(2), 248–92. [Part 1, 1900.]
Carthew, K.D., Taylor, M.P. and Drysdale, R.N. (2006) An environ- mental model of fluvial tufas in the monsoonal tropics, Barkly karst, northern Australia. Geomorphology, 73, 78–100.
Castellani, V. and Dragoni, W. (1986) Evidence for karstic mechanisms involved in the evolution of Moroccan Hamadas. International Journal of Speleology, 15(1–4), 57–71.
Castany,  G.  (1982)  Principes  et  Methodes  de  l’Hydrogologie, Dunod, Paris.
Castany, G. (1984a) Hydrogeological features of carbonate rocks, in  Guide  to  the  Hydrology  of  Carbonate  Rocks  (eds P.E. LaMoreaux, B.M. Wilson and B.A. Memon),  Studies and Reports in Hydrology 41, UNESCO, Paris, pp. 47–67.
Castany, G. (1984b) Determination of aquifer characteristics, in Guide to the Hydrology of Carbonate Rocks (eds P.E. LaMor- eaux, B.M. Wilson and B.A. Memon), Studies and Reports in Hydrology 41, UNESCO, Paris, pp. 210–37.
Castillo, A., Lopez Chicano, M. and Pulido-Bosch, A.  (1993) Temporal evolution of Riofrio nitrate  content    (Sierra Gorda, Granada), in Some Spanish Karstic Aquifers  (ed. A. Pulido-Bosch), University of Granada Press,    Granada, pp. 117–26.
Caumartin, V. (1963) Review of the microbiology of underground environments. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 25, 1–14.
Celi, M. (1991) The impact of bombs of World War I on limestone slopes of Monte Grappa, Proceedings, International Conference on Environmental Changes in Karst Areas, Inter- national Geographical Union/International Speleological Union, pp. 279–87.
Celico, P., Gonfiantini, R., Koizumi, M. and Mangano, F. (1984) Environmental isotope studies of limestone aquifers in central Italy, in Isotope Hydrology 1983, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, pp. 173–92.

Cerling, T.E. (1984) The stable isotopic composition of modern soil carbonate and its relationship to climate. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 71, 229–40.
Chafetz, H.S. and R.L. Folk (1984) Travertines: depositional morphology and the bacterially constructed constituents. Jour- nal of Sedimentary Petrology, 54(1), 189–316.
Chafetz, H.S., Srdocˇ, D. and Horvatincˇicˇ, N. (1994) Early diagenesis of Plitvicˇe Lakes waterfall and barrier travertine deposits. Ge˙ographie physique et Quaternaire, 43(3); 247–55.
Chaix, E. (1895) Contribution a l’etude des lapies: la topographie du desert de Plate. Le Globe, XXXIV, 67–108.
Chappell, J. (1983) A revised sea-level record for the last 300,000 years from Papua, New Guinea. Search, 14, 99–101.
Chappell, J. and Shackleton, N.J. (1986) Oxygen isotopes and sea level. Nature, 324, 137–40.
Chapellier, D. (1992) Well Logging in Hydrogeology, Balkema, Rotterdam, 175 pp.
Chapman, J.B., Ingraham, N.L. and Hess, J.W. (1992) Isotopic investigation of infiltration and unsaturated zone processes at Carlsbad Cavern, New Mexico. Journal of  Hydrology, 133, 343–63.
Chardon, M. (1992) Evolution actuelle et recent des karsts de la Vanoise orientale. in Karst et Evolutions Climatiques (eds J-N. Salomon, and R. Maire), Presses Universitaires de Bordeaux, pp. 293–308.
Chen, W., Zhu D. and Zhu X. (2003) Study on Karst Landscape and World Natural Heritage Value of Tiankeng-Difeng Tourist Site, Fengjie, Chongqing. Geological Printing House, Beijing, 133 pp. [In Chinese.]
Chen, X.  (ed.)  (1998)  South  China  Karst  1.  ZRC   SAZU, Lubljana, 247 pp.
Chen,  Z.,  Song,  L.  and  Sweeting,  M.M.  (1986)  The  pinnacle karst of the Stone Forest on Lunan, Yunnan,  China:  an example  of  a  subjacent  karst,  in  New  Directions in Karst (eds M.M. Sweeting and K. Paterson), Geo Books, Norwich, pp. 587–607.
Chenoweth, S., Day, M., Koenig, S., et al. (2001) Conservation issues in the Cockpit Country, Jamaica, Proceedings of  the 13th International Congress of Speleology, Brazilia,  Vol. 2, pp. 237–41.
Chernyshev,  S.N.  (1983)  Fissures  in  Rocks.  Nauka,  Moscow, 240 pp. [In Russian.]
Chicocki, G. and Zojer, H. (2005) VURAAS – vulnerability and risk analysis in Alpine aquifer systems, in Water  Resources and Environmental  Problems  in  Karst.    Belgrade   (eds
Z.  Stevanovic´,  and  P.  Milanovic´),  National  Committee  of the International Association of Hydrogeologists of  Serbia and Montenegro, pp. 91–6.
Choquette, P.W. and Pray, L.C. (1970) Geological nomenclature and   classification   of   porosity   in   sedimentary   carbonates. American   Association   of   Petroleum   Geologists  Bulletin, 54, 207–50.
Chorley, R.J. and B.A. Kennedy (1971) Physical geography, a Systems Approach. Prentice-Hall, London, 370 pp.
Chou,  L.,  Garrels,  R.M.  and  Wollast,  R.  (1989)  Comparative study of the kinetics and mechanisms of   dissolution of carbonate minerals. Chemical Geology, 78, 269–82.




Christiansen, E.A. (1967) Collapse structures near Saskatchewan, Canada. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 4, 757–67.
Christiansen, E.A. and Sauer, E.K. (2001) Stratigraphy and structure of a Late Wisconsin salt collapse in the  Saskatoon Low  south  of  Saskatoon,  Saskatchewan,  Canada: an update. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 38, 1601–13.
Christopher, N.S.J. (1980) A preliminary flood pulse study  of Russett Well, Derbyshire. Transactions of the British  Cave Research Association, 7(1), 1–12.
Cigna,   A.A.   (1986)   Some   remarks   on   phase   equilibria   of evaporites and other karstifiable rocks. Le Grotte  d’Italia, 4(XII), 201–8.
Cigna, A.A. (1993) Environmental management of tourist caves: the examples of Grotta di Castellana and Grotta Grande  del Vento. Environmental Geology, 21, 173–80.
Cigna, A.A. and Burri, E. (2000) Development, Management and Economy of Show Caves. International Journal of Speleology, 29B9(1/4), 1–27.
Cinq-Mars, J. and Lauriol, B. (1985) Le karst de Tsi-It-Toh-Choh: notes preliminaire sur quelques phenomenes karstiques du Yukon septentrional, Canada. Comptes Rendus  du Colloque Interna- tional de Karstologie Applique, Universite de Liege, 185–96.
Ciry, R. (1962) Le role du froid dans la speleogenese. Spelunca Memoires, 2(4), 29–34.
Civita, M. and De Maio, M. (2000) Valutazione e  cartografia automatica della vulnerabilita degli acquiferi  all’inquina- mento con il sistema parametrico SINTACS  R5, Pitagora Editore, Bologna.
Clark, I.D.  and  Fritz,  P.  (1997)  Environmental  Isotopes   in Hydrogeology. Lewis, New York, 328 pp.
Clark, I.D. and Lauriol, B. (1999) Aufeis of the Firth River Basin, Northern Yukon, Canada: Insights into Permafrost Hy- drogeology and Karst. Arctic and Alpine Research, 29(2), 240–52.
Clark, P.J. and Evans, F.C. (1954) Distance to nearest neighbour as a measure of spatial relationships in populations. Ecology, 35, 445–53.
Clark, P.U. and Mix, A.C. (2002) Ice sheets and sea level of the Last Glacial Maximum. Quaternary Science Reviews, 21, 1–7. Clarke, F.W. (1924) The data of geochemistry. US  Geological
Survey Bulletin, 770, 84 pp.
Clarke, J.D.A. (1994) Evolution of the Lefroy and Cowan palaeodrainage channels, Western Australia. Australian Jour- nal of Earth Sciences, 41, 55–68.
Clemens, T., Hu¨ckinghaus, M., Sauter, M., Liedl, R. and Teutsch,
G. (1997) Simulation of the evolution of maze caves. Bulletin d’Hydroge´ologie, 16, 201–9.
Clemens, T., Huckinghaus, D., Liedl, R. and Sauter, M. (1999) Simulation of the development of karst aquifers: role of  the epikarst. International Journal of Earth  Sciences,   88(1), 157–62.
Cockburn, H.A.P. and Summerfield, M.A. (2004)  Geomorpho- logical applications of cosmogenic isotope analysis. Progress in Physical Geography, 28(1), 1–42.
Collins, M. E., Cum, M. and Hanninen, P. (1994). Using ground- penetrating radar to investigate a subsurface karst landscape in north-central Florida. Geoderma, 61(1–2): 1–15.

Committee on Fracture Characterization and Fluid Flow (1996) Rock Fractures and Fluid Flow: Contemporary Understanding and Applications, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 551 pp.
Condomines, M., Brouzes, C. and Rihs, S. (1999) Le  radium et ses descendants dans quelques carbonates  hydrothermaux d’Auvergne: origin et utilization pour la  datation. Comptes Rendus, Acade´mie des Sciences (Paris), 328, 23–8.
Conroy,  G.C,  Pickford,  M.,  Senut,  B.,  van  Couvering,  J.  and Mein, P. (1992) Otavipithecus namibiensis, first  Miocene hominoid from Southern Africa. Nature, 356, 144–8.
Contos, A. and James, J.M. (2001) Nullarbor rafts and their paleo-environmental significance, Proceedings of the 13th International Congress of Speleology, Brasilia, Vol. 1, p. 53. Contos, A., James, J., Holmes, A., et al. (2001) Calcite biomi- neralisation  in  the  caves  of  Nullarbor  Plains,  Australia, Proceedings of the 13th International Congress of Speleology,
Brazilia, Vol. 1, pp. 33–8.
Cooper, A.H. (1995) Subsidence hazards due to the dissolution of Permian gypsum in England: Investigation and remediation, in Karst Geohazards (ed. B.F.  Beck),  Balkema,   Rotterdam, pp. 23–9.
Cooper, A.H. (1998) Subsidence hazards caused by the dissolu- tion of Permian gypsum in England: geology, investigation and remediation, in Geohazards in Engineering Geology (eds J.G. Maund, and M. Eddleston), Engineering Geology  Special Publications 15, Geological Society Publishing House, Bath, pp. 265–75.
Cooper, A.H. (2001) Natural and induced halite karst geohazards in Great Britain, in Geotechnical and Environmental Applica- tions of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds B.F. Beck and J.G. Herring), Balkema, Lisse, pp. 119–124.
Coplen, T.B. (1994) Reporting of stable hydrogen, carbon  and oxygen abundances.  Pure  and  Applied  Chemistry,   66, 2423–44.
Coplen, T.B., Winograd, I.J., Landwehr, J.M. and Riggs,  A.C. (1994) 500,000 year stable carbon isotopic record from Devils Hole, Nevada. Science, 263, 361–5.
Corbel, J. (1956) A new method for the study of limestone regions. Revue Canadienne de Geographie, 10, 240–2.
Corbel, J. (1957) Les Karsts du Nord-Ouest de l’Europe, Institut Etudes Rhodaniennes Univ. Lyon 12 Mms. Docs, 531 pp.
Corbel, J. (1959) Erosion en terrain calcaire. Annales de  Geo- graphie, 68, 97–120.
Correa Neto, A.V. (2000) Speleogenesis in quartzite in  south- eastern Minas Gerais, Brazil, in Speleogenesis;  Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological   Society  of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 452–7.
COST Action 65 (1995a) Hydrogeological Aspects of  Ground- water Protection in Karstic Areas, Final report (COST Action 65), Report  EUR  16547,    Directorate-General Science, Research and Development,  European  Commission,  Office for   Official   Publications   of  the  European  Communities, Luxembourg, 446 pp.
COST Action 65 (1995b) Hydrogeological Aspects of  Ground- water Protection in Karstic Areas – Guidelines, EUR 16526,




Directorate-General Science, Research and Development, European Commission, Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg, 15 pp.
COST Action 620 (2004) Vulnerability and Risk Mapping for the Protection of Carbonate (Karst) Aquifers, Final report (COST Action 620), Report EUR 20912. Directorate-General Science, Research and Development, European Commission, Office for   Official   Publications   of   the   European   Communities, Luxembourg, 297 pp.
Courbon, P., Chabert, C., Bosted, P. and Lindsley, K.  (1989) Atlas of the Great Caves of the World, Cave Books, St Louis, 369 pp.
Courre`ges, M. and Maire, R. (1996) Karsts et vignobles en Bordelais. Rapports de  recherches, Institut de  Ge´ographie, Universite´ de Fribourg, 8, 9–22.
Coward, J.M.H. (1975) Paleohydrology and streamflow simula- tion of three karst basins in southeastern West Virginia. McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, Canada.
Cowell, D.W. and Ford, D.C. (1980. Hydrochemistry of a dolomite terrain; the Bruce Peninsula, Ontario. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 17(4), 520–6.
Coxon, C.E. (1987) The spatial distribution of turloughs.  Irish Geography, 20, 11–23.
Craig, D.H. (1987) Caves and other features of Permian karst in San Andres dolomites, Yates field reservoir, West Texas,  in Paleokarst (eds N.P. James and P.W. Choquette),  Springer- Verlag, New York, pp. 342–63.
Craig, H. (1961) Isotopic variations in meteoric waters. Science,
133, 1702–3.
Cramer, H. (1941) Die Systematik der Karstdolinen. Neues Jahrbuch fu¨r Mineralogie, Geologie und Palaontogie, 85, 293–382.
Crampon, N., Roux, J.C. and Bracq, P. (1993) France, in  The Hydrogeology  of  the  Chalk  of  North-west  Europe  (eds R.A. Downing, M. Price  and  G.P.  Jones),   Clarendon,  Oxford, pp. 113–52.
Crawford, N.C. (1981) Karst flooding in urban areas:  Bowling Green, Kentucky, Proceedings of the 8th International Congress of Speleology, Bowling Green, Kentucky, Vol. 2, pp. 763–5.
Crawford, N.C. (1984a) Sinkhole flooding associated with urban development upon karst terrain: Bowling Green, Kentucky, in Sinkholes: their Geology, Engineering and Environmental Impact (ed. B.F. Beck), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 283–92.
Crawford,  N.C.  (1984b)  Toxic  and   explosive  fumes   rising from carbonate aquifers: a hazard for residents of  sinkhole plains,  in  Sinkholes:   their   Geology,    Engineering and Environmental Impact (ed. B.F. Beck),  Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 297–304.
Crawford, N.C. (2001) Field trip guide, Part 1:  environmental problems associated  with  urban   development upon karst, Bowling Green, Kentucky, in Geotechnical and Environmental Applications of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds B.F. Beck and J.G. Herring), Balkema, Lisse, pp. 397–424.
Crawford, N.C., Lewis, M.A., Winter, S.A. and Webster,  J.A. (1999) Microgravity techniques for subsurface investigations of sinkhole collapses and for detection of  groundwater flow paths through karst aquifers, in  Hydrology and Engineering

Geology of Sinkholes and Karst (eds B.F. Beck, A.J. Pettit and
J.G. Herring), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 203–18.
Crawford, S.J. (1994) Hydrology and geomorphology of the Paparoa  Karst,  north  Westland,  New  Zealand.   Auckland Univ. Unpublished PhD thesis, New Zealand, 240 pp.
Crowther, J. (1983) A comparison of the rock tablet and water hardness methods for determining chemical erosion rates  on karst surfaces. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie NF.,  27(1), 55–64.
Crowther, J. (1989) Groundwater chemistry and cation budgets of tropical karst outcrops, peninsular Malaysia, 1 calcium  and magnesium. Journal of Hydrology, 107, 169–92.
Crowther, J. (1998) New methodologies for investigating rillen- karren cross-sections: a case study at Lluc, Mallorca.  Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 23, 333–44.
Cruden, D.M. (1985) Rock slope movements in the  Canadian Cordillera. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 22, 528–40.
Cruden, D.M. (1989) Limits to common toppling. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 26, 737–42.
Cruz, F.W., Burns, S.J., Karmann, I., et al. (2005a)  Insolation- driven  changes  in  atmospheric  circulation   over the  past 116,000 years in subtropical Brazil. Nature, 434, 63–66.
Cruz, F.W., Karmann, I., Viana, O., Burns, S.J., Ferrari,  J.A., Vuille, M., Sial, A.N. and Moreira, M.Z. (2005b)  Stable isotope study of cave percolation waters in subtropical Brazil: Implications for palaeoclimate inferences from  speleothems.
Chemical Geology, 220, 245–62.
Cser, F. and Maucha, L. (1966) Contribution to the origin  of ‘excentric’ concretions. Karszt- es Barlangkutatas, 6, 83–100.
Cucchi, F. and Forti, F. (1994) Degradation by dissolution  of carbonate rocks. Acta Carsologica, XXIII, 55–62.
Cucchi, F. and Gerdol, S. (1985) I marmi del Carso  triestino, Camera di Commercio, Trieste, 195 pp.
Curl, R.L. (1966) Scallops and flutes. Transactions of the Cave Research Group of Great Britain, 7(2), 121–60.
Curl, R.L. (1973) Minimum diameter stalagmites. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 35(1), 1–9.
Curl, R.L. (1974) Deducing flow velocity in cave conduits from scallops. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 36(2), 1–5.
Currens, J.C. (2002) Changes in groundwater quality in a conduit- flow-dominated karst aquifer, following BMP implementation. Environmental Geology, 42, 525–31.
Cvijic, J. (1893) Das Karstphanomen. Versuch einer morpholo- gischen Monographie, Geographische Abhandlungen  heraus- gegeben von A Pench, Bd., V.H, 3. Wien, pp. 218–329. [The section on dolines, pp. 225–76, is translated  into English in Sweeting (1981).]
Cvijic,  J.  (1901)  Morphologische  und  glaciale  Studien   aus Bosnien, der Hercegovina und Montenegro: die Karst-Poljen. Abhandlungen der Geographie Gesellschaft Wien, 3(2), 1–85. Cvijic, J. (1918) Hydrographie souterraine et evolution morpho-
logique  du  karst.  Hydrographie  souterraine  et   evolution morphologique du karst, 6(4), 375–426.
Cvijic, J. (1925) Types morphologiques des terrains  calcaires. Comptes  Rendus,  Acade´mie  des  Sciences  (Paris), 180, 592, 757, 1038.




D’Argenio, B. and Mindszenty, A. (1992) Tectonic and climatic control on paleokarst and bauxites. Giornale di Geologia, 54(1), 207–18.
Daly, D. Dassargues, A., Drew, D., et al. (2002) Main concepts of the ‘European approach’ to karst-groundwater-vulnerability assessment and mapping. Hydrogeology Journal, 10, 340–5.
Damblon, F. (1974) Observations palynologiques dans la Grotte de Remouchamps. Bulletin de la Societe Royale Belge de Anthropologie et Prehistorie, 85, 131–55.
Danes, J.V. (1908) Geomorphologische Studien in Karstgebiete Jamaikas, Proceedings of the 9th International Geogological Congress, Vol. 2, pp. 178–82.
Danes, J.V. (1910) Die Karstphanomene im Goenoeng Sewoe auf Java. Tijdschrift der Koninklijke Nederlandsche Aardrijkskun- dig Genootschap, 27, 247–60.
Danin, A. (1983) Weathering of limestone in Jerusalem by cyanobacteria. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 27(4), 413–21. Danin, A. (1993) Biogenic weathering of marble monuments in Didim,  Turkey  in  Trajan  Column,  Rome.  Water  Science
Technology, 27, 557–63.
Danin, A. and Garty, J. (1983) Distribution of cyanobacteria and lichens on hillsides in the Neger Highlands and their impact on biogenic weathering. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie,  27(4), 423–44.
Darabos, G. (2003) Observation of microbial weathering result- ing  in  peculiar  ‘exfoliation-like’  features  in  limestone  from Hirao-dai karst, Japan. Zeitschrift fu¨r   Geomorphologie, Supplement-Band, 131, 33–42.
Darcy, H. (1856) Les fontaines publiques de le ville de  Dijon, Dalmont, Paris.
Dassargues, A. (ed.) (2000) Tracers and Modelling in Hydrology, Publication 262, International Association of  Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, 571 pp.
Dassargues, A. and Derouane, J. (1997) A modelling approach as an intermediate step for the study of protection zones in karstified limestones, in Karst Hydrology (eds C. Leibundgut,
J.  Gunn  and  A.  Dassargues),  Publication  247,  International Association of Hydrological Sciences,     Wallingford, pp. 71–80.
Davies, W.E. and LeGrand, H. (1972) Karst of the United States, in Karst: Important Karst Regions of the Northern Hemisphere (eds M. Herak and V.T. Stringfield), Elsevier,  Amsterdam, pp. 467–505.
Davis, A.D. and Long, A.J. (2002) KARSTIC: a sensitivity method for carbonate aquifers in karst terrains. Environmental Geology, 42, 65–72.
Davis, S.N. (1966) Initiation of groundwater flow in jointed limestone. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 28, 111.
Davis, W.M. (1899) The geographical cycle. Geographical Jour- nal, 14, 481–504.
Davis, W.M. (1930) Origin of limestone caves. Geological Society of America Bulletin, 41, 475–628.
Davison, I., Bosence, D., Alsop, G.I. and Al-Aawah, M.H. (1996) Deformation and sedimentation around active  Miocene salt diapers on the Tihama Plain, northwest   Yemen, in Salt Tectonics (eds G.I. Alsop, D.J. Blundell  and I. Davison),

Special Publication 100, Geological Society Publishing House, Bath, pp. 23–39.
Day, M. (1977) Surface roughness in tropical karst terrain, Proceedings of the 7th International Congress of Speleology, Sheffield, pp. 139–43.
Day, M.J. (1978) Morphology and distribution of residual lime- stone  hills  (mogotes)  in  the  karst  of  northern  Puerto  Rico. Geological Society of America Bulletin, 89, 426–32.
Day, M.J. (1979) Surface roughness as a discriminator of tropical karst styles. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplement-band, 32, 1–8.
Day,   M.J.   (1983)   Doline   morphology   and   development   in Barbados. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 73(2), 206–19.
Day,   M.J.   (1984)   Carbonate   erosion   rates   in   southwestern Wisconsin. Physical Geography, 5(2), 142–9.
Day,   M.J.   (2001)   Sandstone   caves   in   Wisconsin.   Brasilia, Proceedings of the 13th International Congress of Speleology, Vol. 1, pp. 88–92.
De Bellard-Pietri, E. (1981) Stalactite growth in the tropics under artificial conditions, Proceedings of the 8th International Congress of Speleology, pp. 221–2.
De Freitas, C.R. and Schmekal, A. (2003) Condensation as  a microclimate process: measurement, numerical simulation and prediction in the Glowworm Cave, New Zealand. International Journal of Climatology, 23, 557–75.
De Waele, J. and Follesa, R. (2003) Human impact on karst: the example of Lusaka (Zambia). International Journal of  Spe- leology, 32(1/4), 71–83.
Debenham, N.C. and Aitken, M.J. (1984) Thermoluminescence dating of stalagmitic calcite. Archaeometry, 26(2), 155–70.
Deike, G.H. and White, W.B. (1969) Sinuosity in limestone solution conduits. American Journal of Science, 267, 230–41. Delannoy, J-J. and Caillault, S. (1998) Les apports de l’endokarst dans la reconstitution morphoge´nique d’un karst: exemple de
l’Antre de Ve´nus. Karstologia, 31, 27–41.
Delannoy, J.-J., Guendon, J.-L., Quinif, Y and Roiron, P. (1997) Les formations travertineuses: Des temoins paleoenvironmen- taux et morphogeniques. Exemple du Piemont Mediterraneen de La Serrania de Ronda (Province de Malaga, Espagne).
  Bulletin de la Societe belge de Geologie, 106, 79–96.
DeMille, G., Shouldice, J.R. and Nelson, H.W. (1964) Collapse structures  related   to   evaporites   of   the   Prairie   Formation, Saskatchewan. Geological Society of America  Bulletin, 75, 307–16.
Denizman, C. (2003) Morphometric and spatial distribution para- meters of karstic depressions, lower Suwannee River  basin, Florida. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 65(1), 29–35.
Dennis, P.R., Rowe, P.J. and Atkinson, T.C. (2001) The recovery and isotopic measurement of water from fluid inclusions in spleothems. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 65, 871–84. Denniston,  R.F.,  Gonzalez,  L.A.,  Baker,  R.,  et  al.   (1999)
Speleothem evidence for Holocene fluctuations of the prairie- forest ecotone, north-central USA. The Holocene, 9(6), 671–6.
Denniston,  R.F.,  Gonzalez,  L.A.,  Asmerom,  Y.,  et  al.  (2000) Speleothem carbon isotopic records of Holocene environments




in  the  Ozark  Highlands,  USA.  Quaternary   International,
67, 21–7.
Dewandel, B., Lachassagne, P., Bakalowicz, M., et al.  (2003) Evaluation of aquifer thickness by analysing recession hydro- graphs. Application to the Oman ophiolite hard-rock aquifer. Journal of Hydrology, 274, 248–69.
Dilsiz, C. and Gu¨nay, G. (2004) Pamukkale, Turkey, in  Ency- clopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn),  Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 568–9.
Dincer, T., Payne, B.R., Yen, C.K. and Zotl, J. (1972) Das Tote Gebirge  als  –  Entwasserungstypus   der   Karstmassive der  nordostlichen  Kalkhochalpen  (Ergebnisse  von  Isotopen- messungen). Steirische Beitrage zur   Hydrogeologie,  24,
71–109.
Doerfliger,  N.,  Jeannin,  P.-Y.,  and  Zwahlen,  F.  (1999)  Water vulnerability assessment in karst environments: a new method of defining protection areas using a multi-attribute  approach and GIS tools (EPIK method). Environmental Geology, 39(2),
165–76.
Dogan, U. and Yesilyurt, S. (2004) Gypsum karst south of Imranli, Sivas, Turkey. Cave and Karst Science, 31(1), 7–14. Dogwiler, T. and Wicks, C.M. (2004) Sediment entrainment and transport  in  fluviokarst  systems.  Journal  of  Hydrology,
295(1–4), 163–72.
Domenico, P.A. and Schwartz, F.W. (1998) Physical and  Che- mical Hydrogeology, 2nd edn, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 506 pp.
Dorale, J.A., Gonzalez, L.A., Reagan, M.K., et al. (1992) A high resolution record of Holocene climate change in  speleothem calcite from Cold  Water  Cave,  northeast   Iowa.  Science, 258, 1626–30.
Dorale, J.A., Edwards, R.L., Ito, E. and Gonzalez, L.A. (1998) Climate and vegetation history of the mid-continent from 75 to 25 ka: a speleothem record from Crevice Cave, Missouri, USA. Science, 282, 1871–4.
Dorale, J.A., Edwards, R.L., Alexander, E.C., et al. (2004) Uranium-series dating of speleothems: current techniques, limits  applications,  in  Studies  of  Cave  Sediments:  Physical and Chemical Records of Paleoclimate (eds I.D. Sasowsky and
  J. Mylroie), Kluwer Academic, New York, pp. 177–97. Dougherty, P. (2005) Case Study #7. Sinkhole destruction  of
Corporate Plaza, Pennsylvania, in Sinkholes and Subsidence: Karst and Cavernous Rocks in Engineering and Construction (eds A.C. Waltham, F. Bell, and M. Culshaw), Praxis Publish- ing, Chichester, pp. 304–8.
Douglas, I. (1968) Some hydrologic factors in the  denudation of limestone terrains. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geomorphologie, 12(3), 241–55.
Dove, P.M. and Rimstidt, J.D. (1994) Silica–water interactions, in Silica (eds P.J. Heaney, C.T. Prewitt and G.V. Gibbs). Reviews in Mineralogy, 29, 259–308.
Drake, J.J. (1984) Theory and model for global carbonate solution by groundwater, in Groundwater as a Geomorphic Agent (ed.
R. G. LaFleur), Allen & Unwin, London, pp. 210–26.
Drake, J.J. and D.C. Ford (1972) The analysis of growth patterns of two generations; the example of karst sinkholes. Canadian Geographer, 16, 381–4.

Drake, J.J. and D.C. Ford (1973) The dissolved solids  regime and  hydrology  of  two  mountain  rivers,  Proceedings of the 6th International Congress of  Speleology, Olomouc, CSSR, Vol. 4, pp. 53–6.
Drake,  J.J.  and  Harmon,  R.S.  (1973)  Hydrochemical  environ- ments of carbonate terrains. Water Resources   Research, 9(4), 949–957.
Drake, J.J. and Wigley, T.M.L. (1975) The effect of climate on the chemistry  of  carbonate  groundwater.   Water    Resources Research, 11, 958–62.
Dreiss, S.J. (1982) Linear Kernels for karst aquifers. Water Resources Research, 18(4), 865–76.
Dreiss, S.J. (1989) Regional scale transport in a karst aquifer,
1. Component separation of spring flow hydrographs.  Water Resources Research, 25, 117–25.
Drew, D.P. (1983) Accelerated soil erosion in a karst area:  the Burren, western Ireland. Journal of Hydrology, 61, 113–24.
Drew, D.P. and Daly, D. (1993) Groundwater and Karstification in mid-Galway, South Mayo and North Clare, Report  Series 93/3 (Groundwater), Geological Survey of Ireland, 86 pp.
Drew, D. and Ho¨tzl, H. (eds). (1999) Karst Hydrogeology  and Human Activities: Impacts, Consequences and  Implications, Rotterdam, Balkema, 322 pp.
Drew, D.P. and Jones, G.L. (2000) Post-Carboniferous pre- Quaternary karstification in Ireland, Proceedings of the Geol- ogists’ Association, 111, 345–53.
Drew, D.P. and Magee, E. (1994) Environmental implications of land reclamation in the Burren, Co. Clare: a preliminary analysis. Irish Geography, 27(2), 81–96.
Drew, D.P. and Smith, D.I. (1969) Techniques for the tracing of subterranean water. British Geomorphological Research Group, Technical Bulletin, 2, 36 pp.
Drew, D.P., Doerfliger, N. and Formentin, K. (1997) The use of bacteriophages for multi-tracing in a lowland karst aquifer in western Ireland, in Tracer Hydrology 97 (ed. A. Kranjc), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 33–7.
Drewry, D. (1986) Glacial Geologic Processes, Edward Arnold, London.
Dreybrodt,  W.  (1988)  Processes  in  Karst  Systems,   Physics, Chemistry and Geology Series, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 288 pp. Dreybrodt, W. (1990) The role of dissolution  kinetics in the development of karst aquifers in limestone: a model simulation
  of karst evolution. Journal of Geology, 98, 639–55.
Dreybrodt, W. (1996a) Principles of early development of karst conduits under natural and man-made conditions revealed by mathematical analysis of numerical models. Water Resources Research, 32, 2923–35.
Dreybrodt, W. (1996b) Chemical kinetics, speleothem growth and climate, in Climate Change: the Karst Record (ed.  S.-E. Lauritzen), Special Publication 2, Karst Waters   Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 23–5.
Dreybrodt, W. (2003) Viewpoints and comments on feasibility of condensationprocessesinhypogeniccaves.www.Speleogenesis, 1(2), 2 pp.
Dreybrodt, W. (2004) Speleogenesis: computer models, in Ency- clopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn),  Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 677–81.




Dreybrodt, W. and Buhmann, D. (1991) A mass transfer model for dissolution and precipitation of calcite from solutions  in turbulent motion. Chemical Geology, 90, 107–22.
Dreybrodt, W. and Gabrovsˇek, F. (2000a) Influence of fracture roughness on karstification times, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C.  Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National  Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 220–3.
Dreybrodt, W. and Gabrovsek, F. (2000b) Dynamics of the evolution of single karst conduits, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 184–93.
Dreybrodt, W. and Gabrovsˇek, F. (2002) Basic processes  and mechanisms governing the evolution of karst, in Evolution of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation (ed. F. Gabrovsek), Institut za raziskovanje krasa, ZRC SAZU,   Postojna-Ljubljana, pp. 115–54.
Dreybrodt, W., Gabrovsˇek, F. and Siemers, J. (1999) Dynamics of
the  early  evolution  of  karst,  in  Karst  Modelling  (eds  A.N. Palmer, M.V. Palmer and I.D. Sasowsky), Special Publication 5, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 106–19.
Dreybrodt, W., Romanov, D. and Gabrovsek, F. (2002)  Karsti- fication below dam sites: a model of increasing leakage from reservoirs. Environmental Geology, 42, 518–24.
Dreybrodt, W., Gabrovsˇek, F. and Perne, M. (2005a) Condensa- tion   corrosion:  a   theoretical  approach.   Acta   Carsologica, 34(2), 317–48.
Dreybrodt, W., Gabrovsˇek, F. and Romanov, D. (2005b)  Pro- cesses of Speleogenesis: a Modeling Approach, ZRC Publish- ing, Lubljana.
Drogue, C. (1980) Essai d’identification d’un type de structure de magasins carbonate´s fissures. Application a`  l’interpre´ta- tion de certains aspects du foncionnement hydroge´ologique. Memoire hors se´rie Socie´te´  ge´ologique de la France, 11, 101–8.
Drogue, C. (1989) Continuous inflow of seawater and outflow of brackish water in the substratum of the karstic island of Cephalonia, Greece. Journal of Hydrology, 106, 147–53.
Drogue,  C.  (1993)  Absorption  massive  d’eau  de  mer  par  des aquiferes karstiques coˆtiers, in Hydrogeological Processes in Karst Terranes (eds G. Gu¨nay, A.I. Johnson  and W. Back), Publication 207, International Association  of Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 119–28.
Drogue, C., Laty, A.-M. and Paloc, H. (1983) Les eaux souter- raines   des   karsts   mediterraneens.   Exemple   de   la   region pyreneo-provencale (France meridionale). Bulletin   Bureau de Recherches Geologique et Minieres,   Hydrogeologie-
geologie de l’ingenieur, 4, 293–311.
Droppa, A. (1966) The correlation of some horizontal caves with river terraces. Studies in Speleology, 1(4), 186–92.
Drost,  W.   and   Klotz,  D.   (1983)  Aquifer   characteristics,   in Guidebook on Nuclear Techniques in Hydrology,  Technical Reports Series No. 91, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, pp. 223–56.
Drysdale, R.N., Taylor, M.P. and Ihlenfeld, C. (2002)  Factors controlling the chemical evolution of  travertine-depositing

rivers of the Barkly karst, northern Australia.  Hydrological Processes, 16, 2941–62.
Du Chene, H. and Hill, C.A. (eds) (2000) The caves of the Guadalupe Mountains. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 62(2), 52–158.
Dubljansky, V.N.  (2000a) A  giant hydrothermal  cavity in  the Rhodope Mountains, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of  Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N.  Palmer and
W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of  America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 317–8.
Dubljansky, V.N. (2000b) Fascinating Speleology, Ural Ltd, Perm, 527 pp. [In Russian.]
Dubljansky, V.N. and Dubljansky, Y.V. (2000) The role of condensation in karst hydrogeology and speleogenesis, in Speleogenesis;    Evolution    of    Karst    Aquifers    (eds    A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W.  Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America,  Huntsville, AL, pp. 100–112.
Dubljansky, Y.V. and Dubljansky, V.N. (1997) Hydrothermal cave minerals, in Cave Minerals of the World, 2nd edn (eds C.A. Hill and P. Forti), National Speleological Society of  America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 252–5.
Dublyansky,V.N. and Kiknadze,T.Z. (1983) Hydrogeology of Karst of  the  Alpine  Folded  Region  of  the  South  of   the U.S.S.R., Nauka, Moscow, 125 pp. [in Russian.]
Dulinski,  M.  and  Rosanski,  K.  (1990)  Formation  of  13C/12C
isotope ratios in speleothems: a semi-dynamic model. Radio- carbon, 32, 7–16.
Dunham,    R.J.    (1962)    Classification    of    carbonate    rocks. Memoirs, American Association of Petroleum  Geologists, 1, 108–21.
Dunkerley, D.L. (1983) Lithology and microtopography in  the Chillagoe karst, Queensland, Australia. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geo- morphologie, 27(2), 191–204.
Dunne, J.R. (1957) Stream tracing: mid-Appalachian region.
  Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 2, 7 pp.   Dunne, T.R. and Leopold, L.B. (1978) Water in Environmental
Planning, Freeman, San Francisco.
Dura´n Valsero, J.J. and Lo´pez Martinez, J. (1998) Karst  en Andalucia, Instituto Tecnologico GeoMinero  de   Espan˜a, Madrid, 192 pp.
Durozoy, G. and Paloc,  H. (1973) Le regime  des eaux de  la fontaine de Vaucluse, Bureau de recherches gol. minie`res, Min. du Dev. Industriel et Scientifique, 31 pp.
Dykoski, C.A., Edwards, R.L. Cheng H., et al. (2005) A high- resolution, absolute-dated Holocene and deglacial Asian mon- soon record from Dongge Cave, China. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 233, 71–86.
Dz˙ulynski, S. and Sass-Gutkiewicz, M. (1989) Pb-Zn ores,  in
Paleokarst – a Systematic and Regional Review (eds P. Bosa´k,
D.C. Ford, J. Glazek and I. Hora´cˇek), Academia Praha/Else- vier, Prague/Amsterdam, pp. 377–97.
Eagles, P.F.J., McCool, S.F. and Haynes, C.D. (2002) Sustainable Tourism in Protected Areas: Guidelines for  Planning and Management, International Union for the  Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), Gland and Cambridge, xv þ 183 pp.




Eckert,  M.  (1895)  Das  Karrenproblem.  Die  Geschichte  seiner Loesung. Zeitschrift fu¨r Naturwissenschaften    (Leipzig), 68, 321–432.
Edgell, H.S. (1991) Proterozoic salt basins of the Persian Gulf area and their role in hydrocarbon generation.  Precambrian Research, 54, 1–14.
Edgell, H.S. (1993) Karst and Water Resources in the Hyper-Arid Areas of Northeastern Saudi Arabia,  Proceedings, Interna- tional Symposium on Water   Resources  in   Karst,   with Special   Emphasis  on   Arid   and  Semi-Arid  Zones,  Shiraz, pp. 309–26.
Edmond, J.M. and Huh, Y. (2003) Non-steady-state  carbonate recycling and implications for the evolution of  atmospheric PCO2.  Earth   and   Planetary   Science     Letters,    216, 125–39.
Edwards,   R.L.,   Chen,   J.H.   and   Wasserburg,   G.J.   (1986/7) 238U–234U–230Th–232Th systematics and the precise measure- ment of time over the past 500,000 years. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 81, 175–92.
Edwards,  R.L.,  Cheng,  H.,  Murrell,  M.T.  and  Goldstein,  S.J. (1997) Protactinium-231 dating of carbonates by  thermal ionization mass spectrometry: Implications for  Quaternary climate change. Science, 276, 782–6.
Egemeier,    S.J.    (1981)    Cavern    development    by    thermal waters. Bulletin of the National Speleological   Society, 43, 31–51.
Eggins, S.M., Gru¨n, R., McCulloch, M.T., et al. (2005) In situ U-series dating by laser-ablation multi-collector ICPMS: new prospects for Quaternary geochronology. Quaternary Science Reviews, 24, 2523–38.
Ehrlich, H.L. (1981) Geomicrobiology, Marcel Dekker, New York.
Eisenlohr, L., Madry, B. and Dreybrodt, W. (1997a) Changes in the dissolution kinetics of limestone by intrinsic inhibitors adsorbing to the surface, Proceedings of the 12th International Congress of Speleology, Vol. 2, pp. 81–4.
Eisenlohr,  L.,  Bouzelboudjen,  M.,  Kiraly,  L.  and   Rossier,
Y. (1997b) Numerical versus statistical modelling of  natural response of a karst hydrogeological  system.   Journal  of Hydrology, 202(1–4), 244–62.
Eisenlohr,  L.,  Kiraly,  L.,  Bouzelboudjen,  M.  and   Rossier,
Y. (1997c) Numerical simulation as a tool for checking  the interpretation  of   karst  spring  hydrographs.  Journal   of Hydrology, 193(1–4), 306–15.
Ek, C. (1961) Conduits souterrains en relation avec les terrasses fluviales. Annales de la Societe Ge´ologique de Belgique, 84, 313–40.
Ek, C. (1973) Analyses d’Eaux des Calcaires Paleozoiques de la Belgique,  Professional  Paper   13,  Service   Ge´ologique   de Belgique.
Ek, C. and Gewelt, M. (1985) Carbon dioxide in cave  atmo- spheres. New results in Belgium and comparison  with some other countries. Earth Surface Processes and  Landforms, 10, 173–87.
Ekmekc¸i, M. and Gu¨nay, G. (1997) Role of public  awareness in groundwater protection. Environmental  Geology, 30(1/2), 81–7.

El Aref, M.M., Abou Khadrah, A.M. and Lotfy, Z.H. (1987) Karst topography  and karstification  processes in  the  Eocene lime- stone plateau of El Bahariya Oasis, Western  Desert, Egypt. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 31, 45–64.
Elkhatib, H. and Gu¨nay, G. (1993) Analysis of sea water intrusion associated with karstic channels beneath Ovacik Plain, south- ern Turkey, in Hydrogeological Processes in  Karst Terranes (eds G. Gu¨nay, A.I. Johnson and W.  Back), Publication 207, International Association of   Hydrological  Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 129–32.
Ellaway, M., Smith, D.I., Gillieson, D.S. and Greenaway, M.A. (1990) Karst water chemistry – Limestones Ranges, Western Australia. Helictite, 28(2), 25–36.
Embry, A.F. and Klovan, J.E. (1971) A Late Devonian reef tract in northeastern Banks Island, Northwest Territories.  Canadian Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 19, 730–81.
Emmett, A.J. and Telfer, A.L. (1994) Influence of karst hydrology on  water  quality  management  in  southeast  South Australia. Environmental Geology, 23, 149–55.
Enyedy-Goldner, S.R. (1994) The karst geomorphology of Man- itoulin Island, Ontario. McMaster Univ. MSc thesis, 312 pp. Ettazarini, S. and El Mahmouhi, N. (2004) Vulnerability mapping of the Turonian limestone aquifer in the  Phosphates Plateau
(Morocco). Environmental Geology, 46, 113–17.
Eugster, H.P. and Hardie, L.A. (1978) Saline Lakes. in Lakes – Chemistry, Geology and Physics (ed. A. Lerman),  Springer- Verlag, New York, 237–93.
Even, H., Carmi, I., Magaritz, M. and Gerson, R. (1986) Timing the  transport  of  water  through  the  upper  vadose  zone  in  a karstic system above a cave in Isreal. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 11, 181–91.
Ewers, R.O (1973) A model for the development of subsurface drainage routes along bedding planes, Proceedings of the 6th International Congress of Speleology, Olomouc, Vol. III, pp. 79–82.
Ewers, R.O (1978) A model for the development of broadscale networks of groundwater flow insteeply dipping carbonate aquifers.    Transactions    of    the    British    Cave    Research Association, 5, 121–5.
Ewers, R.O. (1982) Cavern development in the dimensions  of length and breadth. McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, 398 pp.
Ewing, A. (1885) Attempt to determine the amount and rate of chemical erosion taking place in the limestone valley of Center Co., Pennsylvania. American Journal of Science, 3(29), 29–31. Eyles, N. (ed.) (1983) Glacial Geology, Pergamon Press, Oxford,
409 pp.
Fabel, D., Henricksen, D. and Finlayson, B.L. (1996) Nickpoint recession in karst terrains: an example from the Buchan karst, southeastern Australia. Earth Surface Processes and Land- forms, 21, 453–66.
Fang, L. (1984) Application of distances between nearest neigh- bours to the study of karst. Carsologica Sinica 3(1), pp. 97–101. Fairbanks, R.G. and Matthews, R.K. (1978) The marine oxygen isotope record in Pleistocene coral, Barbados, West Indies.
Quaternary Research, 10, 181–96.
Fairchild, I.J., Borsato, A., Tooth, A.F., et al. (2000) Controls on trace element (Sr–Mg) compositions of carbonate cave waters:




implications  for  speleothem  climate  records.  Chemical Geology, 166, 255–69.
Fairchild, I.J., Smith, C.L., Baker, A., et al. (2006) Modification and preservation of environmental signals in speleothems. Earth-Science Reviews, 75, 105–53.
Farnsworth, R.K., Barrett, E.C. and Dhanju, M.S. (1984) Appli- cation of Remote Sensing to Hydrology including Ground Water. Technical Documents in Hydrology, UNESCO, Paris, 122 pp.
Farrant, A.R. and Ford, D.C. (2004) Mendip Hills, England, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 503–5.
Farrant, A.R., Smart, P.L., Whitaker, F.F. and Tarling, D.H. (1995) Long-term Quaternary uplift rates inferred from limestone caves in Sarawak, Malaysia. Geology, 23(4), 357–60.
Faulkner, G.L. (1976) Flow analysis of karst systems with well developed underground circulation, Proceedings of the Yugo- slavian Symposium on Karst Hydrology, June 1975, Vol.  1, p. 137–64.
Fay, R.O. and Hart, D.L. (1978) Geology and mineral resources (exclusive of petroleum) of Custer County, Oklahoma. Okla- homa Geological Survey Bulletin, 114, 88 pp.
Felton,  G.K.  (1996)  Agricultural  chemicals  at  the  outlet  of  a shallow carbonate aquifer.  Transactions  of  the   American Society of Agricultural Engineers, 39(3), 873–82.
Feng, X. and Epstein, S. (1995: Carbon isotopes of trees from arid environments and implications for reconstructing atmospheric CO2 concentration. Geochimica et  Cosmochimica Acta, 59, 2599–608.
Ferrarese, F., Sauro, U. and Tonello, C. (1997) The  Montello Plateau: evolution of an alpine neotectonic  morphostructure. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie Supplement-band, 109, 41–62.
Field, M.S. (ed.) (1999) A Lexicon of Cave and Karst Terminol- ogy with Special Reference to Environmental Karst Hydrology. Report EPA/600/R–99/006, US Environmental   Protection Agency, Washington, DC, 195 pp.
Field, M.S. (2004) Forecasting versus predicting solute transport in solution conduits for estimating drinking-water risks. Acta Carsologica, 33(2) 115–49.
Field, M.S., Wilhelm, R.G., Quinlan, J.F. and Aley, T.J. (1995) An assessment of the potential adverse properties of fluorescent tracer dyes used for groundwater tracing.   Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 38, 75–96.
Filippov, A.G. (2000) Speleogenesis of Botovskaya Cave, eastern Siberia, Russia, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds  A.V.  Klimchouk,  D.C.  Ford,  A.  N.   Palmer  and
W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of  America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 282–6.
Filippov, A.G. (2004a) Siberia, Russia, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 645–7.
Filippov, A.G. (2004b) Mineral deposits in karst, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 514–15.
Finlayson, B. and Hamilton-Smith, E. (eds) (2003) Beneath the Surface: a Natural History of Australian Caves, UNSW Press, Sydney, 182 pp.

Fiol, L., Fornos, J.J. and Gines, A. (1996) Effects of biokarstic processes on the development of solutional rillenkarren in limestone rocks. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 21, 447–52.
Fish, J.E. (1977) Karst hydrogeology and geomorphology of the Sierra  de  El  Abra  and  the  Valles-San  Luis  Potosi  Region, Mexico. McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, 469 pp.
Fleitmann, D., Burns, S.J., Neff, U., et al. (2003) Changing moisture sources over the last 330,000 years in Northern Oman from fluid-inclusion evidence in speleothems.  Quaternary Research, 60, 223–232.
Fleitmann, D., Burns, S.J., Neff, U., et al. (2004) Palaeoclimate interpretation of high-resolution oxygen isotope profiles derived from annually laminated speleothems from Southern Oman. Quaternary Science Reviews, 23(7–8), 935–45.
Florea, L.J., Paylor, R.L., Simpson, L. and Gulley, J. (2002) Karst GIS advances in Kentucky. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 64(1), 58–62.
Folk, R.L. (1962) Spectral subdivision of limestone types. Mem- oirs, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, 1, 62–84. Folk, R.L. and Assereto, R. (1976) Comparative fabrics of length-
slow and length-fast calcite and calcitized aragonite in a Holocene speleothem, Carlsbad Caverns, New Mexico. Jour- nal of Sedimentary Petrology, 46(3), 486–96.
Folk,  R.L.,  Roberts,  H.H.  and  Moore,  C.M.  (1973)   Black phytokarst from Hell, Cayman Islands, West Indies. Geologi- cal Society of America Bulletin, 84, 2351–60.
Fontes, J. (1980) Environmental isotopes in groundwater hydrol- ogy, in Handbook of Environmental Isotope Geochemistry (eds P. Fritz and J. Fontes), Elsevier, Amsterdam, Vol. 1, pp. 75–140.
Fontes, J.-Ch. (1983) Dating of groundwater, in Guidebook on   Nuclear   Techniques   in   Hydrology,   Technical   Reports Series No. 91, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, pp. 285–317.
Ford, D.C. (1965a) The Origin of Limestone Caves: a model from the central Mendip Hills, England. Bulletin of the  National Speleogical Society, 27(4), 107–32.
Ford, D.C. (1965b) Stream potholes as indicators of erosion phases in caves. Bulletin of the National Speleogical Society, 27(1), 27–32.
Ford,  D.C.  (1968)  Features  of  cavern  development  in  central Mendip. Transactions of the Cave Research Group  of Great Britain, 10, 11–25.
Ford, D.C. (1971a) Characteristics of limestone solution in the southern Rocky Mountains and Selkirk Mountains, Alberta and British Columbia. Canadian Journal of Earth Science,  8(6), 585–609.
Ford, D.C. (1971b) Geologic structure and a new explanation of limestone cavern genesis. Transactions of the Cave Research Group of Great Britain, 13(2): 81–94.
Ford,  D.C.  (1973)  Development  of  the  canyons  of  the  South Nahanni River, N.W.T. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 10(3), 366–78.
Ford, D.C. (1979) A review of alpine karst in the southern Rocky Mountains of Canada. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 41, 53–65.




Ford, D.C. (1980) Threshold and limit effects in karst geomor- phology, in Thresholds in Geomorphology (eds D. L. Coates  and  J.  D.  Vitek),  George  Allen  &  Unwin,  London, pp. 345–62.
Ford, D.C. (1983a) Effects of glaciations upon karst aquifers in Canada. Journal of Hydrology, 61, 149–58.
Ford, D.C. (1983b) The Winnipeg Aquifer, Journal of Hydrology,
61(1/3), 177–80.
Ford, D.C. (1983c) Alpine karst systems at Crowsnest Pass, Alberta- British Columbia, Journal of Hydrology, 61(1/3), 187–92.
Ford, D.C. (1984) Karst groundwater activity and landform genesis in modern permafrost regions of Canada, in Ground- water as a Geomorphic Agent (ed. R.G. LaFleur), Allen  & Unwin, London, pp. 340–50.
Ford, D.C. (1987) Effects of glaciations and permafrost upon the development of karst in Canada. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 12(5), 507–21.
Ford, D.C. (1991) Features of the genesis of Jewel Cave and Wind Cave, Black Hills, South Dakota. Bulletin of the  National Speleological Society, 51, 100–10.
Ford, D.C. (1996a) Paleokarst phenomena as ‘targets’ for modern karst groundwaters: the contrasts between thermal water and meteoric water behaviour. Carbonate and  Evaporites, 10(2), 138–47.
Ford, D.C. (1996b) Karst in a cold climate, in Geomorphology sans Frontie`res (eds S.B. McCann and D.C. Ford), John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp 153–79.
Ford, D.C. (1997a) Dating and paleo-environmental studies  of speleothems, in Cave Minerals of the World, 2nd edn (eds C.A. Hill and P. Forti), National Speleological Society ofAmerica Press, Huntsville, AL, pp. 271–84.
Ford, D.C. (1997b) Principal features of evaporite karst in Canada. Carbonates and Evaporites, 12(1); 15–23.
Ford, D.C. (1998) Perspectives in karst hydrogeology and cavern genesis. Bulletin d’Hydrogeologie, 16, 9–29.
Ford  D.C.  (2000a)  Speleogenesis  Under  Unconfined   Settings, in  Speleogenesis;  Evolution  of  Karst  Aquifers   (eds  A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 319–24. Ford D.C. (2000b) Deep phreatic caves and groundwater systems of the Sierra del Abra, Mexico, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and  W.  Dreybrodt),   National  Speleological  Society  of
America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 325–31.
Ford, D.C. (2000c) Caves Branch, Belize the  Baradla–Domica System, Hungary and Slovakia, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt),   National  Speleological  Society  of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 391–6.
Ford, D.C. (2002) Depth of conduit flow in unconfined carbonate aquifers: comment. Geology, 30(1), 93.
Ford, D.C. and Ewers, R.O. (1978) The development of limestone cave  systems   in  the  dimensions   of  length   and breadth. Canadian Journal of Earth Science, 15, 1783–98.
Ford, D.C. and Lundberg, J.A. (1987) A review of dissolutional rills in limestone and other soluble rocks. Catena Supplement, 8, 119–40.

Ford, D.C. and Stanton, W.I. (1968) Geomorphology of the south- central Mendip Hills, Proceedings of the Geologists’ Associa- tion, 79(4), 401–27.
Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. (1989) Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology, Unwin Hyman, London, 601 pp.
Ford, D.C., Harmon, R.S., Schwarcz, H.P., et al. (1976) Geohy- drologic and thermometric observations in the vicinity of the Columbia Icefields, Alberta and British Columbia. Journal of Glaciology, 16(74); 219–30.
Ford, D.C., H.P. Schwarcz, J.J. Drake, et al. (1981) Estimates of the age of the existing relief within the Southern Rocky Mountains of Canada. Arctic and Alpine Research, 13(1), 1–10.
Ford, D.C., Lundberg, J., Palmer, A.N., et al. (1993) Uranium- series dating of the draining of an aquifer: the example of Wind Cave, Black Hills, South  Dakota.  Geological   Society  of America Bulletin, 105, 241–250.
Ford, D.C., Salomon, J.-N., and Williams, P.W. (1996) Les ‘Foreˆts de Pierre’ ou ‘Stone forests’ de Lunan (Yunnan, Chine). Karstologia, 28(2), 25–40.
Ford, T.D. (1989) Tufa – the Whole Dam Story. Cave Science,
16(2); 39–49.
Ford, T.D. (1995) Some thoughts on hydrothermal caves. Cave and Karst Science, 22, 107–18.
Ford, T.D. and Pedley, H.M. (1996) A review of tufa and travertine deposits of the world. Earth Science Reviews,  41, 117–75.
Formentin, K., Rossi, P., Aragno, M. and Mu¨ller, I. (1997) Determination of bacteriophage migration and survival poten- tial in karstic groundwaters using batch agitated experiments and mineral colloidal particles, in Tracer Hydrology 97  (ed.
A. Kranjc), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 39–46.
Forno´s, J.-J. and Gine´s, A. (eds.) (1996) Karren  Landforms, Universitat de les Illes Balears Press, Palma, 450 p.
Forno´s, J.J., Gelabert, B., Gine´s, A., et al. (2002) Phreatic overgrowths   on   speleothems:   a   useful   tool   in   structural geology in littoral karst  landscapes.  The   example of eastern Mallorca (Balearic Islands).   Geodinamica  Acta,
15, 113–25.
Forti, P. (1997) Speleothems and earthquakes, in Cave Minerals of the World, 2nd edn (eds C.A. Hill and P. Forti),  National Speleological Society of  America,  Huntsville,   AL,  pp. 284–5.
Forti, P.  and  Grimandi,  P.  (eds)  (1986)  Atti  del   symposio internazionale sul carsismo delle evaporiti.  Bologna, 1985. Le Grotte d’Italia, 4(XII), 420 pp.
Forti, P. and Postpischl, D. (1984) Seismotectonic and  paleo- seismic analyses using karst sediments. Marine Geology, 55, 145–61.
Forti,  P.  and  Postpischl,  D.  (1985)  Relazioni  tra   terremoti e deviazioni degli assi di accrescimento delle  stalagmiti. Le Grotte d’Italia, 4(XII), 287–303.
Fowler,  A.  (2002)  Assessment  of  the  validity  of  using  mean potential evaporation in computations of the  long-term soil water balance. Journal of Hydrology, 256, 248–63.
Franke, M.W. (1965) The theory behind stalagmite shapes.
Studies in Speleology, 1, 89–95.




Frappier, A., Sahagian, D., Gonzalez, L.A. Carpenter, S.J. (2002) El  Nin˜o  events  recorded  by  stalagmite  carbon   isotopes. Science, 298, 565.
Freeze, R.A. and Cherry, J.A. (1979) Groundwater, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 604 pp.
Freiderich, H. and Smart, P.L. (1981) Dye tracer studies of the unsaturated-zone recharge of the Carbonifereous Limestone aquifer of the Mendip Hills, England, Proceedings of the 8th International Congress of Speleology, Vol. 1, pp. 283–6. French, H.M. (1996) The Periglacial Environment, 2nd edn,
Harlow, Addison Wesley Longman; 341 pp.
Friederich, H. and Smart, P.L. (1982) The classification of autogenic percolation waters in karst aquifers: a study in
G.B. Cave, Mendip Hills, England, Proceedings of the  Uni- versity of Bristol Speleological Society, 16(2), 143–59.
Frisia, S., Borsato, A., Fairchild, I.J. and McDermott, F. (2000) Calcite fabrics, growth mechanisms environments of formation in speleothems from the Italian Alps and southwestern Ireland. Journal of Sedimentary Research, 70(5), 1183–96.
Fritz, P. and Fontes, J.C. (eds) (1980) Handbook of Environmental Isotope Geochemistry, Vol. 1, The  Terrestrial Environment, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Fritz, R.D., Wilson, J.L and Yurewicz, D.A. (1993)  Paleokarst Related Hydrocarbon Reservoirs. Core Workshop 18, Society of Ecomic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, New Orleans, 275 pp. Frumkin, A. (1992) The karst system of the Mt Sedom salt diapir.
Hebrew University PhD thesis, Jerusalem, 135 pp.
Frumkin, A. (1994) Hydrology and denudation rates of  halite karst. Journal of Hydrology, 162, 171–89.
Frumkin, A. (1995) Morphology and development of salt caves.
  Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 56, 82–95.
Frumkin, A. (1996) Uplift rate relative to base-levels of a  salt diapir (Dead Sea Basin, Israel) as indicated by cave levels, in Salt Tectonics (eds G.I. Alsop, D.J. Blundell and I. Davison), Special Publication 100, Geological Society Publishing House, Bath, pp. 41–7.
Frumkin,  A.  (2000a)  Dissolution  of  salt,  in   Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V.   Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 169–70.
Frumkin, A. (2000b) Speleogenesis in salt – the mount Sedom area, Israel, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds
A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National  Speleological  Society  of  America,  Huntsville,  AL, pp. 443–51.
Frumkin, A. and Ford, D.C. (1995) Rapid entrenchment of stream profiles in the salt caves of Mount Sedom, Israel. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 20, 139–52.
Frumkin, A., Ford, D.C. and Schwarcz, H.P. (1999) Continental oxygen isotope record of the last 170,000 years in Jerusalem. Quaternary Research, 51, 317–27.
Furley, P.A. (1987) Impact of forest clearance on the soils  of tropical cone karst. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 12, 523–9.
Gabrovsˇek, F. (ed.) (2002) Evolution of Karst: from  Prekarst to Cessation, Institut za raziskovanje krasa, ZRC  SAZU, Postojna-Ljubljana, 448 pp.

Gabrovsek,  F.  and  Dreybrodt,  W.  (2000)  The  role  of  mixing corrosion in calcite-aggressive  H2O-CO2-CaCO3  solutions in the early evolution of karst aquifers. Water   Resources Research, 36, 1179–88.
Galan, C. (ed.) (1995) Exploracion y estudio de cavidades  en rocas siliceas Precambricas del Grupo Roraima,  Guayana Venezolana: una sintesis actual. Karaitza, 4, 1–52.
Galan, C. and Lagarde, J. (1988) Morphologie et evolution des caverns et formes superficielles dans les quartzites du Roraima (Venezuela). Karstologia, 11–12, 49–60.
Galdenzi, S. and Menichetti, M. (1990) Un modello genetico per La Grotta Grande del Vento. Instituto Italiana  Speleologica, 4(Series II), 123–42.
Gale, S.J. (1984) The hydraulics of conduit flow in  carbonate aquifers. Journal of Hydrology, 70, 309–327.
Gams, I. (1962) Measurements of corrosion intensity in Slovenia and their geomorphological significance. Geografski  vestnik, 34, 3–20.
Gams, I. (1972) Effect of runoff on corrosion intensity in  the northwest Dinaric karst. Transactions of the Cave  Research Group of Great Britain, 14(2), 78–83.
Gams,   I.   (1973a)   Slovenska   kraska   terminologija   (Slovene karst terminology), Zveza Geografskih Institucij  Jugoslavije, Ljubljana.
Gams, I.  (1973b)  The  Terminology  of  the  Types  of   Polje. Slovenska Kraska Terminologija, Zveza Geografskih Institucij Jugoslavije, Ljubljana, pp. 60–7.
Gams, I. (1976) Hydrogeographic review of the Dinaric and alpine karst in Slovenia with special regard to corrosion,  in Problems of Karst Hydrology in Yugoslavia, Memoir 13, Serbia Geographical Society, pp. 41–52.
Gams,  I.  (1978)  The  polje:  the  problem  of  its   definition.
Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 22, 170–181.
Gams, I. (1980) Poplave na Planinskem polju (Inundations  in Planina polje). Geografski Zbornik, XX, 4–30.
Gams, I. (1981) Comparative research of limestone solution by means of standard tablets, Proceedings of the 8th International Congress  of  Speleology,  Bowling  Green,  Kentucky,  Vol.  1, pp. 273–5.
Gams,   I.   (1985)   International   comparative   measurement   of surface solution by means of  standard  limestone  tablets. Zbornik Ivana Rakovica, Razprave  4,  Razreda   Sazu  26, pp. 361–86.
Gams, I. (1991a) The origin of the term karst in the time  of transition of karst (kras) from deforestation to  forestation, Proceedings of the International Conference on Environmental Changes in Karst Areas (IGU/UIS), Quaderni del Dipartimento di Geografia 13, Universita di Padova, pp. 1–8.
Gams, I. (1991b) Systems of adapting the littoral Dinaric karst to agrarian land use. Geografski Zbornik, XXXI, 5–106.
Gams, I. (1993) Origin of the term ‘karst’ and the transformation of the Classical karst (kras). Environmental Geology, 21, 110–4.
Gams, I. (1994) Types of contact karst. Geografia Fisica e Dinamica Quateraria, 17, 37–46.
Gams, I. (2003) Kras v Sloveniji v prostoru in cˇasu, Zalozˇba ZRC, ZRC SAZU, Ljubljana, 516 pp.




Gams, I. and Kogovsˇek, J. (1998) The dynamics of  flowstone deposition in the caves Postojnska, Planinska,  Taborska and Sˇkocjanske, Slovenia. Acta Carsologica, 38(1), 299–324.
Gandino, A. and Tonelli, A.M. (1983) Recent remote  sensing technique in freshwater marine springs monitoring: qualitative and quantitative approach, in Methods and Instrumentation for the Investigation of Groundwater Systems, Proceedings Inter- national Symposium, Noordwijkerhout, Netherlands,UNESCO/ IAHS, pp. 301–10.
Gao, Y., Alexander, E.C. and Tipping, R.G. (2005a) Karst database development in Minnesota: design and data assembly. Environmental Geology, 47, 1072–82.
Gao, Y., Alexander, E.C. and Tipping, R.G. (2005b) Karst database development in Minnesota: analysis of sinkhole distribution. Environmental Geology, 47, 1083–98.
Gao, Y., Alexander, E.C. and Tipping, R.G. (2002) The  devel- opment of a karst feature database for southeastern Minnesota. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 64(1), 51–7.
Gargani, J. (2004) Modelling of the erosion in the Rhone valley during the Messinian crisis (France). Quaternary Interna- tional, 131, 13–22.
Garrels, R.M. and Christ, C.L. (1965) Solutions, Minerals  and Equilibria, Harper & Row, New York, 450 pp.
Gary, M.O., Sharp, J.M., Havens, R.S. and Stone, W.C. (2002) Sistema Zacato´n: identifying the connection between volcanic activity and hypogenic karst in a hydrothermal phreatic cave system. Geo2, 29(3–4), 1–14.
Gascoyne,   M.   (1977)   Trace   element   geochemistry   of   spe- leothems, Proceedings of the 7th International  Congress of Speleology, Sheffield, pp. 205–8.
Gascoyne, M. (1992) Palaeoclimate determination from cave calcite deposits. Quaternary Science Reviews, 11, 609–32. Gascoyne, M., Benjamin, G.J., Schwarcz, H.P. and Ford,  D.C.
  (1979) Sea-level lowering during the Illinoian glaciation: evidence from a Bahama ‘blue hole’. Science, 205, 806–808. Gascoyne, M., Ford, D.C. and Schwarcz, H.P. (1983) Rate of cave
and  landform  development  in  the  Yorkshire  Dales   from speleothem age data. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 8, 557–68.
Gaspar, E. (1987) Modern Trends in Tracer Hydrology,  CRC Press, Boca Raton, 145 pp.
Gat, J.R. (1980) The isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen in precipitation, in Handbook of Environmental Isotope Geo- chemistry (eds P. Fritz and J. Fontes), Elsevier,  Amsterdam, Vol. 1, pp. 21–47.
Gat, J.R. and Carmi, I. (1987) Effect of climate changes on the precipitation patterns and isotopic composition of water in a climate transition zone: case of the eastern Mediterranean Sea area,   in   The   Influence   of   Climate   Change   and   Climate Variability on the Hydrologic Regime and Water  Resources, Publication 168, International Association of  Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 513–23.
Gavrilovic, D. (1970) Intermittierende Quellen in  Jugoslawien.
Die Erde, 101(4),B381 284–298.
Genty, D. (1992) Les spe´le´othemes du tunnel de  Godarville (Belgique) – un exemple exceptionnel de  concre´tionnement moderne. Spe´le´ochronos, 4(6), 3–29.

Genty, D. and Deflandre, G. (1998) Drip flow variations under a stalactite of the Pere Noel cave (Belgium). Evidence of seasonal variations and air pressure constraints. Journal of Hydrology, 211(1–4), 208–32.
Genty, D. and Quinif, Y. (1996) Annually laminated sequences in the internal structure of some Belgian stalagmites – importance for paleoclimatology. Journal of Sedimentary Research, 66(1), 275–288.
Genty, D.,  Bastin,  B.  and  Ek,  C.  (1995)  Nouvel   exemple d’alternance delamines annuelles dans une stalagmite (Grotte de Dinant ‘La Merveilleuse,’ Belgique).  Spe´le´ochronos, 6, 9–22.
Genty, D., Baker, A., R., Massault, M., Proctor, C.,Gilmour, M., Pons-Branchu,   E.   Hamelin,   B.   (2001a)   Dead   carbon   in stalagmites: Carbon bedrock paleodissolution vs. ageing  of soil  organic  matter.  Implications  for  13C  variations   in speleothems. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 65(20), 3443–57.
Genty, D., Baker, A. Vokal, B. (2001b) Intra- and  inter-annual growth rate of modern stalagmites. Chemical  Geology, 176, 191–212.
Genty, D., Plagnes, V., Causse, C., et al. (2002) Fossil water in large stalagmite voids as a tool for paleoprecipitation  stable isotope composition reconstitution and paleotemperature cal- culation. Chemical Geology, 184, 83–95.
Genty, D., Blamart, D., Ouahdi, R. et al. (2003) Precise dating of Dansgaard–Oeschger  climate  oscillations  in  western  Europe from stalagmite data. Nature, 421, 833–7.
Gerba, C.P., Wallis, C. and Melnick, J.L. (1975) Fate of waste- water bacteria and viruses in soil. ASCE Journal of the Irrigation and Drainage Division, 101, 157–74.
Gerson, R. (1976) Karst and fluvial denudation of carbonate terrains under sub-humid Mediterranean and arid climates  - principles, evaluation and rates (examples from Israel), in Karst Processes and Relevant Landforms (ed. I. Gams), Proceedings of the Karst Denudation Symposium, International Speleology Union, University of Ljubljana, pp. 71–9.
Geurts,  M.A.  (1976)  Genese  et  stratigraphie  des  travertins  au fond de vallee en Belgique. Acta Geographica  Lovaniensa, 16, 87 pp.
Ghannam, J., Ayoub, G.M. and Acra, A. (1998) A profile of the submarine  springs in  Lebanon as  a  potential water  resource. Water International, 23, 278–86.
Ghazban, F., Schwarcz, H.P. and Ford, D.C. (1992a) Multistage dolomitization in the Society Cliffs Formation, northern Baffin Island, Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian  Journal of Earth Sciences, 29, 1459–73.
Ghazban, F., Schwarcz, H.P and Ford, D.C. (1992b) Correlated strontium, carbon and oxygen isotopes in carbonate gangue at the   Nanisivik   zinc-lead   deposits,   northern   Baffin   Island, Canada. Chemical Geology (Isotope Geoscience  Section),
87, 137–46.
Ghergari, L., Onac, B.P., Vremir, M. and Strusievicz, R. (1998) La cristallogene`se des spe´le´othe`mes, Monts Pa˘durea Crailui, Roumanie. Karstologia, 31, 19–26.
Ghyben, W.B. (1889) Nota in verband met de voorgenomen put boring nabij Amsterdam (Notes on the probable results of the




proposed well drilling near Amsterdam). Koninski.  Instituut Ingenieur Tijdschrift, The Hague, 21 pp.
Gilli,   E.   (2002)   Les   karsts   littoraux   des   Alpes-Maritimes: inventaire  des  emergences  sous-marines  et captage expe´rtal de Cabbe´. Karstologia, 40(2), 1–12.
Gillieson, D. (1986) Cave sedimentation in the New Guinea highlands.   Earth   Surface   Processes   and   Landforms,   11, 533–543.
Gillieson, D. (1993) Environmental change and human impact on karst in arid and semi-arid Australia,  in  Karst   terrains; Environmental  Changes  and  Human  Impacts   (ed.  P.W. Williams). Catena Supplement, 25, 127–46.
Gillieson, D. (1996) Caves: Processes, Development and Man- agement, Blackwell, Oxford, 324 pp.
Gillieson, D. (2004) Nullarbor Plain, Australia, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 544–6.
Gillieson, D. and Household, I. (1999) Rehabilitation of the Lune River Quarry, Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage area, Australia,   in   Karst   Hydrogeology   and   Human   Activities: Impacts, Consequences and Implications (eds D.  Drew and
H. Hotzl), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 201–5.
Gillieson, D. Spate, A. (1992) The Nullarbor karst, in Geology, Climate, Hydrology and Karst Formation: Field Symposium in Australia; Guidebook (ed. D.S. Gillieson), Special Publication 4, Department of Geography and  Oceanography, University College, Australian Defense   Force  Academy,  Canberra, pp. 65–99.
Gillieson, D., Smith, D.I., Greenaway, M. and Ellaway, M. (1991) Flood history of the limestone ranges in the Kimberley region, Western Australia. Applied Geography, 11, 105–23.
Gladysz, K. (1987) Karren on the Quatsino Limestone, Vancou- ver Island. McMaster Univ. BSc thesis.
Glazek, J.,  Rudnicki, J.  and  Szynkiewicz,  A. (1977)  Proglacial caves – a special genetic type of cave in  glaciated areas, Proceedings of the 7th International Congress of Speleology, Sheffield, pp. 215–7.
Glennie, E.A. (1954) Artesian flow and cave formation. Transac- tions of the Cave Research Group of Great Britain, 3, 55–71. Glew, J.R. and Ford, D.C. (1980) A simulation  study of the development   of   rillenkarren.   Earth   Surface    Processes,
5(B404), 25–36.
Glover, R.R. (1974) Cave development in the Gaping Ghyll System, in Limestones and Caves of Northwest England (ed. A.C. Waltham), David and Charles, Newton Abbot, pp. 343–84.
Gine´s,   A.   (2004)   Karren,   in   Encyclopedia   of   Caves   and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New  York, pp. 470 –73.
Goede, A. Green, D.C. and Harmon, R.S. (1982) Isotopic composi- tion of precipitation, cave drips and actively forming speleothems at three Tasmanian cave sites. Helictite, 20, 17–29.
Goede, A., Green, D.C. and Harmon, R.S. (1986) Late Pleisto- cene paleotemperature record from a Tasmanian speleothem. Australian Journal of Earth Science, 33, 333–42.
Goldie, H.S. (1993) The legal protection of limestone pavements in Great Britain. Environmental Geology, 21, 160–66.

Goldie, H.S. (2005) Erratic judgements: re-evaluating solutional erosion rates of limestones using erratic-pedestal sites, includ- ing Norber, Yorkshire. Area, 37(4), 433–42.
Goldie, H.S. and Cox, N.J. (2000) Comparative morphometry of limestone pavements in Switzerland, Britain and Ireland. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, N.F. Supplement-Band,  122, 85–112.
Goldscheider, N., Klute, M., Sturm, S. and Ho¨tzl, H. (2000) The PI method: a GIS based approach to mapping  groundwater vulnerability with special consideration of  karst aquifers. Zeitschrift fu¨r Angewendte Geologie, 463, 157–66.
Golwer, A. (1983) Underground purification capacity, in Ground Water in Water Resources Planning, Publication 42 (UNESCO Koblenz Symposium), International Association  of Hydrolo- gical Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 1063–72.
Goodchild J.G. (1875) Glacial erosion. Geological Magazine,
II, 323–8 and 356–62.
Goodchild, J.G. (1890) Notes on some observed rates of weath- ering of limestone. Geological Magazine, 27, 463–6.
Gorbunova, K.A. (1977) Exogenetic gypsum tectonics, Proceed- ings of the 7th International Congress of Speleology, Sheffield, pp. 222–3.
Gorbunova,  K.A.  (1979)  Morphology  and  Hydrogeology   of Gypsum Karst. All-Union Karst and Speleology  Institute, Perm, 93 pp. [In Russian.]
Gospodaricˇ,  R.  (1976)  The  Quaternary  caves  development
between the Pivka basin and Polje of Planina. Acta Carsolo- gica, 7, 5–135.
Gospodaric, R. and Habic, P. (1976) Underground Water Tracing, Institute Karst Research, Postojna, Ljubljana.
Gospodaricˇ, R. and Habic, P. (1978) Kraski pojavi Cerkniskega polja (Karst phenomena of Cerknisko polje). Acta  Carsolo- gica, 8(1), 6–162.
Goudie,   A.S.   (1983)   Calcrete,   in   Chemical   Sediments   and Geomorphology, (eds A. S. Goudie and K. Pye),  Academic Press, London, pp. 93–131.
Goudie, A.S. (1999) A comparison of the relative resistance of limestones   to   frost   and   salt   weathering.   Permafrost   and Periglacial Processes, 10, 309–16.
Goudie, A.S., Bull, P.A. and Magee, A.W. (1989)  Lithological control  of rillenkarren development in  the   Napier Range, Western Australia. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 75, 95–114. Goudie, A.S., Viles, H., Allison, R., Day, M., et al. (1990) The
geomorphology   of   the   Napier   Range,   Western   Australia. Transactions of the Institute of British  Geographers, New Series, 15(3), 308–22.
Grabau,    A.W.    (1913)    Principles    of    Stratigraphy.    Seiler, New York.
Gracia, F.J., Gutie´rrez, F. and Gutie´rrez, M. (2003) The  Jiloca karst polje-tectonic graben (Iberian Range, NE  Spain). Geo- morphology, 52, 215–31.
Gradzinski, M. and Kicinska, D. (2002) Morphology of Czarna Cave and its significance for the geomorphic evolution of the Koscielska Valley (Western Tatra Mountains). Annales Socie- tatis Geologorum Poloniae, 72, 255–62.
Gradzin´ski, M., Rospondek, M. and Szulc, J. (1997) Paleoenvir- onmental controls and microfacies variability of the flowstone




cover from the Zvoniva´ Cave in the Slovakian Karst. Slovak Geological Magazine, 3(4), 299–313.
Graf, C.G. (1999) Hydrogeology of Kartchner Caverns State Park, Arizona. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 61(2), 59–67.
Granger, D.E. and Muzikar, P.F. (2001) Dating sediment burial with in situ produced cosmogenic nuclides: theory, techniques, limitations. Earth and Planetary Science  Letters, 188(1–2), 269–281.
Granger, D. E. and Smith, A.L. (2000) Dating buried sediments using radioactive decay and muogenic production of 26Al and 10Be. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research, Series B, 172, 822–6.
Granger,  D.E.,  Kirchner,  J.  and  Finkel,  R.  (1997)  Quaternary downcutting rate of the New River, Virginia, measured from differential decay of cosmogenic 26Al and  10Be in cave- deposited alluvium. Geology, 25(2), 107–10.
Granger, D.E., Fabel, D. and Palmer, A.N. (2001) Plio- Pleistocene incision of the Green River, KY, from radioactive decay  of   cosmogenic   26Al   and   10Be   in   Mammoth  Cave sediments. Bulletin, Geological Society of America,  113(7), 825–36.
Grasby,  S.E.,  Chen,  Z.  and  Betcher,  R.  (2002)  Impact   of Pleistocene glaciation on the hydrodynamics of the  Western Canada Sedimentary Basin. Annual Meeting of the Geological Association of Canada, abstract.
Grigg, R.W., Grossman, E.E., Earle, S.A., et al. (2002) Drowned reefs and antecedent karst topography, Au’au Channel,  S.E. Hawaiian Islands. Coral Reefs, 21(1), 73–82.
Grimes, K.G. (1994) The south-east karst province of South Australia. Environmental Geology, 23, 134–48.
Grimes, K.G. (2002) Syngenetic and eogenetic karst: an  Aus- tralian viewpoint, in Evolution of Karst from  Prekarst to Cessation   (ed.   F.   Gabrovsˇek),   ZRC    SAZU,   Postojna, pp. 407–14.
Grimes, K.G., Mott, K. and White, S. (1999) The Gambier Karst Province, Proceedings of the 13th Australian Conference  on Cave and Karst Management, pp. 1–7.
Grindley, G.W. (1971) Sheet S8 Takaka. Geological Map of New Zealand, 1:63360, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Wellington.
Groves, C. and Meiman, J. (2005) Weathering, geomorphic work, and karst landscape evolution in the Cave City  groundwater basin, Mammoth Cave, Kentucky.   Geomorphology,  67, pp. 115–126.
Gru¨n, R. Moriarty, K. and Wells, R. (2001) Electron spin resonance dating of the fossil deposits in the Naracoorte Caves,   South   Australia.   Journal   of   Quaternary   Science, 16(1), 49–59.
Grund, A. (1903) Die Karsthydrographie: Studien aus Westbos- nien. Geographischen Abhandlungen, Band VII, Heft 3,  von A. Penck, 7, pp. 103–200.
Grund, A. (1914) Der geographische Zyklus im Karst. Gesellschaft   fu¨r   Erdkunde,   52,   621–40.   [Translated   into English in Sweeting (1981).]
Gu¨nay, G. (2002) Gypsum karst, Sivas, Turkey.  Environmental Geology, 42, 387–98.

Gu¨nay, G. and S¸ims¸ek, S¸. (2000) Karst hydrogeology in hydro- thermal systems, in Present State and Future Trends of Karst Studies (eds G. Gu¨nay, K.S. Johnson, D. Ford and  A.I. Johnson), IHP-V, Technical Documents in Hydrology, 49(II), UNESCO, Paris, pp. 501–13.
Gunn, J. (1978) Karst hydrology and solution in the  Waitomo District, New Zealand. Auckland Univ PhD thesis.
Gunn, J. (1981a) Limestone solution rates and processes in the Waitomo district, New Zealand. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 6, 427–45.
Gunn, J. (1981b) Hydrological processes in karst depressions.
Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, NF, 25(3), 313–31.
Gunn, J. (1982) Magnitude and frequency properties of dissolved solids transport. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 26(4), 505–11.
Gunn, J. (1983) Point recharge of limestone aquifers – a model from New Zealand karst. Journal of Hydrology, 61, 19–29.
Gunn, J. (1993) The geomorphological impacts of limestone quarrying, in Karst Terrains: Environmental Changes and Human Impact (ed. P.W. Williams). Catena Supplement,  25, 187–97.
Gunn, J. (ed.) (2004a) Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science, Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, 902 pp.
Gunn, J. (2004b) Limestone as a mineral resource, in Encyclo- pedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 489–90.
Gunn, J. (2004c) Radon in caves, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst  Science  (ed.  J.  Gunn),  Fitzroy  Dearborn,  New  York, pp. 617–8.
Gunn, J. and Bailey, D. (1993) Limestone quarrying and quarry reclamation in Britain. Environmental Geology, 21(3), 167–72. Gunn, J. and Lowe, D.J. (2000) Speleogenesis on  tectonically
active carbonate islands, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A. N. Palmer and
W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of  America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 238–43.
Gunn, J., Bailey, D. and Handley, J. (1997) The  Reclamation of Limestone Quarries using Landform    Replication. Department  of  the  Environment,  Transport  and the Regions, London.
Gutierrez, F. (1996) Gypsum karstification-induced subsidence: effects on alluvial systems and derived geohazards (Calatayud  Graben,  Iberian  Range,  Spain).  Geomorphology, 16, 277–93.
Gutierrez, F. and Cooper, A.H. (2002) Evaporite dissolution subsidence in the historical city of Calatayud, Spain: Damage Appraisal and Prevention. Natural Hazards, 25, 259–88.
Gutie˙rrez, M. and Gutie˙rrez, F. (1998) Geomorphology of  the Tertiary gypsum formations in the Ebro Depression  (Spain). Geoderma, 87, 1–29.
Hagen,  G.  (1839)  Uber  die  Bewegung  des  Wassers  in  engen cylindrischen Rohren. Poggendorff Annalen,    46(B444), 423–42.
Haid, A. (1996) Yonne. Spelunca, 62, 14.
Halihan, T. and Wicks, C.M. (1998) Modeling of storm responses in conduit flow aquifers with reservoirs. Journal of Hydrology, 208, 82–91.




Halihan, T., Wicks, C.M. and Engeln, J.F. (1998) Physical response of a karst drainage basin to flood pulses:  example of the Devil’s Icebox cave system (Missouri, USA). Journal of Hydrology, 204, 24–36.
Halihan, T., Sharp, J.M. and Mace, R.E. (1999) Interpreting flow using permeability at multiple scales, in Karst Modeling (eds
A.N. Palmer, M.V. Palmer and I.D. Sasowsky) (1999), Special Publication 5, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 82–96.
Hallet, B. (1976) Deposits formed by subglacial precipitation of CaCO3. Bulletin, Geological Society of America, 87, 1003–15. Hallet, B. (1979) Subglacial regelation water film. Journal  of
Glaciology, 23(89), 321–34.
Halliday, W.R. and Anderson, C.H. (1970) Glacier caves: a new field of speleology. Studies in Speleology, 220, 53–9.
Hamilton, J. and Ford, D.C. (2002) Karst geomorphology  and hydrogeology of the Bear Rock formation – a  remarkable dolostone and gypsum megabreccia in the continuous perma- frost zone of Northwest Territories, Canada. Carbonates and
Evaporites, 17(2), 54–56.
Hamilton-Smith, E. (2004) The World Heritage Context. IUCN International Workshop on China World Heritage Biodiversity Programme, Kunming, China, 12 pp.
Han, B.P. (1998) Study on Microkarstification Process,  Geolo- gical Publishing House, Beijing, 156 pp. [In Chinese; summary translation courtesy of the author.]
Hanna, R.B. and Rajaram, H. (1998) Influence of aperture variability on dissolutional growth of fissures in karst forma- tions. Water Resources Research, 34(1), 2843–53.
Hanshaw, B.B. and Back, W. (1979) Major geochemical  pro- cesses in the evolution of carbonate–aquifer systems. Journal of Hydrology, 43, 287–312.
Harbaugh, A.W. and McDonald, M.G. (1996) User’s documenta- tion for MODFLOW-96, an update to the US Geological Survey modular finite-difference ground-water flow model. US Geological Survey, Open-File Report, 96-485, 56.
Harbor, J. (ed.) (1999) Cosmogenic isotopes in geomorphology.
Geomorphology (Special Issue), 27, 1–172.
Harding, K. (1987) Deforestation of limestone slopes on northern Vancouver Island. McMaster Univ. MSc thesis, 188 pp.
Harding, K. and Ford, D.C. (1993) Impacts of primary deforesta- tion on limestone slopes in northern Vancouver Island, British Columbia. Environmental Geology, 21, 137–43.
Harmon, R.S., Ford, D.C. and Schwarcz, H.P. (1977) Interglacial chronology of the Rocky and Mackenzie Mountains based on 230Th/234U dating of calcite speleothems. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 14, 2543–52.
Harmon, R.S.,  Thompson,  P.,  Schwarcz,  H.P. and  Ford,  D.C. (1978) Late Pleistocene paleoclimates of North  America as inferred from stable isotope studies of speleothems. Quatern- ary Research, 9, 54–70.
Harmon, R.S., Schwarcz, H.P. Gascoyne, M. Hess, J.W. and Ford,
D.C. (2004) Paleoclimate information from speleothems: the present as a guide to the past, in Studies of Cave Sediments: Physical and Chemical Records of Paleoclimate (eds I.D. Sasowsky and J. Mylroie), Kluwer Academic, New York, pp. 199–226.

Harmon, R.S., Atkinson, T.C. and Atkinson, J.J. (1983) The mineralogy of Castleguard Cave, Columbia Icefields, Alberta, Canada. Arctic and Alpine Research, 15(4), 503–16.
Haryono, E. and Day, M. (2004) Landform differentiation within the Gunung Kidul kegelkarst, Java, Indonesia. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 66(2), 62–9.
Hauns M., Jeannin, P.Y. and Atteia, O. (2001) Dispersion, retardation and scale effect in tracer breakthrough curves in karst conduits. Journal of Hydrology, 241(3–4), 177–193.
Ha¨uselmann, P. and Granger, D.E. (2004) Dating caves  with cosmogenic nuclides: methods, possibilities and the  Sieben- hengste example, in Dating of Cave Sediments (eds A. Mihevc and N. Zupan Hajna), SAZU, Postojna, p. 50.
Ha¨uselmann, P., Jeannin, P-Y. and Monbaron, M. (2003) Role of epiphreatic flow and soutirages in conduit  morphogenesis: the Ba¨renschacht example (BE,  Switzerland). Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 47(2), 171–90.
Hays, P.D. and Grossman, E.L. (1991) Oxygen isotopes in meteoric calcite cement as indicators of continental paleocli- mate. Geology, 19, 441–4.
He, K., Liu, C. and Wang, S. (2001) Karst collapse mechanism and criterion for its stability. Acta Geologica Sinica,  75(3), 330–5.
Heaton, T. (1986) Caves: a tremendous range of energy environ- ments on Earth. National Speleological Society News, August, 301–4.
Heim, A. (1877) Uber die Karrenfelder. Jahrbuch des Schweizer Alpenclub, XIII, 421–33.
Hellden, U. (1973) Limestone solution intensity in a karst area in Lapland, northern Sweden. Geografiska Annaler, 54A(3/4), 185–96.
Hendy, C.H. (1971) The isotopic geochemistry of speleothems –
I. The calculation of the effects of different modes of forma- tion on the isotopic composition of speleothems and their applicability  as   palaeoclimatic   indicators.   Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 35, 801–24.
Hennig, G.J. and Gru¨n, R. (1983) ESR dating in  Quaternary geology. Quaternary Science Reviews, 2, 157–238.
Herak, M. (1972) Karst of Yugoslavia, in Karst: Important Karst Regions of the Northern Hemisphere (eds M. Herak and V.T. Stringfield), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 25–83.
Herak, M. and Stringfield, V.T. (1972) Historical review of hydrogeologic  concepts,  in  Karst:  Important  Karst  Regions of the Northern Hemisphere (eds M. Herak and  V.T. String- field), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 19–24.
Hercman, H. (2000) Reconstruction of paleoclimatic changes in central Europe between 10 and 200 thousand years BP, based on  analysis   of  growth  frequency   of  speleothems.   Studia Quaternaria, 17, 35–70.
Herman,  J.S.  and  White,  W.B.  (1985)  Dissolution  kinetics  of dolomite: effects of lithology and fluid flow velocity. Geochi- mica et Cosmochimica Acta, 49, 2017–26.
Herold, T., Jordan, P. and Zwahlen, F. (2000) The influence of tectonic structures on karst flow patterns in karstified  lime- stones and aquitards in the Jura Mountains,  Switzerland. Eclogae Geologicae Helvetiae, 93(3), 349–62.




Hertbert, T.D., Schuffert, J.D., Andreasen, D., et al. (2001) Collapse of the California Current during glacial maxima linked to climate change on land. Science, 293, 71–6.
Herzberg, A. (1901) Die Wasserversorgung einiger Nordsee Bader.  Journal  fu¨r  Gasbeleuchtung  und  Verwandte  Beleu- chtungsarten sowie fu¨r Wasserversorgung, 44,    815–9, 842–4.
Hess, J.W. and Slattery, L.D. (1999) Extractive industries impact, in Karst Hydrogeology and Human Activities: Impacts, Con- sequences and Implications (eds D. Drew  and H. Hotzl), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 187–201.
Hewlett, J.D. and Hibbert, A.R. (1967) Factors affecting the response of small watersheds to precipitation in humid areas, in Forest Hydrology (eds W.E. Sopper and H.W. Lull), Pergamon, Oxford, pp. 275–90.
High, C. and Hanna, G.K. (1970) A method for the direct measurement of erosion of rock surfaces. Brititish  Geomor- phological Research Group Technical Bulletin, 5, 24 pp.
Hill, C.A. (ed.) (1981) Saltpeter: a symposium. Bulletin of  the National Speleological Society, 43(4), 83–131.
Hill, C.A. (1982) Origin of black deposits in caves. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 44, pp. 15–19.
Hill, C.A. (1987) Geology of Carlsbad Caverns and other caves of the Guadalupe Mountains. New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Minerals Bulletin, 117, 150 pp.
Hill, C.A. (1995) Sulfur redox reactions: hydrocarbons,  native sulfur, Mississippi Valley-type deposits sulfuric acid karst in the Delaware Basin, New Mexico and Texas.  Environmental Geology, 25, 16–23.
Hill, C.A. (2003) Intrastratal Karst at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Site, Southeastern New Mexico. Oklahoma Geological Survey Circular, 109, 197–209.
Hill,  C.A.  and  Forti,  P.  (1997)  Cave  Minerals  of  the  World, 2nd edn, National Speleological Society of    America, Huntsville, AL, 463 pp.
Hillaire-Marcel, C., Soucy, J.M. and Cailleux, A. (1979) Analyse isotopique de concretions sous-glaciaires de l’inlandsis  laur- entidien et teneur en oxygene 18 de la glace. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 16, 1494–8.
Hillel, D. (1982) Introduction to Soil Physics, Academic Press, New York.
Hillner, P.E., Gratz, A.J., Manne, S. and Hansma, P.K.  (1992) Atomic-scale imaging of calcite growth and dissolution in real time. Geology, 20, 359–62.
Hiscock,  K.M.,  Rivett,  M.O.  and  Davison,  R.M.  (eds)  (2002) Sustainable Groundwater Development, Special  Publication 193, Geological Society Publishing House, Bath, 352 pp.
Hobbs, S.L. and Gunn, J. (1998) The hydrogeological impacts of quarrying karstified limestone, options for prediction and mitigation. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 31, 47–157.
Hobbs, S.L. and Smart, P.L. (1986) Characterization of carbonate aquifers: a conceptual base, Proceedings of the  9th Interna- tional Congress of Speleology, Barcelona, Vol. 1, pp. 43–6.
Hoblea, F., Jaillet, S. and Maire, R. (2001) E´ rosion et ruisselle-
m,ent sur karst nu en contexte subpolaire oce´anique: les ˆıles de Patagonie (Magallanes, Chili). Karstologia, 38(2); 13–18.

Holmgren, K., Lee-Thorp, J. A., Cooper, G. R. J et al.  (2003) Persistent millennial-scale climatic variability over  the past 25,000 years in Southern Africa. Quaternary Science Reviews, 22, 2311–26.
Homann, W. (1969) Experimentelle Ergebnisse zum Wachstum rezenter Hohlenperlen, Proceedings  of the  5th  International Congress of Speleology, Stuttgart, Vol. 2, pp. 5/1–5/19.
Hopley, D. (1982) The Geomorphology of the Great Barrier Reef, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Hose, L. (2004) Cueva de Villa Luz, Mexico, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 758–9.
Hose, L.D., Palmer, A.N., Palmer, M.V., et al. (2000)  Micro- biology and geochemistry in a  hydrogen-sulphide-rich karst environment. Chemical Geology, 169, 399–423.
Hotzl,  H.  and  Werner,  A.  (eds)  (1992)  Tracer   Hydrology. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Howard, A.D. (1963) The development of karst features. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 25, 45–65.
Howard, A.D., Kochel, R.C. and Holt, H.E. (1988) Sapping Features of the Colorado Plateau: a Comparative  Planetary Geology Field Guide, NASA, Washington, DC, 108 pp.
Hsu¨, K.J., Ryan, W.B.F. and Cita, M.B. (1973) Late  Miocene desiccation of the Mediterranean. Nature, 242, 240–4.
Huang, Y., Fairchild, I.J., Borsato, A., et al. (2001)  Seasonal variations in Sr, Mg and P in modern speleothems (Grotta di Ernesto, Italy). Chemical Geology, 175, 429–48.
Hubbard, B. and Hubbard, A. (1998) Bedrock surface roughness and the distribution of subglacially precipitated carbonate deposits: implications for formation at Glacier de Tsanfleuron, Switzerland. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 23,
261–70.
Hubbert,  M.K.  (1940)  The  theory  of  groundwater  motion.
Journal of Geology, 48, 785–944.
Huizing, T., Jarnot, M., Neumeier, G., et al. (eds) (2003) Calcite: the  Mineral  with  the  Most  Forms,  Christian  Weise Verlag, Munich, 114 pp.
Hunt, R.E. (1984) Geotechnical Engineering Investigation Man- ual, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Huntoon, P.W. (1991) Chairman Mao’s Great Leap Forward and the deforestation ecological disaster in the South China Karst Belt, Proceedings, Third Conference on Hydrogeology, Ecol- ogy,   Monitoring  Management  of   Ground   Water   in   Karst Terranes, Nashville, TN, pp. 149–60.
Huppert, G., Burri, E., Forti, P. and Cigna, A. (1993) Effects of tourist  development  on  caves  and  karst,  in  Karst  Terrains: Environmental  Changes  and  Human  Impact   (ed.  P.W. Williams). Catena Supplement, 25, 251–68.
Hutton, J. (1795) Theory of the Earth, with Proofs and Illustra- tions, Vol. II, Edinburgh.
Hyatt, J.A. and Jacobs, P.M. (1996) Distribution and morphology of sinkholes triggered by flooding following  Tropical Storm Alberto at Albany, Georgia, USA.   Geomorphology,  17, 305–16.
Hyatt, J.A., Wilson, R., Givens, J.S. and Jacobs, P.M.  (2001) Topographic, geologic hydrogeologic controls on dimensions and locations of sinkholes in thick covered  karst, Lowndes




County, Georgia, in Geotechnical and Environmental Applica- tions of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds B.F. Beck, and J.G. Herring), Balkema, Lisse, pp. 37–45.
IAEA (1983) Guidebook on Nuclear Techniques in  Hydrology, Technical Reports Series No. 91, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna.
IAEA (1984) Isotope Hydrology 1983, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna.
Indermu¨hle, A., Stocker, T. F., Joos, F., et al. (1999) Holocene
carbon-cycle dynamics based on CO2 trapped in ice at Taylor Dome, Antarctica. Nature, 398, 121–6.
Ingraham, N.L. (1998). Isotopic variations in precipitation,  in
Isotope Tracers in Catchment Hydrology (eds C. Kendall, and
J.J. McDonnell), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 87–118.
Ireland, P. (1979) Geomorphological variations of ‘case  hard- ening’ in Puerto Rico. Zeitschrift fu¨r   Geomorphologie, Supplement-Band, 32, 9–20.
Issar, A. (1983) Emerging groundwater, a triggering factor in the formation of the makhteshim (erosion cirques) in the  Negev and Sinai. Israel Journal of Earth Sciences, 32, 53–61.
Iurkiewicz, A. and Mangin, A. (1993) Utilisation de  l’analyse systemique  dans  l’e´tude  des  aquife`res  karstiques des Monts Vaˆlcan (Roumanie). Theoretical and  Applied Karstology, 7, 9–96.
Ivanovich,  M.  and  Harmon,  R.S.  (1992)  Uranium-series  Dis- equilibrium: Applications to Earth, Marine  Environmental Sciences, Oxford Geoscience Publications, 910 pp.
Ivanovich, M. and Ireland, P. (1984) Measurements of uranium series disequilibrium in the case-hardened Aymamon lime- stone in Puerto Rico. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 28, 305–19.
Jackson, M.P.A., Roberts, D.G. and Snelson, S. (eds) (1995) Salt Tectonics: a Global Perspective, Memoir 65, American Asso- ciation of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK.
Jacobson, G. and Hill, P.J. (1980) Hydrogeology of a raised coral atoll, Niue Island, South Pacific Ocean. Journal of Australian Geology and Geophyics, 5(4), 271–8.
Jacobson, G., Hill, P.L. and Ghassemi, F. (1997) Geology  and hydrogeology of Nauru Island, in Geology and Hydrogeology of Carbonate Islands (eds H.L. Vacher and T. Quinn), Devel- opments in Sedimentology 54, Elsevier, pp. 707–42.
Jahn, B. and Cuvellier, H. (1994) Pb–Pb and U–Pb geochronol- ogy of carbonate rocks: an assessment. Chemical Geology (Isotope Geoscience Section), 115, 125–51.
Jakucs,  L.  (1959)  Neue  Methoden  der  Hohlenforschung   in Ungarn und ihre Ergebnisse. Hohle, 10(4), 88–98.
Jakucs, L. (1977) Morphogenetics of Karst Regions: Variants of Karst Evolution, Akademiai Kiado, Budapest, 284 pp.
James, A.N. (1992) Soluble Materials in Civil Engineering, Ellis Horwood, Chichester, 434 pp.
James, A.N. and Lupton, A.R.R. (1978) Gypsum and anhydrite in foundations of hydraulic structures. Geotechnique, 28, 249–72.
James, J.M.  (1992)  Corrosion  par melange  des  eaux  dans  les grottes de  la  Plaine  de  Nullarbor,  Australie,  in   Karst et  e´volutions  climatiques  (eds  J.-N.  Salomon  and  R. Maire), Presses Universitaires, Bordeaux, pp. 333–48.

James, J.M. (1993) Burial and infilling of a karst in Papua New Guinea  by  road  erosion  sediments.  Environmental  Geology, 21, 144–51.
James, J.M. (1994) Microorganisms in Australian caves and their influence on speleogenesis, in Breakthroughs in Karst  Geo- microbiology and Redox Geochemistry (eds I.D. Sasowsky and
M.V. Palmer), Special Publication 1, Karst Waters  Institute, pp. 31–4.
James, J.M. (1997) Minor, trace and ultra-trace constituents of speleothems, in Cave Minerals of the World, 2nd edn (eds C.A. Hill and P. Forti), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 236–37.
James, N.P. and Choquette, P.W. (1984) Diagenesis (9). Limestones  –  the  meteoric  diagenetic  environment.   Geo- science Canada, 11, 161–94.
James, N.P. and Choquette, P.W. (1988) Paleokarst,  Springer- Verlag, New York, 416 pp.
Jarvis, R.S. (1981) Specific geomorphometry, in Geomorpholo- gical Techniques (ed. A. Goudie), Allen & Unwin,  London, pp. 42–6.
Jeanin, P-Y, Bitterli, T. and Ha¨uselmann, P. (2000) Genesis of a large cave system: case study of the North of Lake Thun System (Canton Bern, Switzerland), in Speleogenesis; Evolu- tion of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 338–47.
Jeannin, P.-Y. and Sauter, M. (1998) Analysis of karst  hydro- dynamic behaviour using global approaches: a review. Bulletin d’Hydroge´ologie (Neuchaˆtel), 16, 31–48.
Jeannin, P-Y., Liedl, R. and Sauter, M. (1997 Some  concepts about heat transfer in karstic systems, Proceedings  of the 12th International Congress of Speleology, Vol. 2, pp. 195–9. Jennings, J.E. (1966) Building on dolomites in the  Transvaal. Transactions of the South African Institute of Civil Engineers,
8(2), 41–62.
Jennings, J.N. (1968) Syngenetic karst in Australia, in Contribu- tions to the Study of Karst (eds P.W. Williams and J.N. Jennings), Publication G5, Research School for Pacific Studies Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 41–110.
Jennings, J.N. (1972a) The Blue Waterholes, Cooleman Plain,
N.S.W. the problem of karst denudation rate  determination. Transactions  of  the  Cave  Research  Group  of Great Britain, 14, 109–17.
Jennings, J.N. (1972b) Observations at the Blue Waterholes, March 1965 to April 1969 limestone solution on  Cooleman Plain, N.S.W. Helictite, 10(1–2), 1–46.
Jennings, J.N. (1975) Doline morphometry as a morphogenetic tool: New Zealand examples. New Zealand Geographer,  31, 6–28.
Jennings, J.N. (1976) A test of the importance of cliff-foot caves in tower karst development. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geomorphologie, Supplement-Band, 26, 92–7.
Jennings, J.N. (1982) Karst of Northeastern Queensland Recon- sidered. Tower Karst Occasional Paper No. 4, Chillagoe Caving Club, pp. 13–52.
Jennings,  J.N.  (1983a)  The  disregarded  karst  of  the  arid  and semiarid domain. Karstologia, 1, 61–73.




Jennings, J.N. (1983b) Sandstone pseudokarst or karst? in Aspects of Australian Sandstone Landscapes (eds R.W.  Young, and
G.C. Nanson), Special Publication 1, Australian and New Zealand Geomorphology Group, pp. 21–30.
Jennings,  J.N.  (1985)  Karst  Geomorphology,  Basil  Blackwell, Oxford, 293 pp.
Jennings,  J.N.  and  Bik,  M.J.  (1962)  Karst  morphology   in Australian New Guinea. Nature, 194, 1036–8.
Jennings, J.N. and Sweeting, M.M. (1963) The limestone ranges of the Fitzroy Basin, Western Australia. Bonner Geogra- phische Abhandlungen, 32, 60 pp.
Jeschke, A.A., Vosbeck, K. and Dreybrodt, W. (2001)  Surface controlled dissolution rates of gypsum in aqueous  solutions exhibit nonlinear dissolution kinetics. Geochimica et Cosmo- chimica Acta, 65, 13–20.
Johnson, K.S. (1989) Development of the Wink Sink in  west Texas, USA, due to salt dissolution and collapse.  Environ- mental Geology Water Science, 14, 81–92.
Johnson, K, S. (1996) Gypsum karst in the United States. International Journal of Speleology, 25(3–4), pp. 183–193. Johnson,  K.S.  and  Neal,  J.T.  (2003)  Evaporite  Karst   and
Engineering/Environmental Problems in the United States, Oklahoma Geological Survey Circular 109, US Geological Survey  and  National  Cave  and  Karst  Research   Institute, National Park Service, 353 pp.
Jones, B. (2001) Microbial activity in caves – a geological perspective. Geomicrobiology Journal, 18, 345–57.
Jones, I.C. and Banner, J.L. (2000) Estimating recharge in a tropical karst aquifer. Water Resources Research, 36(5), 1289–99.
Jones, W.K., Culver, D.C. and Herman, J.S. (eds) (2004) Epikarst, Special Publication 9, Karst Waters Institute,  Charles Town, WV, 160 pp.
Julian, M., Martin, J. and Nicod, J. (1978) Les karsts Mediter- raneens. Mediterranee, 1–2, 115–31.
Kac¸arog˘lu, F. (1999) Review of groundwater pollution and protection in karst areas. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 113, 337–56.
Kaddu-Mulindwa, D., Filip, Z. and Milde, G. (1983)  Survival of some pathogenic and potential pathogenic  bacteria in ground- water, in Ground Water in Water Resources Planning, Publication 42 (UNESCO Koblenz Symposium), International Association of Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 1137–45.
Karanjac, J. and Gunay, G. (1980) Dumanli Spring, Turkey – the largest karstic spring in the world? Journal of Hydrology, 45, 219–31.
Karolyi,  M.S.  and  Ford,  D.C.  (1983)  The  Goose  Arm  Karst, Newfoundland. Journal of. Hydrology, 61(1/3), 181–6.
Karp, D. (2002) Land Degradation Associated with Sinkhole Development   in   the   Katherine   Region,   Technical   Report No.11/2002,  Department  of  Infrastructure,   Planning  and Development, Northern Territories Government, 80 pp.
Ka¨ss, W. (1967) Erfahrungen mit Uranin bei  Farbversuchen.
Steirische Beitrage zur Hydrogeologie, 18/19, 123–34.
Ka¨ss, W. (1998) Tracing technique in geohydrology. Rotterdam, Balkema, 581p.
Kastning, E.H. (1983) Relict caves as evidence of landscape and aquifer evolution in a deeply dissected carbonate terrain: south-

west Edwards Plateau, Texas, U.S.A. Journal of Hydrology,
61, 89–112.
Katz, B.G. (2004) Sources of nitrate contamination and age of water in large karstic springs of Florida. Environmental Geo- logy, 46, 689–706.
Katz, B.G., Bohlke, J.K. and Hornsby, H.D. (2001) Timescales for nitrate contamination of spring waters, northern  Florida, USA. Chemical Geology, 179, 167–86.
Katzer, E. (1909) Karst und Karsthydrograph. Zur Kunde  der Balkan halbinsel (Sarajevo), 8.
Kaufman, G. (2002) Ghar Alisadr, Hamadan, Iran: first  results on dating calcite shelfstones. Cave and Karst Science, 29(3), 129–33.
Kaufmann, G. (2003) Stalagmite growth and paleoclimate:  the numerical perspective. Earth and Planetary Letters, 214(1–2), 251–66.
Kaufmann, G. and Braun, J. (2000) Karst aquifer evolution in fractured, porous rocks. Water Resources Research, 36, 1381–91.
Kaufmann, O. and Quinif, Y. (1999) Cover-collapse sinkholes in the ‘Tournaisis’ area, southern Belgium. Engineering Geology, 52, 15–22.
Kemmerly,  P.R.  (1982)  Spatial  analysis  of  a  karst  depression population: clues to genesis. Geological Society  of America Bulletin, 93, 1078–86.
Kemmerly,  P.R.  and  Towe,  S.K.  (1978)  Karst  depressions  in  a time  context.  Earth  Surface  Processes  and  Landforms, 35, 355–62.
Kempe, S. and Spaeth, C. (1977) Excentrics: their capillaries and growth rates, Proceedings of the 7th International Congress of Speleology, Sheffield, pp. 259–62.
Kempe, S., Brandt, A., Seeger, M. and Vladi, F. (1975) ‘Facetten’ and ‘Lungdecken’, the typical morphological  elements  of caves  developed  in  standing  water.  Annales  de Speleologie, 30(4), 705–8.
Kendall, C. and Caldwell, E.A. (1998) Fundamentals of isotope geochemistry, in Isotope Tracers in Catchment Hydrology (eds C. Kendall, and J.J. McDonnell), Elsevier,  Amsterdam, pp. 51–86.
Kendall, C. and McDonnell, J.J. (eds) (1998) Isotope Tracers in Catchment Hydrology, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 839 pp.
Khang, P. (1991.) Pre´sentation des re´gions karstiques du Vietnam.
Karstologia, 18, 1–12.
Kiernan, K. (1984) Towards a Forestry Commission Karst  and Karst Catchment Management Policy. Forestry  Commission, Tasmania.
Kindinger, J.L., Davis, J.B. and Flocks, J.G. (1999) Geology and evolution of lakes in north-central Florida. Environmental Geology, 38(4), 301–21.
Kiraly, L. (1975) Rapport sur l’etat actuel des connaissances dans le domaine des caracteres physiques des roches  karstiques, in Hydrogeology of Karstic Terrains (eds A.  Burger and
L. Dubertret), International Union of Geological Sciences, Series B, Vol. 3, pp. 53–67.
Kiraly, L. (1998) Modelling karst aquifers by the combined discrete channel and continuum approach. Bulletin  d’Hydro- geologie (Neuchatel), 16.




Kiraly, L. (2002) Karstification and groundwater flow, in Evolu- tion of Karst: from Prekarst to Cessation (ed. F. Gabrovsek), Institut za raziskovanje krasa, ZRC SAZU, Postojna-Ljubljana, pp. 155–90.
Kirkland, D.W. and Evans, R. (1980) Origin of castiles on  the Gypsum Plain of Texas and New Mexico. New Mexico Geo- logical Society, Guidebook, 31, 173–8.
Klimchouk, A.B. (1995) Karst morphogenesis in the epikarstic zone. Cave and Karst Science, 21(2), 45–50.
Klimchouk, A.B. (1996) The dissolution and conversion of gypsum  and  anhydrite.  International  Journal  of  Speleology, 25(3–4), 21–36.
Klimchouk, A.B. (2000a) The formation of epikarst and its role in vadose speleogenesis, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of  Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N.  Palmer and
W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of  America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 91–9.
Klimchouk, A.B. (2000b) Speleogenesis of the Great  Gypsum Mazes in the Western Ukraine, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 261–73.
Klimchouk, A.B. (2003) Conceptualisation of speleogenesis  in multi-storey artesian systems: a transverse speleogenesis. www. Speleogenesis, 1(2), 21 pp.
Klimchouk, A. (2004) Evaporite karst, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 343–7.
Klimchouk, A.B. and Aksem, S.D. (2000) Gypsum karst in the western Ukraine, in Present State and Future Trends of Karst Studies (eds G. Gu¨nay, K.S. Johnson, D. Ford and A.I. Johnson), IHP-V, Technical Documents in Hydrology, 49(II), UNESCO, Paris, pp. 67–80.
Klimchouk, A.B. and Andrejchouk, V.N. (1986) Geological and hydrogeological conditions of gypsum karst develop- ment in the western Ukraine. Le Grotte d’Italia, 4(XII), 349–58.
Klimchouk, A.B. and Andrejchuk, V. (1996) Sulphate rocks as an arena for karst development. International Journal of Speleol- ogy, 25(3–4), 9–20.
Klimchouk, A.B. and Andrejchuk, V.N. (2003) Karst breakdown mechanisms  from  observations  in  the  gypsum  caves  of  the Western Ukraine: implications for subsidence hazard  assess- ment. www. Speleogenesis, 1(4), 20 pp.
Klimchouk, A.B. and   Ford, D.C. (2000) Types of Karst  and Evolution of Hydrogeologic Settings. in Klimchouk,  A.B., Ford, D.C., Palmer, A.N. and Dreybrodt, W.   (Editors). Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst  Aquifers.   Huntsville, Al.	National                                         Speleological  Society  of      America, pp. 45–53.
Klimchouk, A.B., Cucchi, F., Calaforra, J.M., et al. (1996a) Dissolution of gypsum from field observations. International Journal of Speleology, 25(3–4), 37–48.
Klimchouk, A.B., Sauro, U. and Lazzarotto, M. (1996b) ‘Hidden’ shafts at the base of the epikarstic zone: a case study from the Sette Communi plateau, Venetian Pre-Alps, Italy.  Cave and Karst Science, 23(3), 101–7.

Klimchouk, A.B., Ford, D.C., Palmer, A.N. and Dreybrodt, W. (eds) (1996c) Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers, National Speleological Society Press, Huntsville, AL, 527 pp.
Knez, M. (1996) Bedding-plane impact on the development  of karst caves. Univ. of Lubljana PhD thesis, 186 pp.
Knez, M., Otonicˇar, B., and Slabe, T. (2003) Subcutaneous stone forest (Trebnje, central Slovenia). Acta Carsological,  32(1), 29–38.
Knisel, W.G. (1972) Response of Karst Aquifers to  Recharge, Hydrological Paper 60, Colorado State   University,  Fort Collins, 48 pp.
Kogovsek, J. (1997) Water tracing tests in the vadose zone,  in Tracer Hydrology 97 (ed. A. Kranjc), Rotterdam,  Balkema, pp. 167–72.
Kohn, M.J. and Welker, J.M. (2005) On the temperature correla- tion  of  d18O  in  modern  precipitation.  Earth  and  Planetary Science Letters, 231, 87–96.
Kolodny, Y., Bar-Matthews, M., Ayalon, A. and McKeegan,
K.D. (2003) High spatial resolution d18O profile of a speleothem   using   an   ion-microprobe.   Chemical   Geology, 197, 21–8.
Konzuk, J.S. and Kueper, B.H. (2004) Evaluation of cubic law based models describing single-phase flow through a  rough- walled fracture. Water Resources Research 40,   W02402, doi:10.1029/2003WR002356.
Korotkov, A.N. (ed.) (1974) Caves of the Pinego-Severodvinskaja Karst. Geographical Society of the USSR, Leningrad, 191 pp. [In Russian.]
Korpa´s, L. and Hofstra, A.H. (eds) (1999) Carlin Gold in Hungary, T. 24, Geologica Hungarica, Budapest, 331 pp.
Korshunov,  V.  and  Semikolennyh,  A.  (1994)  A  model   of speleogenic processes connected with bacterial redox in sulfur cycles in the caves of Kugitangtau Ridge,  Turkmenia, in Breakthroughs in Karst Geomicrobiology  and Redox Geo- chemistry (eds I.D. Sasowsky and M.V.  Palmer), Special Publication 1, Karst Waters Institute, pp. 43–4.
Ko´sa, A. (1995/6) The Cavers’ Living Dictionary, ER-PETRO,
Budapest,  157  pp.  [Terms  in  English,  French,  German  and Hungarian. Updates available online at www.uis-speleo.org]
Ko´sa, A. (ed.) (1981) Bir Al Ghanam Karst Study Project, Jamahiriya, Tripoli, 79 pp.
Kova´cs, A. (2003). Geometry and hydraulic parameters of karst aquifers:  a  hydrodynamic  modeling  approach.  Faculte´  des Sciences, Universite´ de Neuchaˆtel Thesis, 131 pp. [Available in pdf at www.unine.ch/biblio/]
Kowalski,  K.  (1965)  Cave  studies  in  China  today.  Studies  in Speleology, 1(2–3), 75–81.
Kozary, M.T., Dunlap, J.C. Humphrey, W.E. (1968) Incidence of saline deposits in geologic time. Geological Society of America Special Paper, 88, 43–57.
Kranjc, A. (1981) Sediments from Babja Jama near Most na Soci.
Acta Carsologica, X(9), 201–11.
Kranjc, A. (1982) Prod iz Kacne jame. Nase jame, 23(4), 17–23. Kranjc, A. (1985) The lake of Cerknisko and its floods.  Geo-
grafski Zbornik, 25(2), 71–123.
Kranjc,  A.  (ed.)  (1989a)  Cave  Tourism,  Institute  of   Karst Research, Postojna, 204 pp.




Kranjc, A. (1989b) Recent fluvial cave sediments, their origin and role in speleogenesis. Slovenian Academy of Sciences, Lubl- jana, 167 pp.
Kranjc, A. (ed.) (1997a) Tracer Hydrology 97, Balkema,  Rot- terdam, 450 pp.
Kranjc, A. (ed.) (1997b) Karst Hydrogeological Investigations in South-western Slovenia. Acta Carsologica Krasoslovni Zbor- nik (Ljubljana), XXVI(1), 388 pp.
Kranjc,  A.  (2001a)  About  the  name  kras  (karst)  in  Slovenia, Proceedings of the 13th International Congress of Speleology, Brazilia, Vol. 2, 140–2.
Kranjc, A. (ed.) (2001b) Classical Karst – Contact Karst; a Symposium. Acta Carsologica, 30(2), 13–164.
Kranjc, A. (ed.) (2002) Monitoring of Karst Caves. Acta Carso- logica, 31. 177 pp.
Kranjc, A. and Lovrencak, F. (1981) Poplavni svet na Kocevskem polju (Floods in Kocevsko polje). Geografski  zbornik, 21, 1–39.
Krawczyk,  W.E.  (1996)  Manual  for  Karst  Water   Analysis, Handbook 1 – Physical Speleology, International  Journal of Speleology, 51 pp.
Krawczyk, W.E. and Ford, D.C. (2006) Correlating specific conductivity  with  total  hardness  in  limestone  and  dolomite karst waters. Earth Surface Processes and  Landforms, 31, 221–34.
Krawczyk,  W.E.,  Glowacki,  P.  and  Niedzwiedz,  T.   (2002) Charakterystyka chemiczna opado´w atmosferycznych w rejo- nie Hornsundu (SW Spitsbergen) latem 2000 r. na tle cyrkulacji atmosferycznych, in Funkcjonowanie i monitoring geoekosys- temo´w obszaro´w polarnych (eds A.    Kostrzewski   and
G. Rachlewicz), Polish Polar Studies, Poznan´, pp.  187–202. [In Polish.]
Kresic, N. (1995). Remote sensing of tectonic fabric controlling groundwater flow in Dinaric karst. Remote Sensing of the Environment, 53, 85–90.
Kresic, N., O’Laskey, R., Deeb, R., et al. (2005) Technical impracticability of DNAPL remediation in karst, in Water Resources  and  Environmental  Problems  in  Karst  (eds
Z. Stevanovic and P. Milanovic), pp. 63–6.
Kruse,   P.B.   (1980)   Karst   investigations   of   Maligne   Basin, Jasper National Park, Alberta. Univ. of Alberta  MSc thesis, 120 pp.
Kunaver, J. (1982) Geomorphology of the Kanin Mountains with special regard to the glaciokarst. Geografsky Zbornik, XXII, 200–343.
Kunsky, J. (1950) Kras a Jeskyne, Priro, Naklad. Praz, Prague, 263 pp.
Labat, D. Ababou, R. and Mangin, A. (2001) Multifractal  and wavelet analyses in karstic hydrology: concepts and applica- tions, in Present State and Future Trends of Karst Studies (eds
G. Gu¨nay, K.S. Johnson, D. Ford and A.I. Johnson),  IHP-V, Technical Documents in Hydrology, 49(II), UNESCO, Paris, pp. 441–50.
Lageat,  Y.,  Sellier,  D.  and  Twidale,  C.R.  (1994)  Me´galithes et me´te´orisation des granites en Bretagne  littorale, France du nord-ouest. Ge´ographie physique et   Quaternaire,  48(1), 107–13.

Lakey, B. and Krothe N. C. (1996) Stable isotopic variation of storm discharge from a perennial karst spring, Indiana. Water Resources Research, 32(3), 721–731.
Lalkovicˇ, M. (1995) On the problem of the ice filling in Dobsˇina Ice Cave. Acta Carsologica, 24, 314–22.
Lallemand-Barres,   A.   (1994)   Standardization  of   Criteria   of Establishment of Vulnerability to Pollution Maps. Preliminary Documentary Study, Report R37928, Bureau  de Recherche Geologiques et Minieres, 21 pp.
Lambeck, K. and Chappell, J. (2001) Sea level change through the last glacial cycle. Science, 292, 679–86.
LaMoreaux,   P.E.   (1989)   Water   development   for   phosphate mining in a karst setting in Florida – a complex environmental problem. Environmental Geology and Water  Science, 14(2), 117–53.
LaMoreaux, P.E. and Wilson, B.M. (1984) Remote sensing, in  Guide  to  the  Hydrology  of  Carbonate  Rocks  (eds
P.E. LaMoreaux, B.M. Wilson and B.A. Memon), Studies and Reports in Hydrology No. 41, UNESCO, Paris, pp. 166– 71.
Land, L.A. and Paull, C.K. (2000) Submarine karst belt rimming the  continental  slope  in  the  Straits  of  Florida.  Geo-Marine Letters, 20, 123–32.
Lange, A.L. (1968) The changing geometry of cave structures.
Cave Notes, 10(1–3), 1–10, 13–19, 26–7, 29–32.
Lange, A.L. and Barner, W.L.(1995). Application of the natural electric field for detection of karst conduits on Guam, in Karst Geohazards (ed. B. F. Beck), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 425–41. Langmuir,  D.  (1971)  The  geochemistry  of  some   carbonate groundwaters in central Pennsylvania. Geochim et Cosmochim
Acta, 35, 1023–45.
Langmuir,  D.  (1996)  Aqueous  Environmental   Geochemistry, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 600 pp.
Lascu,  C.  (2004)  Movile  Cave,  Romania,  in  Encyclopedia  of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 528–30.
Lasserre,  G.  (1954)  Notes  sur  le  karst  de  la   Guadeloupe.
Erdkunde, VIII(1/4), 115–17.
Last, W.M. (1990) Lacustrine dolomite – an overview of modern, Holocene and Pleistocene occurrences. Earth Science Reviews, 27, 221–63.
Latham A.G. and Ford, D.C. (1993) The paleomagnetism  and rock magnetism of cave and karst deposits, in Applications of Paleomagnetism to Sedimentary Geology, Special Publication 49,  Society  of  Economic  Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Tulsa, OK, pp. 149–155.
Latham, A.G., H.P. Schwarcz, D.C. Ford and W.G. Pearce (1979) Palaeo-magnetism of stalagmite deposits. Nature, 280(5721), 383–5.
Latham,  A.G.  Schwarcz,  H.P.  and  Ford,  D.C.  (1986)   The paleomagnetism and U–Th dating of Mexican  stalagmite, DAS 2. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 79, 195–207.
Lattman,  L.H.  and  Parizek,  R.P.  (1964)  Relationship  between fracture traces and the occurrence of groundwater in carbonate rocks. Journal of Hydrology, 2, 73–91.
Laudermilk, J.D. and Woodford, A.O. (1932) Concerning Rillen- steine. American Journal of Science, 223, 135–54.




Lauriol, B. and Clark, I.D. (1993) An approach to determine the origin and age of massive ice blockages in two arctic caves. Permafrost and Periglacial Processes, 4, 77–85.
Lauriol, B. and Clark, I.D. (1999) Fissure calcretes in the arctic: a paleohydrologic indicator. Applied Geochemistry, 14, 775–85. Lauriol, B. and Gray, J.T. (1990) Drainage karstique en Mileu de Perge´lisol: le cas de l’ile d’Akpatok, T.N.O. Canada. Perma-
frost and Perigalcial Processes, 1, 129–44.
Lauriol, B., Ford, D.C., Cinq-Mars, J. and Morris, W.A. (1997) The chronology of speleothem deposition in Northern Yukon and its relationship to permafrost. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 34(7), 902–11.
Lauritzen, S.-E. (1981) Simulation of rock pendants – small scale experiments  on  plaster  models,  Proceedingsof  the  8th Inter- national Congress of Speleology, Kentucky, pp. 407–9.
Lauritzen,  S.-E.  (1982)  The  paleocurrents  and  morphology  of Pikhaggrottene, Svartisen, North Norway. Norsk  Geografisk Tidsskrift, 4, 184–209.
Lauritzen, S.-E. (1984a) A symposium: arctic and alpine karst.
Norsk Geografisk Tidesskrift, 38, 139–214.
Lauritzen, S.-E. (1984b) Evidence of subglacial karstification in Glomdal, Svartisen. Norsk Geografisk Tidesskrift, 38(3–4), 169–70.
Lauritzen, S.-E. (1986) Kvithola at Fauske, northern Norway: an example of ice-contact speleogenesis. Norsk Geografisk Tides- skrift, 66, 153–61.
Lauritzen, S.-E. (1990) Autogenic and allogenic denudation  in carbonate karst by the multiple basin method: an example from Svartisen, north Norway. Earth Surface Processes and Land- forms, 15, 157–67.
Lauritzen, S.-E. (1995) High-resolution paleotemperature proxy record   for   the   Last   Interglaciation   based   on   Norwegian speleothems. Quaternary Research, 43, 133–46.
Lauritzen, S.-E.  (1996a)  Interaction  between glacier  and  karst aquifers: Preliminary results from Hilmarfjellet, South Spits- bergen. Kras I Speleologica, XVII, 17–28.
Lauritzen, S.-E. (1996b) Karst landforms and caves of Nordland, North Norway, in Climate Change: the Karst Record, Guide to Excursion 2, University of Bergen, 160 pp.
Lauritzen, S.-E. and Karp, D. (1993) Speleological assessment of Karst Aquifers developed within the Tindall Limestone, Katherine, N.T. Report 63/1993, Power and Water Authority, Darwin, NT, 60 pp.
Lauritzen, S.-E. and Lundberg, J. (1999a) Speleothems and climate: a special issue of The Holocene. The Holocene, 9(6), 643–7.
Lauritzen, S.-E. and Lundberg, J. (1999b) Calibration of the speleothem delta function: an absolute temperature record for  the Holocene in northern Norway. The Holocene, 9(6), 659–69. Lauritzen, S.-E. and Lundberg, J. (2000) Meso- and micromor-
phology  of  caves,  in  Speleogenesis;  Evolution  of   Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N.  Palmer and
W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of  America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 407–26.
Lauritzen, S.-E., Abbott, J., Arnesen, R. et al. (1985) Morphology and hydraulics of an active phreatic conduit.  Cave Science, 12(4), 139–46.

Lauritzen, S-E., Haugen, J.E., Løvlie, R. and Gilje-Nielsen, H. (1994) Geochronological potential of isoleucine epimerization in calcite speleothems. Quaternary Research, 41, 52–8.
Lea, D.W., Pak, D.K. and Spero, H.J. (2000) Climate impact of late Quaternary equatorial Pacific sea surface temperature variations. Science, 289, 1719–24.
Lee,  E.S.  and  Krothe,  N.C.  (2001)  A  four-component  mixing model for water in a karst terrain in south-central  Indiana, USA. Using solute concentration and stable isotopes as tracers. Chemical Geology, 179(1–4), 129–43.
Lee, E.S. and Krothe N.C. (2003) Delineating the karstic  flow system in the upper Lost River drainage basin, south central Indiana: using sulphate and delta S–34(SO4) as   tracers. Applied Geochemistry, 18(1), 145–53.
Lee, M.R. and Bland, P.A. (2002) Dating climatic change in hot deserts using desert varnish on meteorite finds. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 6487, 1–12.
Lehmann, H. (1936) Morphologische Studien auf Java. Series 3, No. 9, Geographische. Abhandlungen, Stuttgart, 114 pp.
Lehmann, H. (ed.) (1954) Das Karstphanomen in den verschie- denen Klimazonen. Erdkunde, 8, 112–39.
Lehmann, H.W., Krommelbein, H.K. and Lotschert, W.  (1956) Karstmorphologische, geologische und botanische   Studien in der Sierra de los Organos auf Cuba. Erdkunde, 10, 185–204.
Lei,  M.,  Jiang,  X.  and  Li,  Y.  (2001)  New  advances  of  karst collapse research in China, in Geotechnical and Environmental Applications of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds B.F. Beck, and J.G. Herring), Balkema, Lisse, pp. 145–51.
Leibundgut, Ch. and Hadi, S. (1997) A contribution to toxicity of fluorescent tracers, in Tracer Hydrology 97 (ed. A.  Kranjc), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 69–75.
Leighton, M.W. and Pendexter, C. (1962) Carbonate rock types. Memoirs, American Association of Petroleum Geologists,  1, 33–61.
Leutscher, M. and Jeannin, P.-Y. (2004) Temperature distribution in karst systems: the role of air and water fluxes. Terra Nova, 16, 344–50.
Lewis, D.C., Kriz, G.J. and Burgy, R.H. (1966) Tracer dilution sampling technique to determine hydraulic conductivity of fractured rock. Water Resources Research, 2(3), 533–42.
Lewis, I. and Stace, P. (1980) Cave Diving in Australia, I. Lewis. Adelaide.
Ley, R.G. (1979) The development of marine karren along  the Bristol Channel coastline. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geomorphologie, Supplement-Band, 32, 75–89.
Li, W-X., Lundberg, J., Dickin, A.P., Ford, D.C., et al.  (1989) High precision mass spectrometric dating of speleothem and implications for paleoclimate studies.   Nature,  339(6225), 534–6.
Liedl, R. and Sauter, M. (1998) Modelling of aqifer genesis and heat transport in karst systems. Bulletin d’Hydroge´ologie (Neuchaˆtel), 16, 185–200.
Lignier, V. and Desmets, M. (2002) Les archives sedimentaires quaternaries de la grotte sous les Sangles, Bas-Bugey,  Jura me´ridional, France. Karstologia, 39(1), 27–46.
Linge, H., Lauritzen, S.-E., Lundberg, J. and Berstad, I.M. (2001) Stable isotope stratigraphy of Holocene  speleothems:




examples from a cave system in Rana, northern Norway. Palaeogeography,   Palaeoclimatology,   Palaeoecology,   167, 209–24.
Lismonde, B. (2003) Limestone wall retreat in a ceiling cupola controlled by hydrothermal dissolution with wall condensation (Szunyogh model). www. Speleogenesis, 1(4), 3 pp.
Longley, P.A., Goodchild, M.F., Maguire, D.J. and Rhind, D.W. (2005) Geographic Information Systems and Science, 2nd edn,
J. Wiley & Sons, New York.
Loop, C.M. and White, W.B. (2001) A conceptual model  for DNALP transport in karst ground water basins. Ground Water, 39(1), 119–27.
Lo´pez-Chicano, A., Calvache, M. L., Mart¯ın-Rosales, W.  and Gisbert, J. (2002) Conditioning factors in flooding of karstic poljes – the case of the Zafarraya polje (South Spain). Catena, 49(4), 331–52.
Lo´pez-Chicano, M. and Pulido-Bosch, A. (1993) The fracturing in the Sierra Gorda karstic system (Granada), in Some Spanish Karstic Aquifers (ed. A. Pulido-Bosch), University of Granada, pp. 95–116.
Lowe, D.J. (2000) The speleo-inception concept, in Speleogen- esis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 65–75.
Lowe, D.J. and Waltham, A. (2002) A Dictionary of Karst and Caves, Cave Studies 10, British Cave Research  Association, London.
Lowry, D.C. and Jennings, J.N. (1974) The Nullarbor karst, Australia. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 18, 35–81.
Lu, G., Zheng, C., Donahoe, R.J. and Berry Lyons, W.  (2000) Controlling processes in a CaCO3 precipitating  stream in Huanglong natural Scenic District, Sichuan,  China. Journal of Hydrology, 230, 34–54.
Lu,  Y.  (1985)  Karst  in  China:  Landscapes,  Types,   Rules. Geological Publishing House, Beijing, 288 pp.
Lu, Y. (1993) Comparative Research on Evolution of Karst Environments in the Main Construction Regions of China, Institute of Hydrogeology and Engineering Geology, Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences, Beijing, 13 pp.
Ludwig, K.R., Simmons, K.R., Szabo, B.J., et al. (1992) Mass- spectrometric 230Th–234U–238U dating of the Devils Hole Calcite Vein. Science, 258, 284–7.
Lundberg, J., Ford, D.C and Hill, C.A. (2000) A  preliminary U–Pb date on cave spar, Big Canyon, Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico, U.S.A. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 62(2), 144–8.
Lynch, F.L., Mahler, B.J. and Hauwert, N.N. (2004) Provenance of suspended sediment discharged from a karst aquifer deter- mined by clay mineralogy, in Studies of Cave Sediments: Physical and Chemical Records of Paleoclimate (eds I.D. Sasowsky and J. Mylroie), Kluwer Academic, New York, pp. 83–94.
Macaluso, T. and Sauro, U. (1996) Weathering crust and karren on exposed gypsum surfaces. International Journal of Speleol- ogy, 25(3–4), 115–26.
Mace, C.E. (1921) Sewer system more than a million years old.
Popular Mechanics Magazine 35(5), 687.

Machel, H.G. (2001) Bacterial and thermochemical sulphate reduction  in  diagenetic   settings  –  old   and  new   insights. Sedimentary Geology, 140, 143–75.
Maclay, R.W. and Small, T.A. (1983) Hydrostratigraphic subdivisions   and   fault   barriers   of   the   Edwards   aquifer, south-central Texas,  U.S.A.  Journal  of   Hydrology,  61, 127–46.
Magdalene, S. and Alexander, E.C. (1995) Sinkhole distribution in Winona County, Minnesota revisited, in Karst Geohazards (ed. B.F. Beck), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 43–51.
Maillet, E. (1905) Essais d’Hydraulique souterraine et fluviale, Hermann, Paris.
Mainguet, M. (1972) Le Modele des Gres: Problemes Generaux, Institut Geographique National, Paris.
Maire, R. (1981a) Giant shafts and underground rivers of  the Nakanai Mountains (New Britain). Spelunca, 3(Supplement), 8–9.
Maire, R. (1981b) Karst and hydrogeology synthesis. Spelunca,
3(Supplement), 23–30.
Maire, R. (1981c) Inventory and general features of PNG karsts.
Spelunca, 3(Supplement), 7–8.
Maire, R. (1986) A propos des karsts sous-marins. Karstologia,
7, 55.
Maire, R. (1990) La Haute Montagne Calcaire. Karstologia Memoire, 3, 731 pp.
Maire, R. (1999) Les glaciers de marbre de Patagonie, Chili. Un karst subpolaire oceanique de la zone australe. Karstologia, 33, 25–40.
Maire, R. et l’equipe Ultima Esperanza (1999) Les ‘glaciers de marbre’ de Patagonie, Chili. Karstologia, 33, 25–40.
Malis, C.P. (1997) Littoral Karren along the Western Shore  of Newfoundland,. MSc thesis, McMaster University. 310 p.
Mangin, A. (1969a) Nouvelle interprtation du mcanisme des sources intermittentes. Comptes Rendus, Acade´mie des Sciences (Paris), 269, 2184–6.
Mangin, A. (1969b) Etude hydraulique du mecanisme  d’inter- mittence de Fontestorbes (Blesta-Ariege). Annales et Speleo- logie, 24(2), 253–98.
Mangin, A. (1973) Sur la dynamiques des transferts en aquifere karstique, Proceedings of the 6th International Congress  of Speleology, Olomouc, CSSR, Vol. 6, 157–62.
Mangin, A. (1975) Contribution a l’etude hydrodynamique des aquiferes karstiques. Univ. Dijon These Doct. es. Sci. [Annales et Speleologie, 29(3), 283–332; 29(4), 495–601, 1974; 30(1),
21–124, 1975.]
Mangin,  A.  (1981a)  Utilisation  des  analysis  correlatoire   et spectrale dans l’approche des systemes hydrologiques. Comp- tes Rendus, Acade´mie des Sciences (Paris), 293, 401–4.
Mangin, A. (1981b) Apports des analyses correlatoire et spectrale croisees dans la connaissance des sytsemes  hydrologiques. Comptes Rendus, Acade´mie des Sciences  (Paris), 293(II), 1011–14.
Mangin, A. (1984) Pour une meilleure connaissance des systemes hydrologiques a` partir des analyses correlatoire  et spectrale. Journal of Hydrology, 67, 25–43.
Mangin,  A.  (1998)  L’approche  hydroge´ologique  des   karsts.
Spe´le´ochronos, 9, 3–26.




Mangini, A., Spotl, C. and Verdes, P. (2005) Reconstruction of temperature in the Central Alps during the past 2000 yr from a d18O stalagmite record. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 235, 741–51.
Margat, J. (1980) Carte hydrogeologique de la France a 1: 1 500 000.  Bureau  de  Recherches  Geologiques  et  Minieres, Orleans.
Margrita, R., Guizerix, J., Corompt, P., et al. (1984) Reflexions sur la theorie des traceurs: applications en hydrologie iso- topique, in Isotope Hydrology 1983, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, pp. 653–78.
Marinos, P.G. (2005) Experiences in tunnelling through karstic rocks,  in  Water  Resources  and  Environmental  Problems  in Karst (eds Z. Stevanovicˇ and P. Milanovicˇ),  International Association of Hydrogeologists, Belgrade, pp. 617–44.
Marker, M.E. (1976) Cenotes: a class of enclosed karst hollows. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie Supplement-Band, 26, 104–23. Marquette, G.C., Gray, J.T., Gosse, J.C., et al. (2004) Felsenmeer
persistence under non-erosive ice in the Torngat and Kaumajet mountains,  Quebec  and  Labrador,  as  determined  by   soil weathering  and  cosmogenic   nuclide   exposure    dating. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 41(1), 19–38.
Martel, E.A. (1894) Les Abimes, Delagrave, Paris.
Martel, E.A. (1921) Nouveau trait des eaux sonterraines,  Edi- tions Doin, Paris, 840 pp.
Martin, J.B., Wicks, C.M. and Sasowsky, I.D. (eds) (2002) Hydrogeology and Biology of Post-Paleozoic Carbonate Aqui- fers, Special Publication 7, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, 212 pp.
Martin-Algarra,  A.,  Martin,  M.,  Andreo,  B.,  et  al.   (2003) Sedimentary   patterns   in   perched   spring   travertines near Granada (Spain) as indicators of the  paleohydrological and
paleoclimatological evolution of a karst massif. Sedimentary Geology, 161, 217–28.
Martini, J.E.J. (2000) Dissolution of quartz and silicate minerals, Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klim- chouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 171–4. Martini, J.E.J. (2004) Silicate karst, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New  York,
pp. 649–53.
Martini, J.E.J., Wipplinger, P.E., Moen, H.F.G. and Keyser,  A. (2003) Contribution to the speleology of Sterkfontein  Cave, Gauteng Province, South Africa. International  Journal of Speleology, 32(1/4), 43–69.
Martini, P., Brookfield, M.E. and Sadura, S. (2001) Principles of Glacial Geomorphology and Geology, New Jersey,  Prentice Hall, 381 pp.
Matthews, M.C., Clayton, C.R.I. and Rigby-Jones, J. (2000) Locating dissolution features in the Chalk. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 33, 125–40.
Maurin, V. and Zotl, J. (1959) Die Untersuchung der  Zusam- menhange unterirdischer Wasser mit besonderer  Berucksi- chtigung der Karstvarheltnisse.  Steirische    Beitrage   zur Hydro-geologie (Graz), 11, 5–184.
Maurin, V. and Zotl, J. (1963) Karsthydrologische Untersuchun- gen auf Kephallenia. Osterreische Hochschulz, 15, 6.

Mavlyudov, B.R. (ed.) (2005) Glacier Caves and Glacial Karst in High Mountains and Polar Regions, Institute of  Geography, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 177 pp.
Maximovich, G.A. and Bykov, V.N. (1976) Karst of Carbonate Oil- and Gas-bearing Series, Ministry of Higher  Education, Perm, 96 pp. [In Russian.]
Mayr, A. (1953) Blutenpollen und pflanzliche Sporen als Mittel zur Untersuchung von Quellen und Karstwassern. Anzeiger der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mathimatisch- Naturwissenschaftliche Klasse (Wien).
McConnell, H. and Horn, J.M. (1972) Probabilities of  surface karst, in Spatial Analysis in Geomorphology (ed. R.J. Chorley), London, Methuen, pp. 111–33.
McDermott, F. (2004) Palaeo-climate reconstruction from stable isotope variations in speleothems: a review. Quaternary  Sci- ence Reviews, 23, 901–918.
McDermott, F., Frisia, S, Huang, Y, et al. (1999) Holocene climate variability in Europe: evidence from d18O, textural and extension-rate variations in three speleothems.  Quaternary Science Reviews, 18, 1021–38.
McDermott,  F.,  Mattey,  D.P.  and  Hawkesworth,  C.   (2001) Centennial-scale Holocene climate variability  revealed  by  a high-resolution  speleothem  d18O  record  from SW Ireland. Science, 294, 1328–31.
McDonald,  B.S.  and  Vincent,  J.S.  (1972)  Fluvial  sedimentary structures formed experimentally in a pipe: their implications for interpretation of subglacial sedimentary  environments. Geological Survey of Canada Paper, 72-77, 30 pp.
McDonald, J., Drysdale, R. and Hill, D. (2004) The 2002–2003 El Nin˜o recorded in Australian cave drip waters: Implications for reconstructing rainfall histories using stalagmites. Geophysical Research Letters, 31, L22202.
McDonald, R.C. (1976) Limestone morphology in south Sulawesi, Indonesia. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supple- ment-Band, 26, 79–91.
McDonald,    R.C.    (1979)    Tower    karst    geomorphology    in Belize. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie,   Supplement-Band, 32, 35–45.
McGarry, S.F. and Caseldine, C. (2004) Speleothem palynology: an undervalued tool in Quaternary Studies. Quaternary Science Reviews, 23, 2389–2404.
McGarry, S., Bar-Matthews, B., Matthews, A., et al. (2004) Constraints on hydrological and paleotemperature variations in the Eastern Mediterranean region in the last 140 ka given by the dD values of speleothem fluid inclusions.  Quaternary
Science Reviews, 23, 919–34.
McGrath R. J., Styles P., Thomas E. Neale S. (2002) Integrated high-resolution  geophysical  investigations  as  potential  tools for water resource investigations in karst terrain.  Environ- mental Geology, 42(5), 552–557.
Mecchia, M. and Piccini, L. (1999) Hydrogeology and SiO2 geochemistry   of   the   Aonda   Cave   System,   Auyan-Tepui, Bolivar, Venezuela. Bollettino Sociedad Venezolana Espeleo- logia, 33, 1–18.
Meijerink, A.M.J. (2000). Groundwater, in Remote Sensing  in Hydrology and Water Management (eds G.A. Schultz and E.T. Engman), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 305–25.




Meiman, J. and Ryan, M.T. (1999) The development of  basin- scale conceptual models of the active-flow conduit system, in Karst Modeling (eds A.N. Palmer, M.V. Palmer  and  I.D. Sasowsky)   (1999),   Special   Publication   5,   Karst  Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 203–12.
Mellett, J.S. and Maccarillo, B. J. (1995). A model for sinkhole formation on interstate and limited access highways, with suggestions  on  remediation,  in  Karst  Geohazards  (ed.  B.F. Beck), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 335–9.
Merrill, G.K. (1960) Additional notes on vertical shafts in limestone caves. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 22(2), 101–5.
Meyer-Peter, E. & Muller, R. (1948) Formulas for bedload transport, Proceedings of the 3rd Conference of the  Interna- tional Association for Hydraulic Research,    Stockholm, pp. 39–64.
Miall, L.C. (1870) On the formation of swallow-holes or pits with vertical sides in mountain limestone. Nature, ii, 526  (and Geological Magazine, ii, 513).
Michie, N. (1997) The threat to caves of the human dust sources, Proceedings of the 12th International Congress of Speleology, pp. 43–6.
Mickler, P.J., Banner, J.L., Stern, L., et al. (2004a) Stable isotope variations in modern tropical speleothems: evaluating equili- brium vs. kinetic isotope effects. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 68(21), 4381–93.
Mickler, P.J., Ketcham, R.A., Colbert, M.W. and Banner,  J.L. (2004b) Application of high-resolution X-ray computed tomo- graphy in deteremining the suitability of speleothems for use in paleoclimatic, paleohydrologic reconstructions.   Journal  of
Cave and Karst Studies, 66(1), 4–8.
Middleton, G.V. (ed.) (2003) Encyclopedia of Sediments and Sedimentary Rocks. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 821 pp.
Middleton, G. (2004) Madagascar, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst  Science  (ed.  J.  Gunn),  Fitzroy  Dearborn,  New  York, pp. 493–5.
Mijatovic,  B.F.  (1984a)  Problems  of  sea  water  intrusion  into aquifers of the coastal Dinaric karst, in Hydrogeology of the Dinaric Karst (ed. B.F. Mijatovic), International Contributions to Hydrogeology 4, Heise, Hannover, pp. 115–42.
Mijatovic, B.F. (1984b) Karst poljes in Dinarides, in Hydrogeol- ogy of the Dinaric Karst (ed. B.F. Mijatovic),  International Contributions to Hydrogeology 4, Heise,  Hannover, pp. 87– 109.
Milanovic´, P. (1976) Water regime in deep karst. Case  study of the Ombla spring drainage area, in Karst  Hydrology and Water Resources: Vol. 1 Karst Hydrology (ed. V. Yevjevich), Water Resources Publications, Colorado, pp. 165–91.
Milanovic´, P.T. (1981) Karst Hydrogeology, Water  Resources Publication, Colorado, 434 pp.
Milanovic´, P.T. (1993) The karst environment and some  con- sequences of reclamation projects, in Proceedings of  the International Symposium on Water Resources in Karst  with Special Emphasis on Arid and Semi Arid Zones (ed.  A. Afrasiabian), Shiraz, Iran, pp. 409–24.

Milanovic´, P.T. (2000) Geological Engineering in Karst: Dams, Reservoirs, Grouting, Groundwater Protection, Water Tapping, Tunnelling, Zebra, Belgrade, 347 pp.
Milanovic´, P.T. (2002) The environmental impacts of human
activities  and  engineering  constructions  in  karst  regions.
Episodes, 25(1), 13–21.
Milanovic´, P.T. (2003) Prevention and remediation in karst engineering, in Sinkholes and the Engineering and  Environ- mental Impacts of Karst (ed. B.F. Beck),  Proceedings of the 9th Multidisciplinary Conference,    Huntsville,   Alabama, Geotechnical Special Publication  122, American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 3–28.
Milanovic´, P.T. (2004) Water Resources Engineering in  Karst, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 312 pp.
Miller, G.H. (1980) Amino acid geochronology: integrity of the carbonate   matrix   and   potential   of   molluscan   fossils,   in Biogeochemistry of Amino Acids (eds P.E. Hare, T.C. Hoering and J. King), John Wiley & Sons, New York, pp. 415–43.
Miller, T.E. (1982) Hydrochemistry, hydrology and morphology of the Caves Branch karst, Belize. Mcmaster Univ. PhD thesis, 280 pp.
Mills, W.R.P. (1981) Karst development and groundwater flow in the Quatsino Formation, northern Vancouver Island.  MSc. thesis, McMaster Univ. 170 pp.
Miotke, F.D. (1968) Karstmorphologische Studien in der glazial- uberformten Hohenstufe der ‘Picos de Europa’, Nordspanien. Jahrbuch   der   geographischen   Gesellschaft   zu   Hannover/ Sonderhef, 4, 161 pp.
Miotke, F.-D. (1974) Carbon dioxide and the soil  atmosphere. Abhandlungen zur Karst-und Ho¨hlenkunde, Reihe A, Spela¨o- logie, 9, 52 pp.
Monroe,  W.H.  (1964)  The  origin  and  interior  structure   of mogotes, Proceedings of the 20th International Geographical Congress, Abstracts, p. 108.
Monroe, W.H. (1966) Formation of tropical karst topography by limestone solution and reprecipitation. Caribbean Journal of Science, 6, 1–7.
Monroe, W.H. (1968) The karst features of northern Puerto Rico.
  Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 30, 75–86. Monroe, W.H. (1974) Dendritic dry valleys in the cone karst of
Puerto Rico. Journal of Research, U.S. Geological Survey,
2(2), 159–63.
Moon, B.P. (1985) Controls on the form and development of rock slopes in fold terrace, in Hillslope Processes (ed.   A.D. Abrahams), 16th Annual Binghamton Symposium,  Program and Abstracts, 22 pp.
Moore, C.H. (2001) Carbonate Reservoirs: Porosity,  Evolution and Diagenesis in a Sequence Stratigraphic   Framework, Developments in Sedimentology 55, Elsevier,  Amsterdam, 444 pp.
Moriarty, K.C., McCulloch, M.T., Wells, R.T. and McDowell,
M.C. (2000) Mid-Pleistocene cave fills, megafaunal  remains and climate change at Naracoorte, South Australia: towards a predictive model using U–Th dating of    speleothems. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,   Palaeoecology,  159,
113–43.




Mo¨rner, N.-A. (2005) Sea level changes and crustal movements with special aspects on the eastern Mediterranean. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 137, 91–102.
Morrow, D. (1998) Regional subsurface dolomitization: models and constraints. Geoscience Canada, 25(2), 57–70.
Morse, J.W. and Arvidson, R.S. (2002) The dissolution kinetics of major sedimentary carbonate minerals. Earth Science Reviews, 58, 51–84.
Morwood, M.J., Soejono, R.P., Roberts, R.G., et al. (2004) Archaeology and age of a new hominin from Flores in eastern Indonesia. Nature, 431, 1087–91.
Moser, H. (1998a) Environmental Isotopes, in Tracing Tec- hnique in Geohydrology (ed. W. Ka¨ss), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 279–303.
Moser, H. (1998b) Radiohydrometrical single-well-methods,  in Tracing Technique in Geohydrology (ed. W. Ka¨ss), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 382–96.
Moser, H., Rajner, V., Rank, D. and Stichler, W. (1976) Results of measurements of the content of deuterium, oxygen-18  and tritium in water samples from test area taken during  1972– 1975, in Underground Water Tracing (eds R. Gospodaric and
P. Habic), Institute of Karst Research, Postojna,  Ljubljana, pp. 93–117.
Moser, M. and Geyer, M. (1979) Seismospelaologic-Erdbeben- zerstorungen  in  Hoblen  am   Beispiel   des   Gaislochs bei   Oberfellendorf   (Oberfranken,   Bayern).   Die   Hohle,   4, 89–102.
Mottershead, D.N., Moses, C.A. and Lucas, G.R. (2000) Lithological control of solution flute form: a comparative study. Zeitschrift fur Geomorphologie, 44(4), 491–512.
Mueller, M. (1987) Takaka Valley Hydrogeology  (Preliminary Assessment), Nelson Catchment Board and  Regional Water Board.
Muhs, D.R. (2002) Evidence for the timing and duration of the last interglacial period from high-precision uranium-series ages  of  corals  on  tectonically  stable  coastlines.  Quaternary Research, 58, 36–40.
Muldoon, M.A., Simo, J.A. and Bradbury, K.R. (2001) Correla- tion of hydraulic conductivity with stratigraphy in a fractured- dolomite aquifer, northeastern Wisconsin, USA. Hydrogeology Journal, 9, 570–583.
Muller, P. and I. Sarvary (1977) Some aspects of developments in Hungarian speleology theories during  the  last  ten   years. Karszte´s Barlang, Special Issue, pp. 53–59.
Myers, A.J. (1962) A fossil sinkhole. Oklahoma  Geolological Notes, 22(B677), 13–15.
Mylroie, J.E. (1984) Hydrologic classification of caves and karst, in Groundwater as a Geomorphic Agent (ed. R. G. LaFleur), Allen & Unwin, London, pp. 157–72.
Mylroie, J.E. and Carew, J.L. (1990) The flank margin  model for dissolution  cave  development  in  carbonate    plat- forms. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 15,  413– 24.
Mylroie, J.E. and Carew, J.L. (1995) Karst development on carbonate islands, in Unconformities and Porosity in  Carbo- nate Strata (eds D.A. Budd, P.M. Harris and A. Saller), Memoir

63, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, pp. 55–76.
Mylroie, J.E. and Carew, J.L. (2000) Speleogenesis in  Coastal and Oceanic Settings, in Speleogenesis; Evolution  of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N.  Palmer and
W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of  America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 226–33.
Mylroie,  J.E.  and  Jenson,  J.W.  (2002)  Karst  flow  systems  in young carbonate islands, in Hydrogeology and Biology of Post- Paleozoic  Carbonate  Aquifers  (eds  J.B.  Martin,  C.M. Wicks and I.D. Sasowsky), Special Publication 7,  Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 107–10.
Mylroie,  J.E.  and  Vacher,  H.L.  (1999)  A  conceptual  view  of carbonate island karst, in Karst Modelling (eds A.N. Palmer,
M.V. Palmer and I.D. Sasowsky), Special Publication 5, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 48–57.
Mylroie, J.E., Carew, J.L. and Vacher, H.L. (1995) Karst devel- opment in the Bahamas and Bermuda, in Terrestrial and Shallow Marine Geology of the Bahamas and Bermuda (eds
H.A. Curran and B. White). Geological Society of  America Special Paper, 300, 251–67.
Nash, D.J. (2004) Calcrete, in Encyclopedia of Geomorphology (ed.   A.S.   Goudie),   Routledge,   London   and   New   York, pp. 108–11.
Naylor, L.A. and Viles, H.A. (2002) A new technique for evaluating short-term rates of coastal bioerosion and biopro- tection. Geomorphology, 47, 31–44.
Neumann, A.C. (1968) Biological erosion of limestone coasts, in Encyclopedia of Geomorphology (ed. R.W. Fairbridge), Rein- hold, New York, pp. 75–81.
Neumeier, U. (1999) Experimental modelling of beach rock cementation under microbial influence. Sedimentary Geology, 126, 35–46.
Neukum, C. and Ho¨tzl, H. (2005) Standardisation of vulnerability map, in Water Resources and Environmental Problems in Karst (eds Z. Stevanovic´ and P. Milanovic´), National Committee of the International Association of Hydrogeologists of Serbia and Montenegro, Belgrade, pp. 11–18.
Newitt, D.M., Richardson, J.F., Abbott, M. and Turtle, R.B. (1955) Hydraulic conveying of solids in horizontal pipes. Transactions Institute of Chemical Engineers, 33, 93–110.
Nicod, J. (1976) Karst des gypses et des evaporites associees.
Annales de Geographie, 471, 513–54.
Nicod, J. (1990) Murettes et terrasses de culture dans les regions karstiques me´diterrane´enes. M´editerran´ee, 3–4, 43–50.
Nicod, J. (1992) Barrages en terrains karstiques; proble`mes ge´omorphologiques et ge´otechniques dans le domaine Me´di- terrane´en, in Ge´o-Me´diter, Ge´ographie physique  et Me´diter- rane´e (eds M. Tabeau, P. Pech, and L. Simon) (Hommage a` G. Beaudet et E. Miossenet), Sorbonne, Paris, pp. 185–200.
Nicod, J.  (1996) Karst  et  mines en  France et  en Europe.
Karstologia, 27(1), 1–20.
Nicod, J. (1997) Les canyons karstique ‘‘nouvelles approaches de proble`mes ge´omorphologiques classigues’’ (spe´cialement dans les domaines me´diterrane´ens et tropicau). Quateraire, 8(2–3), pp. 71–89.




Nicod, J. (2002) Pamukkale (Hie´ropolis): un site de  travertins hydrothermaux exceptionnel de Turquie.   Karstologia,  39, 51–4.
Nicod, J., Julian, M. and Anthony, E. (1996) A historical review of man–karst relationships: miscellaneous uses of karst  and their impact. Rivista di Geografia Italiana, 103, 289–338.
Nishiikumi, K. (1993) Role of in situ cosmogenic nuclides 10Be and 26Al in the study of diverse geomorphic processes. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 18, 407–25.
Noel, M. and Bull, P.A. (1982) The palaeomagnetism of  sedi- ments from Clearwater Cave, Mulu, Sarawak. Cave Science, 9(2),134–41.
Noller, J.S., Sowers, J.M. and Lettis, W.R. (2000)  Quaternary Geochronology: Methods and Applications,  American Geo- physical Union, Washington, DC, 582 pp.
Nordstrom D.K. (2004) Modeling low-temperature geochemical processes, in Treatise in Geochemistry, 5, Surface and Ground Water, Weathering Soils (ed. I. Drever),  Elsevier-Pergamon, Oxford, 626 pp.
Northup, D.E. and Lavoie, K.H. (2001) Geomicrobiology of caves: a review. Geomicrobiology Journal, 18, 199–222.
Nunn, P. (1986) Implications of migrating geoid anomalies for the interpretation of high-level fossil coral reefs. Bulletin, Geological Society of America, 97, 946–52.
Olive, W.W. (1957) Solution subsidence troughs, Castile Forma- tion  of  gypsum  plain,  Texas  and  New  Mexico.  Geological Society of America Bulletin, 68(B693), 351–8.
Ollier, C.D. (1975) Coral island geomorphology:the  Trobriand Islands. Zeitschrift fur Geomorphologie, 19(2), 164–90.
Onac, B.P. (1997) Crystallography of speleothems, in Cave Minerals of the World, 2nd edn (eds C.A. Hill and P. Forti), National  Speleological  Society  of  America,  Huntsville,  AL, pp. 230–36.
Onac, B.P. and Veres¸, D.S¸. (2003) Sequence of secondary phosphate deposition in a karst environment: evidence  from Ma˘gurici Cave, Romania. European Journal of  Mineralogy, 15, 741–745.
Onac, B.P., Viehmann, I., Lundberg, J., et al. (2005) U–Th ages constraining the Neanderthal footprint at Vaˆrtop  Cave, Romania. Quaternary Science Reviews, 24, 1151–7.
Onac, B.P., Tudor, T., Constantin, S. and Persoiu, A. (eds) (2006) Archives of Climate Change in Karst, Special Publication 10, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, 246 pp.
O’Neill, J.R., Clayton, R.N. and Mayeda, T. (1969) Oxygen isotope fractionation in divalent metal carbonates. Journal of Chemistry and Physics, 51, 5547–8.
Ordonez, S., Gonzalez Martin, J.A., Garcia del Cura, M.A. and Pedley, H.H. (2005) Temperate and semi-arid tufas in the Pleistocene to Recent fluvial barrage system in the Mediterra- nean area: The Ruidera Lakes Natural Park (Central  Spain).
Geomorphology, 69, 332–50.
Osborne, R.A.L (1999) The origin of the Jenolan Caves: elements of a new synthesis and framework chronology, Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales, 121, 1–27.
Osborne, R.A.L. (2001) Petrography of lithified cave sediments, Proceedings of the 13th International Congress of Speleology, Brasilia, Vol. 1, pp. 101–4.

Osborne, R.A.L. (2004) The trouble with cupolas. Acta Carso- logica, 33(2), 9–36.
Osmaston, H. and Sweeting, M.M. (1982) Geomorphology  (of the Gunung Mulu National Park). Sarawak Museum Journal, 30(51, new series), 75–93.
Ota, Y. and Chappell, J. (1999) Holocene sea-level rise and coral reef  growth  on  a  tectonically  rising  coast,  Huon  Peninsula, Papua New Guinea. Quaternary International, 55, 51–9.
Padilla A., Pulidobosch A. Mangin A. (1994) Relative  impor- tance of baseflow and quickflow from hydrographs  of karst spring. Ground Water, 32(2), 267–77.
Palmer, A.N. (1975) The origin of maze caves. Bulletin of  the National Speleological Society, 37(3), 56–76.
Palmer, A.N. (1984) Geomorphic interpretation of karst features, in Groundwater as a Geomorphic Agent (ed. R.G.  LaFleur), Allen & Unwin, London, pp. 173–209.
Palmer, A.N. (1991) Origin and morphology of limestone caves.
Geological Society of America Bulletin, 103, 1–21.
Palmer, A.N. (1995) Geochemical models for the origin of macroscopic solution porosity in carbonate rocks. in Uncon- formities and Porosity in Carbonate Strata (eds D.A.  Budd,
P.M. Harris and A. Saller), Memoir 63, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, pp. 77–101.
Palmer, A.N. (1999) Anisotropy in carbonate aquifers, in Karst Modeling (eds A.N. Palmer, M.V. Palmer and I.D. Sasowsky) (1999), Special Publication 5, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 223–7.
Palmer, A.N. (2000) Hydrogeologic control of cave patterns, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klim- chouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 77–90. Palmer,  A.N.  (2002)  Speleogenesis  in  carbonate  rocks,   in Evolution   of   Karst:   from   Prekarst   to   Cessation    (ed.
F. Gabrovsek), Institut za raziskovanje krasa, ZRC SAZU, Postojna-Ljubljana, pp. 43–59.
Palmer,  A.N.  and  Audra,  P.  (2003)  Patterns  of  caves,   in Encyclopedia  of  Caves  and  Karst  Science  (ed.  J.  Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 573–5.
Palmer, A.N. and Palmer, M.V. (1989) Geologic history of  the Black Hills Caves, South Dakota. National  Speleological Society, Bulletin, 51, 72–99.
Palmer, A.N. and Palmer, M.V. (1995) The Kaskaskia  paleo- karst of the Northern Rocky Mountains and the Black Hills, northwestern U.S.A. Carbonates and Evaporites, 10, 148–60. Palmer, A.N. and Palmer, M.V. (2000) Speleogenesis of the Black
Hills Maze Caves, South Dakota, U.S.A, in  Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford,
A.N.  Palmer  and  W.  Dreybrodt),  National   Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 274–81.
Palmer, A.N. and Palmer, M.V. (2003) Geochemistry of  capi- llary seepage in Mammoth Cave. www.Speleogenesis,  1(4), 10 pp.
Palmer, A.N., Palmer, M.V. and Sasowsky, I.D. (eds) (1999) Karst Modeling, Special Publication 5, Karst Waters   Institute, Charles Town, WV, 265 pp.
Palmer, M.V. and Palmer, A.N. (1975) Landform development in the Mitchell Plain of southern Indiana: origin of a  partially




karsted plain. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, N.F., 19(1), 1–39.
Palmer, M.V. and Palmer, A.N. (1989) Paleokarst of the United States, in Paleokarst; a Systematic and Regional Review (eds
P. Bosak, D.C. Ford, J. Glazek and I. Horacek),  Academia Praha/Elsevier, Prague, pp. 337–63.
Palmer, R.J. and Heath, L.M. (1985) The effect of  anchialine factors and fracture control on cave development below eastern Grand Bahama. Cave Science, 12(3), 93–7.
Paloc, H. and J. Margat (1985) Report on hydrogeological maps of karstic terrains, in Hydrogeological Mapping in Asia and the Pacific Region (eds W. Grimelmann, K.D.  Krampe   and
W. Struckmeier), International Contributions to Hydrogeology, Vol. 7, Heise, Hannover, pp. 301–15.
Panno, S.V., Hackley, K.C., Hwang, H.H. and Kelly, W.R. (2001) Determination of the sources of nitrate contamination in karst springs using isotopic and chemical indicators.  Chemical Geology, 179, 113–28.
Panosˇ, V. (2001) Karstological  and Speleological  Terminology. Slovak Caves Administration and Geological Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Zilina, Slovakia, 352 pp. [Defini- tions in the Slovak language, with the  equivalent terms in English, French, German, Italian, Russian and Spanish.]
Panos, V. and Stelcl O. (1968) Physiographic and geologic control in development of Cuban mogotes. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 12(2), 117–73.
Pare´s, J.M. and Pe´rez-Gonza´lez, A. (1995) Paleomagnetic age for hominid fossils at Atapuerca  archaeological  site,   Spain. Science, 269, 830–2.
Parizek, R.P. (1976) On the nature and significance of fracture traces and lineaments in carbonate and other terranes, in Karst Hydrology and Water Resources: Vol. 1 Karst  Hydrology (ed. V. Yevjevich), Water Resources  Publications, Colorado, pp. 47–108.
Parkhurst, D.L. and Appelo, C.A.J. (1999) User’s guide to PHREEQC (Version 2) – a computer program for Speciation, Batch   Reaction,   One-Dimensional   Transport   and   Inverse Geochemical Calculations, Report 99–4259, Water Resources Investigations, US Geological Survey.
Pasini, G. (1973) Sull’importanza speleogenetica dell’ ‘erosione antigravitativa’. Le Grotte d’Italia, 4, 297–326.
Paterson, K. (1979) Limestone springs in the Oxfordshire Scarp- lands: the significance of spatial and temporal variations in  their  chemistry.  Zeitschrift   fu¨r  Geomorphologie,   N.F. Supplement-Band, 32, 46–66.
Patterson, D.A., Davey, J.C. Cooper, A.H. and Ferris, J.K. (1995) The investigation of dissolution subsidence   incorporating microgravity geophysics at Ripon, Yorkshire. Quaterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 28, 83–94.
Paulsen, D.E., Li, H.-C. and Ku, T.-L (2003) Climate variability in central China over the last 1270 years revealed by  high- resolution stalagmite records. Quaternary Science Reviews, 22, 691–701.
Pease, P.P. and Gomez, B. (1997) Landscape development  as indicated  by  basin  morphology and  the  magnetic  polarity of cave sediments,  Crawford  Upland,   south-central Indiana. American Journal of Science, 297, 842–58.

Pechorkin, A.N. (1986) On gypsum and anhydrite distribution in zones near to the surface of sulphate massifs. Le Grotte d’Italia, 4(XII), 397–406.
Pechorkin, A.N. and Bolotov, G.V. (1983) Geodynamics of Relief in Karstified Massifs, University of Perm, 83 pp.  [In Russian.]
Pechorkin, I.A. (1986) Engineering geological investigations of gypsum karst. Le Grotte d’Italia, 4(XII), 383–8.
Penck, A. (1900) Geomorphologische Studien aus der Hercego- vina. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Osterreichischer Alpenver, 31, 25–41.
Pentecost, A. (1992) Carbonate chemistry of surface waters in a temperate karst region: the southern Yorkshire Dales, UK. Journal of Hydrology, 139, 211–32.
Pentecost, A. (1994) Travertine-forming cyanobacteria, in Break- throughs in Karst Geomicrobiology and Redox Geochemistry (eds I.D. Sasowsky and M.V. Palmer), Special Publication 1, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, p. 60.
Pentecost, A. (1995) The Quaternary travertine deposits of Europe and Asia Minor. Quaternary Science Reviews, 14, 1005–28.
Perna, G. (1990) Forme di corrosione carsica superficiale al Lago di Loppio (Trentino). Natura Alpina, XLI(4), 17–27.
Perna, G. and Sauro, U. (1978) Atlante delle microforme di dissoluzione carsica  superficiale del  Trentino  e del  Veneto, Museo Tridentino, Trento, 176 pp.
Perrin, J., Pochon, A., Jeannin, P.-Y., and Zwahlen, F.  (2004) Vulnerability mapping in karstic areas: validation  by field assessments. Environmental Geology, 46, 237–45.
Perritaz, L. (1996) Le ‘karst en vagues’ des Ait Abdi (Haut-Atlas central, Maroc). Karstologia, 28(1), 1–12.
Perry, E., Marin, L., McClain, J. and Guadalupe, V. (1996) Ring of Cenotes (sinkholes), northwest Yucatan, Mexico: its hydro- geologic characteristics and possible association with the Chicxulub impact crater. Geology, 23, 17–20.
Peterson, G.M. (1976) Pollen analysis and the  origin of  cave sediments in the Central Kentucky Karst. Bulletin of  the National Speleological Society 38(3), 53–8.
Peterson, J.A. (1982) Limestone pedestals and denudation esti- mates from Mt. Jaya, Irian Jaya. Australian Geographer, 15, 170–3.
Petit,  J.R.,  Jouzel,  J.,  Raynaud,  D.,  et  al.  1999,  Climate  and atmospheric history of the past 420,000 years from the Vostok ice core, Antarctica. Nature, 399, 429–36.
Pfeffer, K.-H. (1993) Zur Genese tropischer Karstgebiete auf den Westindischen Inseln. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie,  N.F. Supplement-Band, 93, 137–58.
Pfeiffer,    D.    (1963)    Die    geschichtliche    Entwicklung    der Anschauungen uber das karstgrundwasser. Beihefte zum Geo- logischen Jahrbuch (Hannover), 57, 111 pp.
Pham,  K.  (1985)  The  development  of  karst  landscapes   in Vietnam. Acta Geologica Polonica 35(3/4), 305–19.
Phillips, W.M. (2004) Cosmogenic dating, in Encyclopedia  of Geomorphology  (ed.  A.S.  Goudie),  Routledge,   London, pp. 192–4.
Pielou, E.C. (1969) An Introduction to Mathematical Ecology,
J. Wiley & Sons, New York.




Piccini, L., Romeo, A. and Badino, G. (1999) Moulins and marginal  contact  caves  in  the  Gornergletscher,  Switzerland. Nimbus, 23/24, 94–9.
Piccini, L., Drysdale, R. and Heijnis, H. (2003) Karst morphology and cave sediments as indictors of the uplift history in the Alpi Apuane (Tuscany, Italy). Quaternary  International, 101/102, 219–27.
Picknett,   R.G.,   Bray,   L.G.   and   Stenner,   R.D.   (1976)   The chemistry of cave waters, in The Science of Speleology  (eds
T.D. Ford and C.H.D. Cullingford), Academic Press, London, pp. 212–66.
Pinault, J-L., Plagnes, V., Aquilina, L. and Bakalowicz, M. (2001) Inverse modeling of the hydrological and the hydrochemical behaviour of hydrosystems: characterization of karst system functioning. Water Resources Research, 37(8),
2191–204.
Pinneker, E.V. and Shenkman, B.M. (1992) Karst hydrology in the zone of sporadic permafrost, taking the southern part of the Siberian Platform as the example, Proceedings, 2nd Interna- tional Symposium of  Glacier  Caves  and  Karst   in  Polar Regions, University of Silesia, pp. 105–18.
Pitty, A.F. (1968a) The scale and significance of solutional loss from the limestone tract of the southern Pennines, Proceedings of the Geologist’s Association, 79(2), 153–77.
Pitty, A.F. (1968b) Calcium carbonate content of water in relation to flow-through time. Nature, 217, 939–40.
Plagnes, V. and Bakalowicz, M. (2002) The protection of a karst water resource from the example of the Larzac karst plateau (south of France): a matter of regulation or a matter of process knowledge? Engineering Geology, 65, 107–16.
Plan  L.  (2005)  Factors  controlling  carbonate  dissolution  rates quantified in a field test in the Austrian alps. Geomorphology, 68, 201–212.
Playford, P. (2002) Palaeokarst, pseudokarst sequence stratigra- phy in Devonian reef complexes of the Canning Basin, Western Australia, in The Sedimentary Basins of Western Australia 3 (eds M. Keep and S.J. Moss), Proceedings of the  Petroleum Exploration Society of Australia Symposium, Perth, Western Australia, pp. 763–93.
Pluhar, A. and Ford, D.C. (1970) Dolomite karren of the Niagara Escarpment, Ontario, Canada. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 14(4), 392–410.
Plummer, L.N. (1975) Mixing of seawater with calcium carbo- nate ground water: quantitative studies in the geological sciences. Geological Society of America Memoir, 142, 219–36.
Plummer, L.N. and E. Busenberg (1982) The solubilities of calcite,  aragonite  and  vaterite  in  solutions  between  O○   and 90○C an evaluation of the aqueous model for the  system CaCO3——CO2——H2O.  Geochimica  et  Cosmochimica Acta, 46, 1011–40.
Plummer, L.N. and Wigley, T.M.L. (1976) The dissolution  of calcite in CO2 saturated solutions at 25○C and 1 atmosphere total pressure. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 40, 191–202.
Plummer, L.N., Wigley, T.M.L. and Parkhurst, D.L. (1978) The kinetics of calcite dissolution in CO2 – water systems at 5○ to

60○C and 0.0 to 1.0 atm CO2. American Journal of Science,
278, 179–216.
Plummer, L.N., Parkhurst, D.C. and Wigley, T.M.L. (1979) Critical review of the kinetics of calcite dissolution and precipitation, in Chemical Modelling in Aqueous Systems (ed. E. A. Jenne), American Chemical Society,  Washington, DC, pp. 537–73.
Poiseuille,   J.M.L.   (1846)   Recherches   experimentales   sur   le mouvement des liquides dans les tubes de tres petits diametres. Acade´mie des Sciences, Paris Memoir Sav.   Etrang.,  9, 433–545.
Pollard, W., Omelon, C., Andersen, D. and McKay, C. (1999.  Perennial  spring  occurrence  in  the  Expedition  Fiord area of western Axel Heiberg Island, Canadian High  Arctic. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 36, 105–120.
Polyak, V.J., McIntosh, W.C., Gu¨ven, N. and Provencio, P. (1998) Age and origin of Carlsbad Cavern and related  caves  from 40Ar/39Ar of Alunite. Science, 279, 1919–1922.
Pouyllan, M. and M. Seurin (1985) Pseudo-karst dans les roches gres quartzitiques de la formation Roraima. Karstologia, 5(1), 45–52.
Prestor, J. and Veselic, M. (1993). Effects of long term precipita- tion variability on water balance assessment of a karst basin, in Proceedings  of  the  International  Symposium  on   Water Resources in Karst with Special Emphasis on Arid and Semi Arid Zones, (ed. A. Afrasiabian), Shiraz, Iran, pp. 887–99.
Prestwich, J. (1854) Swallow holes on the chalk hills near Canterbury.   Quarterly   Journal   of   the   Geological   Society (London), C, 222–4.
Price, M., Downing, R.A. Edmunds, W.M. (1993) The Chalk as an aquifer, in Hydrogeology of the Chalk of North-West Europe (eds R.A. Downing, M. Price and G.P. Jones), Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 35–8.
Priesnitz, K. (1974) Losungsraten und irhe  geomorphologische Relevanz. Abhandlungen Akademie der  Wissenschaften in Go¨ttingen, Mathematisch-Physikalische  Klasse 3, Folge 29, 68084.
Pringle J.M. (1973) Morphometric analysis of surface  depres- sions in the Mangapu karst.  MSc  thesis    University of Auckland, New Zealand.
Proctor, C.J., Baker, A. and Barnes, W.L. (2002) A three thousand year record of North Atlantic climate. Climate Dynamics, 19, 449–54.
Pulido-Bosch, A. (1986) Le karst dans les gypses de Sorbas (Almeria): aspects morphologiques et hydrogeologiques. Karstologia Memoires, 1, 27–35.
Pulido-Bosch, A., Molina, L., Navarrete, F. and Martinez Vidal,
J.L. (1993) Nitrate content in the groundwater of the Campo de Dalias (Almeria), in Some Spanish Karstic Aquifers  (ed.
A. Pulido-Bosch), University of Granada Press, Granada, pp. 183–94.
Pulina, M. (1971) Observations on the chemical denudation of some karst areas of Europe and Asia. Studia Geomorphologica Carpatho-Balcanica, 5(B752), 79–92.
Pulina, M. (1992) Glacio-karsts gypseux de la zone polaire et pe´riglaciaire: Exemple du Spitzberg et de Sibe´rie orientale,   in   Karsts   et   Evolutions   Climatiques   (eds   J-N.




Salomon and R. Maire), Presses Universitaire de Bordeaux, pp. 266–83.
Pulina, M. (2005) Le karst et les phenomenes karstiques  simi- laires des regions froides, in Salomon, J.-N et Pulina, M. Les karsts des re´gions climatiques extreˆmes. Karstologia  Me´m- oires, 14, 11–100.
Pulinowa,  M.Z.  and  Pulina,  M.  (1972)  Phnomenes  cryogenes dans les grottes et gouffres des Tatras. Biuletyn Peryglacjalny, 21, 201–35.
Purdy, E.G. (1974) Reef configurations: cause and effect, in Reefs in Time and Space (ed. L.F. Laporte), Special Publication 18, Society   of   Economic   Palaeontologists   and  Mineralogists, Tulsa, OK, pp. 9–76.
Purdy, E.G. and Winter, E.L. (2001) Origin of atoll  lagoons.
  Geological Society of America Bulletin, 113(7), 837–54. Purser, B., Tucker, M. and Zeuger, D. (eds) (1994) Dolomites: a
  Volume in Honour of Dolomieu, Oxford, Blackwell, 451 pp. Qian, W. and Zhu, Y. (2002) Little Ice Age climate near Beijing,
China, inferred from historial and stalagmite records.  Qua- ternary Research, 57, 109–19.
Quinif, Y. (1996) Enregistrement et datation des effets  sismo- tectoniques par l’e´tude des spe´le´othemes. Annales de la Socie´te´ Ge´ologique de Belgique, 119(1), 1–13.
Quinlan, J.F. (1976) New Fluorescent direct dye suitable for tracing groundwater and detection with cotton, Proceedings of the  3rd  International  Symposium  on  Underground   Water Tracing, Vol. 1, Institute of Karst Research,   Postojna, Ljubljana, pp. 257–62.
Quinlan, J.F. (1978) Types of karst, with emphasis on cover beds in their classification and development. Univ. of Texas at Austin PhD thesis, 323 pp.
Quinlan, J.F. (1983) Groundwater pollution by sewage, creamery waste heavy metals in the Horse Cave area, Kentucky, in Environmental  Karst   (ed.  P.H.   Dougherty),  Geology   and Speleology Publications, Cincinnati, p. 52.
Quinlan, J.F. (1986) Legal aspects of sinkhole development and flooding in karst terranes: 1. review and synthesis.  Environ- mental Geology and Water Science, 8(1/2), 41–61.
Quinlan, J.F. and Ewers, R.O. (1981) Hydrogeology of the Mammoth Cave Region, Kentucky, in Geological Society  of America  Cincinnati  1981  Field  Trip  Guidebooks,  Vol.  3, (ed.T.G. Roberts), pp. 457–506.
Quinlan,  J.F.  and  Ewers,  R.O.  (1985)  Ground  water   flow in limestone terranes: strategy, rationale and  procedure for reliable, efficient monitoring  of  ground   water quality in karst areas, National Symposium and  Exposition on Aquifer Restoration and Ground Water   Monitoring, Proceedings, National  Water  Well    Association,   Worthington,   OH, pp. 197–234.
Quinlan, J.F. and Ewers, R.O. (1986) Reliable monitoring in karst terranes: it can be done, but not by an EPA-approved method. Ground Water Monitoring Review, 6(1), 4–6.
Quinlan,  J.F.  and  Ray,  J.A.  (1991)  Ground-water  remediation may be achievable in some karst aquifers that  are contami- nated, but it ranges from unlikely to  impossible in most: I. Implications of long-term tracer tests for universal failure by scientists, consultants, and regulators, in Proceedings of the 3rd

Conference on Hydrology, Ecology, Monitoring, and Manage- ment of Ground Water in Karst Terranes (Nashville, Tennessee) (eds J.F. Quinlan and A. Stanley), National  Ground Water Association, Dublin, Ohio, pp. 553–8.
Quinlan, J.F., Smith, A.R. and Johnson, K.S. (1986)  Gypsum karst and salt karst of the United States of America. Le Grotte d’Italia, 4(13), 73–92.
Quinlan, J.F., Smart, P.L., Schindel, G.M., Alexander, E.C., Edwards, A.J. and Smith, A.R. (1991) Recommended admin- istrative/regulatory definition of karst aquifer, principles for classification of  carbonate  aquifers,  practical  evaluation of vulnerability of karst aquifers, and determination of optimum sampling frequency at springs, in Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Hydrology, Ecology, Monitoring, and Management of Ground Water in Karst Terranes (Nashville, Tennessee)   (eds   J.F.   Quinlan   and   A.   Stanley),   National Ground Water Association, Dublin, Ohio, pp. 573–635.
Rachlewicz, G. and Szczucin´ski, W. (2004) Seasonal, annual and decadal ice mass balance changes in Jaskinia   Lodowaw Ciemniaku, the Tatra Mountains, Poland.  Theoretical and Applied Karstology, 17, 16–21.
Racovit¸a˘, G. and Onac, B.P. (2000) Sca˘ris¸oara Glacier  Cave, Editura Carpatica, Cluj-Napoca, 139 pp.
Racovit¸a˘, G., Moldovan, O. and Onac, B. (eds) (2002)  Mono- grafia carstului din Munt¸ii Pa˘durea Craiului,  Institul de Speleologie ‘Emil Racovit¸a˘’, Cluj-Napoca, 264 pp.
Racovitza,  Gh.  (1972)  Sur  la  correlation  entre  l’evolution  du climat et la dynamique des dpots souterrains de glace  de la grotte Scarisoara. Travaux de l’Institut de Speologie  ‘Emile Racovitza, XI, 373–92.
Ragozin, A.L., Yolkin, V.A. and Chumachenko, S.A. (2005) Experience  of  regional  karst  hazard  and  risk  assessment  in Russia, in Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst (ed. B.E. Beck),   Geotechnical Special Publication No. 144, American  Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 72–81.
Railsback, L.B. (1999) Patterns in the compositions, properties and geochemistry of carbonate minerals. Carbonates and Evaporites, 14, 1–20.
Railsback, L.B. (2000) An Atlas of Speleothem Microfabrics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA. http:// www.gly.uga.edu/ railsback/speleoatlas/.html
Railsback, L.B., Brook, G.A., Chen, J., et al. (1994)  Environ- mental controls on the petrology of a late Holocene speleothem from Botswana with annual layers of aragonite  and calcite. Journal of Sedimentary Research, 64, 147–55.
Rauch, H.W. and White, W.B. (1970) Lithologic controls on the development of solution porosity in carbonate aquifers. Water Resources Research, 6, 1175–92.
Ray, J.A. and Currens, J.C. (1998a) Mapped Karst Ground-water Basins in the Beaver Dam 30 × 60 Minute Quadrangle, Map and Chart Series 19, Kentucky Geological Survey.
Ray, J.A. and Currens, J.C. (1998b) Mapped Karst Ground-water Basins in the Campbellsville 30 × 60 Minute Quadrangle, Map and Chart Series 17, Kentucky Geological Survey.
Ray,  J.A.,  Webb,  J.S.  and  O’Dell,  P.W.  (1994)  Groundwater Sensitivity Regions of Kentucky 1:500 000,   Groundwater




Branch, Division of Water, Kentucky Department for  Envir- onmental Protection.
Reams, M.W. (1968) Cave sediments and the geomorphic history of the Ozarks, Washington Univ. PhD thesis, Missouri.
Reardon, E.J. (1992) Problems and approaches to the prediction of the chemical composition in cement/water systems. Waste Management, 12, 221–39.
Reilly, T.E. and Goodman, A.S. (1985) Quantitative analysis of saltwater-freshwater relationships in groundwater systems – a historical perspective. Journal of Hydrology, 80, 125–60.
Renault, P. (1968) Contribution a l’etude des actions  mechan- iques et sedimentologiques dans la speleogenese.  Annales de Speleologie, 22, 5–21, 209–67; 23, 259–307;  529–96;
24, 313–37.
Renault, P. (1970 La formation des caverns. Presses universitaire de France, Paris, 127 pp.
Renault, P. (1982) CO2 atmospherique karstique et  speleomor- phologie. Revue belge Geographique, 106, 121–30.
Renaut,  R.W.  and  Jones,  B.  (2003)  Sedimentology  of   hot spring systems. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences,  40, 1439–42.
Rhoades, R. and Sinacori, N.M. (1941) Patterns of groundwater flow and solution. Journal of Geology, 49, 785–94.
Rhodes, D., Lantos, E.A., Lantos, J.A., et al. (1984) Pine Point orebodies  and  their  relationship  to  structure,  dolomitization and karstification of the Middle Devonian  barrier complex. Economic Geology, 70, 91–1055.
Rice, J.E. and Hartowicz, E. (2003) Biota as water quality indicators in springs at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, in Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst (ed.
B.E. Beck), Proceedings of 9th Multidisciplinary Conference, Huntsville,  Alabama,  Geotechnical  Special  Publication  122, American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 339–48.
Richards,    D.A.    and    Dorale,    J.A.    (2003)    Uranium-series chronology and environmental applications  of speleothems, in Uranium-series Geochemistry (eds B.   Bourdon, G.M. Henderson, C.C. Lundstrom and S.P.  Turner). Reviews in
Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 52, 407–61.
Richards, D.A., Smart, P.L. and Edwards, R.L. (1994) Maximum sea levels for the last glacial period  from U-series ages  of submerged speleothems. Nature, 367, 357–60.
Richards, D.A., Bottrell, S.H., Cliff, R.A. and Strohle, K.D. (1996) U–Pb dating of Quaternary age speleothems, in Climate Change: The Karst Record (ed. S.-E. Lauritzen),  Special Publication 2, Karst Waters Institute, Charles  Town, WV, pp. 136–7.
Richardson, J.J. (2001) Legal impediments to utilizing ground- water as a municipal water supply source in karst terrain in the United  States,  in  Geotechnical  and  Environmental  Applica- tions of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds B.F.  Beck and
J.G. Herring), Lisse, Balkema, pp. 253–58.
Richter, E. (1907) Beitrage zur Landeskunde Bosniens und der Herzegowina. Wissenschaftliche Mitteilungen Bosnien Herze- gowina, 10, 383–545.
Rickard, D.T. and Sjoberg, E.L. (1983) Mixed kinetic control of calcite  dissolution  rates.  American  Journal  of  Science,  238, 815–30.

Riding, R. (2003) Structure and composition of organic reefs and carbonate mud mounds: concepts and categories. Earth Science Reviews, 58(1–2), 233–41.
Riggs, A.C., Carr, W.J., Kolesar, P.T. and Hoffman, R.J.  (1994) Tectonic speleogenesis of Devil’s Hole, Nevada implications for hydrogeology and the development of long, continuous paleoen- vironmental records. Quaternary Research, 42, 241–54.
Ristic, D.M. (1976) Water regime of flooded poljes, in  Karst Hydrology and Water Resources: Vol. 1 Karst  Hydrology (ed. V. Yevjevich), Water Resources  Publications, Colorado, pp. 301–18.
Roberge,  J.  (1979  Geomorphologie  du  karst  de  la   Haute- Saumons, Ile d’Anticosti, Quebec. McMaster Univ. MSc thesis, 217 pp.
Roberge, J. and Caron, D. (1983) The occurrence of an unusual type of pisolite: the cubic cave pearls of Castleguard  Cave, Columbia Icefields, Alberta, Canada. Arctic and   Alpine Research, 15(4), 517–22.
Roberts, M.S., Smart, P.L. and Baker, A. (1998) Annual  trace element variations in a Holocene speleothem. Earth  and Planetary Science Letters, 154, 237–46.
Robinson, D.A. and Williams, R.G.B. (1994) Sandstone weathering and landforms in Britain and Europe, in Rock Weathering and Landform Evolution (eds D.A. Robinson and
  R.G.B. Williams), J. Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp. 371–91. Robinson, V.D. and Oliver, D. (1981) Geophysical logging  of water  wells,  in  Case  Studies  in  Groundwater   Resources Evaluation (ed. J. W. Lloyd), Clarendon, London, pp. 45–64. Rodet, J. (1996) Une nouvelle organisation  ge´ome´trique du drainage  karstique  des  craies:  le   labyrinthe  d’alte´ration, l’example de la grotte de la Mansonnie`re (Bellou-sur-Huisene,
Orne,  France).  Comptes  Rendus,  Acade´mie  des   Sciences (Paris), 322(se´rie IIa), 1039–45.
Rodriguez,   R.   (1995).   Mapping   karst   solution   features   by the integrated geophysical method, in  Karst   Geohazards (ed. B. F. Beck), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 443–9.
Roehl, P.O. and Choquette, P.W. (1985) Carbonate  Petroleum Reservoirs, Springer-Verlag, New York, 622 pp.
Roglic´, J. (1960) Das Verha¨ltnis der Flusserosion zum Karstpro- zess. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 4(2), 116–238.
Roglic´, J. (1972) Historical review of morphological concepts, in Karst: Important Karst Regions of the Northern Hemisphere (eds M. Herak and V.T. Stringfield), Elsevier,  Amsterdam, pp. 1–18.
Roglic´, J. (1974) Les caracteres specifiques du karst Dinarique.
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Memoirs et Documents, 15, 269–78.
Romani, L., Vasseur, F. and Viala, C. (1999) Le systeme  des Fontanilles. Spelunca, 75, 31–8.
Romero, J.C. (1970) The movement of bacteria and virus through porous media. Ground Water, 8(2), 37–48.
Roques, H. (1962) Considerations theoriques sur la chimie des carbonates. Annales de Speleologie, 17, 1–41, 241–84,
463–7.
Roques, H. (1964) Contribution a l’etude statique et cintique des systemes  gaz  carbonique-eau-carbonate.  Annales  de  Speleo- logie, 19, 255–484.




Roques,  H.  (1969)  Problemes  de  transfert  de  masse  poss  par l’evolution des eaux souterraines. Annales de Speleologie, 24, 455–94.
Rose,  G.  (1837)  Uber  die  Buildung  des  Kalkspaths  und Aragonite. Annales de Chimie et de Physique, 2(42), 353–67. Ross, J.-H., Serefiddin, F., Hauns, M. and Smart.C.C. (2001) 24 h
tracer tests on diurnal parameter variability in a subglacial karst conduit: Small River valley, Canada. Theoretical and Applied Karstology, 13–14, 93–9.
Rossi, G. (1986) Karst and structure in tropical areas, in  New Directions in Karst (eds K. Paterson and M.M. Sweeting), Geo Books, Norwich, pp. 189–212.
Rossi, C., Munoz, A. and Cortel, A. (1997) Cave development along the water table in the Cobre System (Sierra de Penalabra, Cantabrian Mountains, Spain, Proceedings of the 12th Inter- national Congress of Speleology, Vol. 1, pp. 179–85.
Rothlisberger, H. (1998. The physics of englacial and subglacial meltwater drainage, Proceedings, 4th International Symposium on Glacier Caves and Cryokarst in Polar and High Mountain Regions, Salzburg, pp. 13–23.
Rozanski, K. and Florkowski, T. (1979) Krypton-85 dating  of groundwater, in Isotope Hydrology 1978, Vol. 2, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 949 pp.
Rozanski, K., Araguas-Araguas, L. and Gonfiantini, R.  (1993) Isotopic patterns in modern global precipitation, in  Climate Change in Continental Isotopic Records, Geophysical Mono- graph 78, American Geophysical Union,  Washington, DC, pp. 1–36.
Salomon, J.-N. (2000) Pre´cis de karstologie, Presses  Universi- taires, Bordeaux, 250 pp.
Salomon, J.-N. (2003a) Cenotes et trous bleus, sites remarquables menace´s par l’e´cotourisme. Cahiers  d’Outres-Mer, 56(223), 327–52.
Salomon, J.-N. (2003b) Karst system response in volcanically and tectonically active regions. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geomorphologie,
N.F. Supplement-Band, 131, 89–112.
Salomon, J.-N. (2005) Les karsts des zones arides et semi-arides, in Les karsts des re´gions climatiques extreˆmes (eds J.-N Salomon    and    M.    Pulina).    Karstologia    Me´moires,    14, 159–91.
Salomon,  J.-N.  and  Bustos,  R.  (1992)  Le  karst  du  gypse  des Andes de Mendoza-Neuquen. Karstologia, 20, 11–22.
Salomon, J.-N. and Maire, R. (eds) (1992) Karst et  e´volutions climatiques, Presses Universitaires, Bordeaux, 520 pp.
Salomon, J.-N. and Pulina, M. (eds) (2005) Les karsts des re´gions climatiques extreˆmes. Karstologia Me´moires, 14, 220 pp.
Salomon, J.-N., Pomel, S. and Nicod, J. (1995) L’e´volution des cryptokarsts: comparaison entre le Pe´rigord-Quercy (France) et le Franken Alb (Allemagne). Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 39(4), 381–409.
Salomons, W. and Mook, W.G. (1980) Isotope geochemistry of carbonates in the weathering zone, in Handbook of Environ- mental   Isotope   Geochemistry,   Vol.   2   (eds   P.   Fritz   and
J. Fontes), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 239–69.
Salvamoser,  J.  (1984)  Krypton–85  for  groundwater  dating,  in Isotope Hydrology 1983, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, pp. 831–2.

Salvigsen O. and Elgersma, A. (1985) Large-scale karst features and open taliks at Valdeborgsletta, outer Isfjorden, Svalbard. Polar Research, 3(2), 145–53.
Sanchez, J.A., Perez, A., Coloma, P. and Martinez-Gil, J. (1998) Combined effects of groundwater and aeolian processes in the formation of the northernmost closed saline  depressions of Europe: north-east Spain. Hydrological  Processes,  12,
813–20.
Sandvik,  P.O.  and  Erdosh,  G.  (1977)  Geology  of  the  Cargill Phosphate Deposit in Northern Ontario, Bulletin,  Canadian Institute of Mining, pp. 90–6.
Sangster,   D.F.   (1988)   Breccia-hosted   lead–zinc   deposits   in carbonate  rocks,  in   Paleokarst   (eds   N.P.   James    and
  P.W. Choquette), Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 102–16.
Sarg,  J.F.  (2001)  The  sequence  stratigraphy,   sedimentology economic   importance   of   evaporite-carbonate transitions: a review. Sedimentary Geology, 140, 9–42.
Sasowsky,  I.D.  and  Mylroie,  J.  (eds)  (2004)  Studies  of  Cave Sediments: Physical and Chemical Records of  Paleoclimate, Kluwer Academic, New York, 329 pp.
Sasowsky, I. D. and Wicks, C.M. (eds) (2000) Groundwater Flow and Contaminant Transport in Carbonate Aquifers, Balkema, Rotterdam, 193 pp.
Sasowsky, I.D., White, W.B. and Schmidt, V.A. (1995) Determi- nation of stream-incision rate in the Appalachian plateaus by using cave sediment magnetostratigraphy. Geology, 23(5), 415–8.
Saunderson, H.C. (1977) The sliding bed facies  in sands  and gravels: a criterion for full-pipe (tunnel) flow. Sedimentology, 24, 623–38.
Sauro, U. (1996) Geomorphological aspects of gypsum karst areas with special emphasis on exposed areas.  International Journal of Speleology, 25(3–4), pp. 105–114.
Sauro, U., Martello, V. and Frigo, G. (1991) Karst environment and human impact in the Sette Communi Plateau  (Venetian Pre-Alps), in Proceedings of the International Conference on Environmental Changes  in  Karst  Areas   (eds  U.  Sauro,
A. Bondesan and M. Meneghel), I.C.E.C.K.A., Universita di Padova, pp. 269–78.
Sauter, M. (1992) Quantification and forecasting of regional groundwater flow and transport in a karst aquifer.  Tu¨binger Geowissenschaftlichen Abhandlungen, Reihe C, 13, 150 pp.
Sauter, M. (1997) Differentiation of flow components in a karst aquifer using the d18O signature, in Tracer Hydrology 97 (ed.
A. Kranjc), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 435–41.
Sawicki, L.R. von (1909) Ein Beitrag zum geographischen Zyklus im Karst. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geographie, 15, 185–204, 259–81. Sawkins, J., et al. (1869) Reports on the Geology  of Jamaica,
Memoir of the Geological Survey, Longman, Green, London (cited in Sweeting, 1972).
Scanlon, B.R., Mace, R.E., Barrett, M.E. and Smith, B. (2003) Can we simulate regional groundwater flow in a karst system using  equivalent  porous  media  models?  Case  study,  Barton Springs Edwards aquifer, USA. Journal of  Hydrology, 276,
137–158.
Schellmann, G., Radtke, U., Potter, E.-K., et al. (2004) Compar- ison of ESR and TIMS U/Th dating of marine isotope stage




(MIS) 5e, 5c, 5a coral from Barbados – implications for palaeo sea-level changes in the Caribbean. Quaternary International, 120, 41–50.
Schillat, B. (1977) Conservation of tectonic waves in the  axes of stalagmites over long periods, Proceedings of the  7th International Congress of Speleology, Sheffield, pp. 377–9.
Schmidl, A. (1854) Die Grotten und Hohlen von Adelsberg, Lueg, Planina und Laas, Wien, 316 pp.
Schmidt, K.-H. (1979) Karstmorphodynamik und ihre hydro- logische Steuerung. Erdkunde, 33(3), 169–78.
Schmidt, V.A. (1982) Magnetostratigraphy of clastic sediments from caves within the Mammoth Cave National Park, Kentucky. Science, 217, 827.
Schmotzer, J.K., Jester, W.A. and Parizek, R.R. (1973) Ground- water tracing with post sampling activation analysis. Journal of Hydrology, 20(B823), 217–36.
Schoeller, H. (1962) Les Eaux Souterraines, Masson et Cie, Paris, 642 pp.
Scholle, P.A. and James, N.P. (eds) (1995, 1996) Photo CD-Series 1, 2, 7, 8, Society of Economic Paleontologists  and Miner- alogists, Denver.
Scholle  P.A.,  Bebout,  D.G.  and  Moore,  C.H.  (eds)   (1983) Carbonate Depositional Environments, Memoir 33, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, 761 pp.
Schott, J., Brantley, S., Drear, D., et al. (1989) Dissolution kinetics of strained calcite. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 53, 373–82.
Schroeder, J. (1979) Le developpement des grottes dans la region du Premier Canyon de la Riviere Nahanni, Sud, T.N.O., Univ. Ottawa PhD thesis, 265 pp.
Schroeder, J. (1999) Le drainage late˙ral d’un glacier subpolaire.
Nimbus, 23/24, 100–3.
Schroeder,   J.   and   Ford,   D.C.   (1983)   Clastic   sediments   in Castleguard Cave, Columbia Icefields, Alberta, Canada. Arctic and Alpine Research, 15(4), 451–61.
Schroeder,  J.,  Beaupre´,  M.  and  Cloutier,  M.  (1990)  Substrat glaciotectonise´ et till synge´ne´tique a`  Pont-Rouge, Que´bec. Ge´ographie physique et Quaternaire, 44(1), 33–42.
Schultz, G.A. and Engman, E.T. (eds) (2000). Remote Sensing in Hydrology and Water Management, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Schulz, M. and Mudelsee, M. (2002) REDFIT: estimating red- noise spectra directly from unevenly spaced  palaeoclimatic time series. Computers and Geosciences, 28, 421–6.
Schulz,   M.   and   Statteger,   K.   (1997)  SPECTRUM:   spectral analysis of unevenly spaced paleoclimate time  series. Com- puters and Geosciences, 23(9), 929–45.
Schwabe, S. and Herbert, R.A. (2004) Black Holes of the Bahamas: what they are and why they are black. Quaternary International, 121, 3–11.
Schwarcz,  H.P.  (1980)  Absolute  age  determination  of  archae- ological sites by uranium series dating of travertine. Archaeo- metry, 22, 3–25.
Schwarcz,   H.P.   (1982)   Absolute   dating   of   travertine   from archaeological sites, in Nuclear  and  Chemical   Dating Techniques (ed. L.A. Currie), Symposium Series   176, American Chemical Society, pp. 475–90.

Schwarcz, H.P. (1993) Uranium series dating and the origin of modern man, in The Origin of Modern Humans and the Impact of Chronometric Dating (eds M. Aitken, P.A.   Mellard,
C.B. Stringer and Paul Mellars). Princeton University  Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 12–26.
Schwarcz, H.P. (2000) Dating bones and teeth: the beautiful and the dangerous, in Humanity from African Naissance to Coming Millennia (eds P. V. Tobia, M.A. Raath, J.  Moggi-Cecci, and  G.A.  Doyle),   Firenze   University    Press,   Florence, pp. 249–56.
Schwarcz, H.P. (in press) Stable isotopes in speleothems, in Encyclopedia of  Quaternary  Science  (ed. S.  Elias),  Elsevier, New York.
Schwarcz, H.P. and Lee, Hee-Kwon (2000) Electron spin reso- nance  dating  of  fault  rocks,  in  Quaternary  Geochronology: Applications in Quaternary Geology and  Paleoseismology (eds J. Sowers, J. Noller and W.J. Lettis), Monograph, American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, pp. 177–86.
Schwarcz,  H.P.,  Harmon,  R.S.,  Thompson,  P.  and  Ford,
D.C. (1976) Stable isotope studies of fluid inclusions in speleothems and their paleoclimatic significance. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 40, 657–665.
Schwartz, J.H., Vu, T.L., Nguyen, L.C., et al. (1995) A Review of the Pleistocene Hominoid Fauna of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam (excluding Hylobatidae). Anthropological Papers 76, American Museum of Natural History, 24 pp.
Sˇebela, S. (2003) The use of structural geological terms and their
  importance for karst caves. Acta Carsologica, 32(2), 53–64.
Selby, M.J. (1980) A rock mass strength classification for geomorphic purposes: with tests from Antarctica and New Zealand. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 24, 31–51.
Selby, M.J. and Hodder, A.P.W. (1993) Hillslope Materials and Processes, 2nd edn, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 451 pp. Self, C.A. and Hill, C.A. (2003) How speleothems grow: a guide to the ontogeny of cave minerals. Journal of Cave and Karst
Studies, 65(2), 130–51.
Senior, K. (2004) Di Feng Dong, China, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 285–7.
Serefiddin,  F.,  Schwarcz,  H.P.,  Ford,  D.C.  and  Baldwin,
S.  (2004)  Late  Pleistocene  paleoclimate  in  the  Black  Hills of South Dakota from isotopic records in   speleothems. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,   Palaeoecology,  203, 1–17.
Serefiddin,  F.,  Schwarcz,  H.P.  and  Ford,  D.C.  (2005)  Use  of hydrogen isotope variations in speleothem fluid inclusions as an independent measure of paleoclimate. Geological Society of America, Special Paper, 395, 43–53.
Shackleton, N.J. (2000) The 100,000-year Ice-Age cycle identified and found to lag temperature, carbon dioxide orbital eccentricity. Science, 289, 1897–902.
Shaw, J. (1988) Subglacial erosional marks, Wilton Creek, Ontario. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 25, 1256–67. Shaw, T.R. (1992) History of Cave Science: the Exploration and
Study of Limestone Caves to 1900, Sydney Speleological Society, Sydney, 338 pp.




Shen, G., Gao, X., Zhao, J-X Collerson, K.D. (2004)  U-series dating of Locality 15 at Zhoukoudian, China implications for hominid evolution. Quaternary Research, 62, 208–13.
Shevenell,  L.  (1996)  Analysis  of  well  hydrographs  in  a  karst aquifer: estimates of specific yields and continuum transmis- sivities. Journal of Hydrology, 174, 331–55.
Shopov,  Y.Y.  (1987)  Laser  luminescent  micro-zonal  analysis: a new method for investigation of the alterations of the climate and solar activity during the Quaternary, in  Problems of Karst Studies of Mountainous Countries (ed.  T. Kiknadze), Metsniereba, Tbilisi, Georgia, pp 104–8.
Shopov, Y.Y. (1997) Luminescence of cave minerals, in  Cave Minerals of the World, 2nd edn (eds C.A. Hill and P. Forti), National Speleological Society of America,  Huntsville, AL, pp. 244–8.
Shopov, Y.Y., Ford, D.C. and Schwarcz, H.P. (1994) Luminescent microbanding in speleothems: High resolution chronology and paleoclimate. Geology, 22(5), 407–10.
Shopov,  Y.Y.,  Tsankov,  L.T.,  Yonge,  C.J.,  Krouse,   H.P.R. Jull, A.J.T. (1997) Influence of the bedrock CO2   on stable isotope records in cave calcites, Proceedings of  the  12th International  Congress  of  Speleology,  Switzerland, Vol. 1, pp. 65–8.
Short, M.B., Baygents, J.C. and Goldstein, R.E. 2005. Stalactite growth  as  a  free-boundary  problem.  Physics  of  Fluids,  17, 083101-12.
Siegenthaler, U., U. Schotterer and I. Muller (1984) Isotopic and chemical investigations of springs from different karst zones in the  Swiss  Jura,  in  Isotope  Hydrology  1983,  International Atmoc Energy Agency, Vienna, pp. 153–72.
Siemers, J. and Dreybrodt, W. (1998) Early development of karst aquifers on percolation networks of fractures in limestone. Water Resources Research, 34, 409–19.
Simms, M.J. (2003) The origin of enigmatic tubular lake-shore karren:   A   mechanism   for   rapid   dissolution   of   limestone in carbonate-saturated waters. Physical   Geography,  23, 1–20.
Simms, M.J. (2004) Tortoises and hares: dissolution, erosion and isostasy in landscape evolution. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 29, 477–94.
Simsek, S. (1999) Pamukkale travertine area, in Karst  Hydro- geology and Human Activities (eds D. Drew and  H. Ho¨tzl), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 172–74.
Simsek, S., Gu¨nay, G., Elhatip, H. and Ekmekc¸i, M.  (2000) Environmental protection of geothermal waters and travertines at Pamukkale, Turkey. Geothermics, 29, 557–72.
Sjoberg, E.L. and Rickard, D.T. (1983) The influence of experi- mental design on the rate of calcite dissolution. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 47, 2281–6.
Slabe,  T.   (1995)   Cave  Rocky   Relief   and  its   Speleological Significance, Znanstvenoraziskovalni Center SAZU, Lubljana, 128 pp.
Sletov, V.A. (1985) On ontogeny of crystalictite and  helictite aggregates of calcite and aragonite from the caves of southern Fergana. Novye Dannye o Mineralogii, 32,  119–127. [In Russian.]

Sloss, L.L. (1963) Sequences in the cratonic interior of  North America. Geological Society of America, Bulletin, 74, 93–114. Smart, C.C. (1983a) Hydrology of a Glacierised  Alpine Karst,
McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, 343 pp.
Smart, C.C. (1983b) The hydrology of the Castleguard  Karst, Columbia Icefields, Alberta, Canada. Arctic and   Alpine Research, 15(4), 471–86.
Smart,  C.C.  (1984)  The  hydrology  of  the  Inland  Blue  Holes, Andros Island. Cave Science, 11(1), 23–9.
Smart, C.C. (1997) Hydrogeology of glacial and subglacial karst aquifers: Small River, British Columbia, Canada, Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Limestone Hydrology and Fissured Media, pp. 315–8.
Smart, C.C. and Brown, M.C. (1981) Some results and limitations in the application of hydraulic geometry to  vadose stream passages, Proceedings of the 8th  International Congress of Speleology, Bowling Green, Kentucky, pp. 724–5.
Smart, C. and Simpson, B. (2001) An evaluation of the perfor- mance of activated charcoal in detection of fluorescent com- pounds in the environment, in Geotechnical and Environmental Applications of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds B.F. Beck, and J.G. Herring), Balkema, Lisse, pp. 265–70.
Smart, C. and Worthington, S.R.H. (2004) Springs, in Encyclo- pedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 699–703.
Smart, P.L. (1986) Origin and development of glacio-karst closed depressions in the Picos de Europa, Spain.  Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, NF, 30(4), 423–43.
Smart, P.L. and Christopher, N.S.J. (1989) Ogof Ffynon Ddu, in Limestones and Caves of Wales (ed. T.D. Ford),  Cambridge University Press, pp. 177–89.
Smart, P.L. and Friederich, H. (1987) Water movement and storage in the unsaturated zone of a maturely karstified  carbonate aquifer, Mendip Hills, England, Proceedings of  Conference on Environmental Problems in Karst Terranes and their Solu- tions. National Water Well Association, Dublin, Ohio, 59–87. Smart, P.L. and Hodge, P. (1980) Determination of the character of the Longwood sinks to Cheddar resurgence conduit using an artificial pulse wave. Transactions of the British Cave Research
Association, 7(4), 208–211.
Smart, P.L. and Laidlaw, I.M.S. (1977) An evaluation of  some fluorescent dyes for water tracing. Water Resources Research, 13, 15–23.
Smart, P.L. and Brown, M.C. (1973) The use of activated carbon for the detection of the tracer dye Rhodamine WT, Proceedings of the 6th International Congress of  Speleology, Olomouc, CSSR, Vol. 4, pp. 285–92.
Smart, P.L. and Richards, D.A. (1992) Age estimates for the Late Quaternary high sea-stands. Quaternary Science Reviews, 11, 687–96.
Smart, P.L. and Smith, D.I. (1976) Water tracing in tropical regions, the use of fluorometric techniques in Jamaica. Journal of Hydrology, 30, 179–95.
Smart, P.L, Waltham, T., Yang, M. and Zhang, Y. (1986) Karst geomorphology of western Guizhou, China. Transactions  of the British Cave Research Association, 13(3), 89–103.




Smart, P.L., Smith, B.W., Chandra, H., et al. (1988) An  inter- comparison of ESR and uranium series ages for  Quaternary speleothem deposits. Quaternary Science Reviews, 7, 411–6.
Sˇmida, B., Audy, M. and Vlcˇek, C. (2003) Roraima 2003 Cueva Ojos de Cristal, Expedition Report, Czech   Speleological Society, Slovak Speleological Society, 28 pp.
Sˇmida, B., Brewer-Carias, C. and Audy, M. (2005) Cueva Charles Brewer, Vol. 3, Spravodaj, 178 pp.
Smith, D.I. (1972) The solution of limestone in an Arctic environment, in Polar Geomorphology (ed. D.E. Sugden), Special Publication, 4, Institute of  British  Geographers, pp. 187–200.
Smith, D.I. and Newson, M.D. (1974) The dynamics of solutional and mechanical  erosion  in  limestone   catchments on the Mendip Hills, Somerset, in Fluvial Processes in Instrumented Watersheds (eds K.J. Gregory  and D.E. Walling), Special Publication 6, Institute of British Geographers, pp. 155–67.
Smith, D.I. and Atkinson, T.C. (1976) Process, landforms  and climate in limestone regions, in Geomorphology and Climate (ed.
  E. Derbyshire), John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp. 369–409.
Smith, D.I., Atkinson, T.C. and Drew, D.P. (1976) The hydrology of limestone terrains, in The Science of Speleology (eds T.D. Ford   and   C.H.D.   Cullingford),   Academic   Press,  London, pp. 179–212.
Smith,  M.W.  and  Riseborough,  D.W.  (2002)  Climate  and  the limits of permafrost: a zonal analysis. Permafrost and  Peri- glacial Processes, 13(1), 1–15.
Sneed, E.D. and Folk, R.L. (1958) Pebbles in the Lower Colorado River, Texas. A study of particle morphogenesis.  Journal of Geology, 66, 114–50.
Snow, D.T. (1968) Rock fracture spacings, openings porosities. Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundation Division, American Society of Civil Engineers, 94, 73–91.
Soderberg, A.D. (1979) Expect the unexpected: foundations for dams in karst. Bulletin, Association of Engineering Geologists, 16(3), 409–25.
Solomon, D.K., Cook, P.G. and Sanford, W.E. (1998) Dissolved gases in subsurface hydrology, in Isotope Tracers in Catchment Hydrology (eds C. Kendall, and J.J.  McDonnell), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 291–318.
Sondag, F., van Ruymbeke, M., Soubie`s, F., et al.  (2003)
Monitoring present day climatic conditions in tropical  caves using an Environmental Data Acquisition System  (EDAS). Journal of Hydrology, 273(1–4), 103–18.
Song, L. (1981) Some characteristics of karst hydrology in Guizhou plateau, China, Proceedings of the 8th International Congress  of  Speleology,  Bowling  Green,  Kentucky,  Vol.  1, pp. 139–42.
Song, L. (1986) Karst geomorphology and subterranean drainage in south Dushan, Guizhou Province, China. Transactions of the British Cave Research Association, 13(2), 49–63.
Song, L. (1987) Pumping subsidence of surface in some  karst areas of China, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Karst and Man, Lubljana, pp. 49–64.
Song,  L.  (1999)  Sustainable  development  of  agriculture   in karst areas, south China. International Journal of Speleology, 28B(1/4), 139–48.

Song, L. and Lin, J. (2004) Hongshui River fengcong karst, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 422–3.
Song, L., Deng, Z., Mangin, A. et al. (1993) Structure, Function- ing and Evolution of Karst Aquifers and Landforms in Conical Karst,   Guizhou,   China,   Sino-French   Karst   Hydrogeology Collaboration, Moulis, France, 213 pp.
Song, L., Waltham, T., Cao, N. and Wang, F (eds.) (1997) Stone Forest: a Treasure of Natural Heritage, China Environmental Science Press, 136 pp.
Sorriaux, P. (1982) Contribution a l’tude de la sedimentation en milieu   karstique:   Le   systeme   de   Niaux-Lombrives-Sabart, Pyrenees Arigeoises. Univ. Paul  Sabatier Thesis, 3rd cycle, Toulouse, 255 pp.
Soudet, H.J., Sorriaux, P. and Rolando, J.P. (1994)  Relationship between Fractures and Karstification – the Oil- Bearing Paleo- karst of Rospo Mare (Italy). Bulletin des Centres de Recherches Exploration-Production Elf Aquitaine, 18(1), 257–97.
Sowers, G.F. (1984) Correction and protection in limestone terrace. in Sinkholes: their Geology, Engineering and Envir- onmental Impact (ed. B.F. Beck), Balkema, Boston, pp. 373–8. Sowers,  G.F.  (1996)  Building  on  Sinkholes.  ASCE   Press,
  American Society of Civil Engineers, New York, 202 pp. Spate, A.P., Jennings, J.N., Smith, D.I. and Greenaway,  M.A.
(1985) The micro-erosion meter: use and limitations.  Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 10, 427–40.
Spencer,   T.   (1985)   Weathering   rates   on   a   Caribbean   reef limestone:   results   and   implications.   Marine   Geology,  69, 195–201.
Spencer, T. and Viles, H. (2002) Bioconstruction, bioerosion and disturbance on tropical coasts: coral reefs and rocky limestone shores. Geomorphology, 48, 23–50.
Spo¨rli, K.B., Craddock, C., Rutford, R.H. and Craddock,  J.P. (1992) Breccia bodies in deformed Cambrian  limestones, Heritage Range, Ellsworth Mountains, West  Antarctica, in Geology and Paleontology of the Ellsworth Mountains, West Antarctica  (eds  G.F.  Webers,  C.  Craddock and J.F. Splett- stoesser), Memoir 170,   Geological  Society  of  America, Boulder, CO, pp. 365–74.
Spo¨tl, C. and Mangini, A. (2002) Stalagmite from the Austrian Alps reveals Dansgaard-Oeschger events during isotope stage 3: implications for the absolute chronology of Greenland  ice cores. Earth and Plantary Science Letters, 203, 507–18.
Spo¨tl, C., Fairchild, I.J. and Tooth, A.F. (2005) Cave air control on dripwater geochemistry, Obir Caves (Austria): Implications for speleothem deposition in dynamically ventilated caves. Geochimica et Cosmochim Acta, 2451–2468.
Spring, U. and Hutter, K. (1981a) Conduit flow of a fluid through its solid phase and its application to intraglacial channel flow. International Journal of Engineering Science, 20(2), 327–63.
Spring,  U.  and  Hutter,  K.  (1981b)  Numerical  studies  of Jokulhaups. Cold Regions Science and Technology, 4, 227–44. Spring, W. and Prost, E. (1883) Etude sur les eaux de la Meuse. Annales de la Societe Ge´ologique de Belgique, XI, 123–220. Springer, G.S. and Kite, J.S. (1997) River-derived  slackwater sediments in caves along Cheat River, West  Virginia. Geo-
morphology, 18, 91–100.




Stanton, R.J. (1966) The solution brecciation process. Geological Society of America, Bulletin, 77, 843–48.
Stanton, W.I. and P.L. Smart (1981) Repeated dye traces of underground streams in the Mendip Hills, Somerset, Proceed- ings of the University of Bristol Speleological Society, 16(1), 47–58.
Stauffer, B., Blunier, T., Dallenbach, A., et al. (1998)  Atmo- spheric CO2 concentration and millennial-scale climate change
during the last glacial period. Nature, 392, 59–62.
Stenson, R.E. (1990) The morphometry and spatial distribution of surface depressions in gypsum, with examples from  Nova Scotia,  Newfoundland  and  Manitoba. McMaster  Univ. MSc thesis, 134 pp.
Stern,  L.,  Engel,  A.S.,  Bennet,  P.C.  and  Porter,  M.L.  (2002) Subaqueous and subaerial speleogenesis in a sulfidic cave, in Hydrogeology and Biology of Post-Paleozoic Carbonate Aqui- fers (eds J.B. Martin, C.M. Wicks and I.D. Sasowsky), Special Publication 7, Karst Waters Institute,  Charles Town, WV, pp. 89–91.
Stevanovic´, Z. and Dragasic´, V. (1995) Some cases of Accidental Karst Water Pollution in the Serbian Carpathians. Theoretical and Applied Karstology, 8, 137–44.
Stevanovic´, Z. and Milanovic´, P. (eds) (2005) Water Resources and Environmental Problems in Karst, National Committee of the International Association of Hydrogeologists of Serbia and Montenegro, Belgrade, 888 pp.
Stevanovic´, Z. and Mijatovic´, B. (eds) (2005) Cvijic´ and Karst: Cvijic´ et  Karst,  Serbian  Academy  of  Science   and  Arts, Belgrade, 405 pp.
Stewart, G.R., Turnbull, M.H., Schmidt, S. and Reskine,  P.D. (1995) 13C natural abundance in plant communities  along a rainfall gradient: a biological indicator of water  availability. Australian Journal of Plant Physiology, 22, 51–55.
Stewart, M. and Williams, P.W. (1981) Environmental isotopes in  New  Zealand  hydrology  3:  isotope  hydrology  of   the Waikoropupu Springs and Takaka River, Northwest  Nelson. New Zealand Journal of Science, 24, 323–37.
Stewart, M.K. and Downes, C.J. (1982) Isotope hydrology  of Waikoropupu Springs, New Zealand, in Isotope Studies  of Hydrologic Processes (eds E.C. Perry and C.W. Montgomery), Northern Illinois University Press, DeKalb, pp. 15–23.
Stichler, W., Trimborn, P., Maloszewski, P., et al. (1997) Isotopic investigations, in Karst Hydrogeological  Investigations in South-Western Slovenia (ed. A. Kranjc).  Acta Carsologica, XXVI(1), 213–59.
Stierman,   D.J.   (2004)   Geophysical   detection   of   caves   and karstic voids, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst  Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 377–80.
Stirling, C.H., Esat, T.M., Lambeck, K. and McCulloch,  M.T. (1995) High-precision U-series dating of corals from Western Australia and implications for the timing and duration of the Last Interglacial. Earth and Planetary Science   Letters,
135, 115–30.
Stirling, C.H., Esat, T.M., Lambeck, K. and McCulloch,  M.T. (1998) Timing and duration of the Last Interglacial: evidence for a restricted interval of widespread coral reef growth. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 160, 745–62.

Stoddart, D.R., Spencer, T. and Scoffin, T.P. (1985) Reef growth and karst erosion on Mangaia, Cook Islands: a  reinterpreta- tion. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie,  Supplement-Band, 57, 121–40.
Stoddart, D. R., Woodroffe, C.D. and Spencer, T. (1990) Mauke, Mitiaro and Atiu: geomorphology of makatea islands in the southern Cooks. Atoll Research Bulletin, 341, 1–65.
Stone, J., Allan, G.L., Fifield, L.K., et al. (1994) Limestone erosion   measurements   with   cosmogenic   chlorine-36  in calcite – preliminary results from Australia. Nuclear Instru- ments and Methods in Physics Research, Series B, 92, 311–16.
Stone, J., Evans, J.M., Fifield, L.K., et al. (1998)  Cosmogenic chlorine-36 production in calcite by muons.  Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 62(3), 433–54.
St-Onge, D.A. and McMartin, I (1995) Quaternary Geology of the  Inman  River  Area,  Northwest  Territories,  Bulletin  446, Geological Survey of Canada, 59 pp.
Strecker, M.R., Bloom, A.L. Gilpin, L.M. and Taylor, F.W. (1986) Karst morphology of uplifted Quaternary coral  limestone terraces: Santo island, Vanuatu. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, NF, 30(4), 387–405.
Stringfield, V.T. and LeGrand, H.E. (1971) Effects of karst features on circulation of water in carbonate rocks in coastal areas. Journal of Hydrology, 14, 139–57.
Stumm, W. and Morgan, J.J. (1996) Aquatic Chemistry, 3rd edn, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 980 pp.
Sunartadirdja, M.A. and Lehmann, H. (1960) Der Tropische Karst von Maros und Nord-Bone im SW-Celebes (Sulawesi). Zeitschrift     fu¨r     Geomorphologie,     Supplement-Band,     2, 49–65.
Sundborg,  A.  (1956)  The  River  Klaralven,  a  study  in  fluvial processes. Geografiska Annaler, 38, 125–316.
Sundquist,  E.T.  (1993)  The  global  carbon  dioxide  budget.
Science, 259, 934–41.
Sˇustersˇic, F. (1979) Some principles of cave profile simulation.
Actes de la Symposium International sur l’erosion karst, Aix- en-Provence, pp. 125–31.
Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ, F. (1994)  Classic  dolines  of  classical  site.   Acta
Carsologica, XXIII(10), 123–54.
Sˇustersˇic, F. (2000)  Speleogenesis  in  the  Lubljanica   River drainage basin, Slovenia,  in  Speleogenesis;   Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer
and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of Amer- ica, Huntsville, AL, pp. 397–406.
Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ, F. (2006) A power function model for the basic
geometry of solution dolines: considerations from the classical karst of south-central Slovenia. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 31, 293–302.
Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ. F. and Sˇusˇtersˇicˇ, S. (2003) Formation of the Cerknisˇ-
cˇica and flooding of Cerknisˇko Polje. Acta Carsologica, 32(2); 121–36.
Svensson, U. and Dreybrodt, W. (1992) Dissolution kinetics of natural calcite minerals in CO2-water systems approaching
  calcite equilibrium. Chemical Geology, 100, 129–45.
Swarzenski P.W., Reich C.D., Spechler R.M., et al. (2001) Using multiple geochemical tracers to characterize the hydrogeology




of the submarine spring off Crescent Beach, Florida. Chemical Geology, 179(1–4), 187–202.
Sweeting, M.M. (1966) The weathering of limestones, with particular reference to the Carboniferous Limestones of north- ern England, in Essays in Geomorphology (ed. G.H.  Dury), Heinemann, London, pp. 177–210.
Sweeting, M.M. (1972) Karst Landforms, Macmillan,  London, 362 pp.
Sweeting, M.M. (1995) Karst in China: its Geomorphology and Environment, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Sweeting, M.M. (ed.) (1981) Karst Geomorphology, Benchmark Papers in Geology 59, Hutchinson-Ross. Stroudsburg, PA. Sweeting, M.M. and Sweeting, G.S. (1969) Some aspects of the
Carboniferous limestone in relation to its landforms with particular reference to N.W. Yorkshire and County Clare. Recherche Mediterranee, 7, 201–8.
Swinnerton, A.C. (1932) Origin of limestone caverns. Bulletin, Geological Society of America, 43, 662–693.
Szunyogh, G. (1989) Theoretical investigation of the  develop- ment of spheroidal niches of thermal water origin, Proceedings of the 10th International Congress of  Speleology, Vol. III, pp. 766–8.
Szunyogh,  G.  (2000)  The  theoretical-physical  study  of   the process of karren development. Karsztfejlo¨de´s, IV, 125–50.
Taborosi, D., Jenson, J.W. and Mylroie, J.E. (2004) Karren features  in  island  karst:  Guam,  Mariana  Islands.  Zeitschrift fur Geomorphologie, N.F., 48(3), 369–89.
Tam, V.T., De Smedt, F., Batelaan, O. Dassargues, A.  (2004) Study on the relationship between lineaments and  borehole specific capacity in a fractured and karstified limestone area in Vietnam. Hydrogeology Journal, 12, 662–73.
Tan, M. (1992) Mathematical modelling of catchment morphol- ogy in the karst of Guizhou, China. Zeitschrift fur  Geomor- phologie, N.F., 36(1), 37–51.
Tan,  M.,  Tungsheng,  L.,  Xiaoguang,  Q.  Xianfeng,  W.  (1998) Signification chrono-climatique de spe´le´othe`mes  lamine´s de Chine du Nord. Karstologia, 32(2), 1–6.
Tan, M., Liu, T., Hou, J., et al. (2003) Cyclic rapid warming on centennial-scale revealed by a 2650-year stalagmite record of warm   season   temperature.   Geophysical   Research   Letters, 30(12), 1617.
Tan, M.,  Hou,  J.  and  Liu,  T.  (2004)  Sun-coupled   climate connection between eastern Asia and northern   Atlantic. Geophysical Research Letters, 31, L07207.
Tanahara, A., Taira, H., Yamakawa, K. and Tsuha, A.  (1998) Application  of  excess  210Pb  dating  method  to  stalactites. Geochemical Journal, 32, 183–7.
Tang, T. (2002) Surface sediment characteristics and tower  karst dissolution, Guilin, southern China. Geomorphology, 49, 231–54. Tang, T. and Day, M.J. (2000) Field survey and  analysis of hillslopes on tower karst in Guilin, southern  China. Earth
Surface Processes and Landforms, 25, 1221–35.
Tarhule-Lips, R. and Ford, D.C. (1998a) Condensation corrosion in caves on Cayman Brac and Isla de Mona, P.R. Journal of Caves and Karst Studies, 60(2), 84–95.
Tarhule-Lips, R. and Ford, D.C. (1998b) Morphometric studies of bellhole development on Cayman Brac.  Cave  and  Karst Science, 25(3), 119–30.

Tate, T. (1879) The source of the R. Aire, Proceedings of  the Yorkshire Geological Society, VII, 177–87.
Teal, L. and Jackson, M. (1997) Geologic overview of the Carlin Trend  gold  deposits  and  descriptions  of  recent  discoveries. Society of Economic Geologists Newsletter, 31, 13–25.
Telbisz, T. (2001. To¨bro¨s felsz´ınfejlo¨des sza´m´ıto´ge´pes  model- leze´se. Karsztfeljlo˝de´s (Szombathely), VI, 27–43.
Terjesen, S.C., Erga, O. and Ve, A. (1961) Phase boundary processes as rate determining steps in reactions between solids and liquids. Chemical Engineering Science, 74, 277–88.
Terry,  J.P.  and  Nunn,  P.D.  (2003)  Interpreting  features   of carbonate  geomorphology  on  Niue  Island,  a  raised  coral atoll. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie,  Supplment-Band, 131, 43–57.
Teutsch, G. (1993) An extended double-porosity concept as  a practical  modelling  approach  for  a  karstified  terrain,   in Hydrogeological   Processes   in   Karst   Terranes   (eds   G. Gu¨nay, A.I. Johnson and W. Back), Publication 207, Interna- tional Association of Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 281–92.
Teutsch, G. and Sauter, M. (1998). Distributed parameter model- ling approaches in karst-hydrological investigations.  Bulletin d’Hydroge´ologie (Neuchaˆtel), 16, 99–110.
Tharp, T.M. (1995) Design against collapse of karst caverns, in Karst Geohazards (ed. B. F. Beck), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 397–406.
Tharp,   T.M.   (2001)   Cover-collapse   sinkhole   formation   and piezometric surface drawdown. in Geotechnical and Environ- mental Applications of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds B.F. Beck and J.G. Herring). Balkema, Lisse, pp. 53–8.
Theis,  C.V.  (1935)  The  relation  between  the  lowering  of  the piezometric surface and the rate and duration of discharge of a well using ground water storage. Transactions,  American Geophysical Union, 2, 519–24.
Therond, R. (1972) Recherche sur l’etancheite des lacs de barrage en pays karstique, Eyrolles, Paris, 443 pp.
Thomas, T.M. (1974) The South Wales interstratal karst. Trans- actions of the British Cave Research Association, 1, 131–52. Thorp, J. (1934) The asymmetry of the pepino hills of Puerto Rico in relation to the Trade Winds. Journal of Geology, 42, 537–45. Thrailkill, J. (1968) Chemical and hydrological  factors in the excavation of limestone caves. Bulletin, Geological Society of
America, 79(B916), 19–46.
Thrailkill, J. (1985) Flow in a limestone aquifer as determined from water tracing and water levels in wells. Journal of Hydrology, 78, 123–36.
Tinkler, K.J. and Stenson, R.E. (1992) Sculpted bedrock forms along  the  Niagara  Escarpment,  Niagara  Peninsula,  Ontario. Ge´ographie physique et Quaternaire, 46(2), 195–207.
Tintilozov, Z.K. (1983) Akhali Atoni Cave System, Metsniereba, Tbilisi, USSR, 150 pp.
Todd, D.K. (1980) Groundwater Hydrology, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Tolmachev, V.V., Troitzky, G.M. and Khomenko, V.P.  (1986) Engineering/Building Development on Karst    Terrains, Moscow, Stroyizdat. Moscow, 177 pp. [In Russian.]
Tolmachev, V., Maximova, O. and Mamonova, T. (2005) Some new  approaches  to  assessment  of  collapse  risks  in  covered




karsts, in Sinkholes and the Engineering and  Environmental Impacts of Karst (ed. B.E. Beck),   Geotechnical Special Publication No. 144, American  Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 66–71.
Tooth, A.F. and Fairchild, I.J. (2003) Soil and karst aquifer hydrologiccontrolsonthegeochemicalevolutionofspeleothem- forming drip waters, Crag Cave, southwest Ireland. Journal of Hydrology, 273, 51–68.
Torbarov,  K.  (1976)  Estimation  of  permeability  and  effective porosity in karst on the basis of recession curve  analysis, in Karst Hydrology and Water Resources: Vol. 1 Karst Hydrology (ed. V. Yevjevich), Water Resources  Publications, Colorado, pp. 121–36.
Tranter, J., Gunn, J., Hunter, C. and Perkins, J. (1997) Bacteria in the Castleton karst, Derbyshire, England. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 63, 171–8.
Treble, P., Shelley, J.M.J. and Chappell, J. (2003) Comparison of high resolution sub-annual records of trace elements in a modern (1911–1992) speleothem with instrumental climate data from southwest Australia. Earth and Planetary  Science
Letters, 216, 141–153.
Treble, P.C., Chappell, J.,  Gagan, M.K., et al.  (2005) In  situ measurement of seasonal d18O variations and analysis  of isotopic trends in a  modern  speleothem  from   southwest Australia. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 233, 17–32.
Tricart, J. and Cailleux, A. (1972) Introduction to Climatic Geomorphology, Longman, London.
Tripathi, J.K and Rajamani, V. (2003) Weathering control  over geomorphology of supermature Proterozoic Delhi Quartzites of India. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 28, 1379–87.
Trisˇicˇ, N. Bat, M., Polajnar, J. and Pristov, J. (1997).  Water balance investigations in the Bohinj region, in Kranjc, A. (ed.), Tracer Hydrology. Balkema, Rotterdam, 295–298.
Trisˇicˇ, N.(1997). Hydrology and Investigations of the  Water
Balance,  in  Karst  Hydrogeological  Investigations  in  South- Western Slovenia (ed. A. Kranjc). Acta Carsologica, XXVI(1), 19–30 and 123–41.
Troester, J.W., White, E.L. and White, W.B. (1984) A comparison of sinkhole depth frequency distributions in  temperate and tropical karst regions, in Sinkholes: their Geology, Engineering and Environmental Impact (ed. B.F. Beck), Balkema, Rotter- dam, pp. 65–73.
Trombe, F. (1952) Traite´ de Spe´le´ologie, Payot, Paris, 376 pp. Trudgill,  S.  (1985)  Limestone  Geomorphology,   Longman,
London.
Trudgill, S., High, C.J. and Hanna, F.K. (1981) Improvements to the micro-erosion meter. British Geomorphological Research Group Technical Bulletin, 29, 3–17.
Trudgill, S.T. (1976) The marine erosion of limestones on Aldabra Atoll, Indian Ocean. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplement-Band, 26, 164–200.
Trudgill, S.T. and Inkpen, R. (1993) Impact of acid rain on karst environments, in Karst Terrains; Environmental Changes and Human Impacts (ed. P.W. Williams). Catena Supplement, 25, 199–218.
Tsui, P.C. and Cruden, D.M. (1984) Deformation associated with gypsum karst in the Salt River Escarpment, northeastern Alberta. Canadian Journal of Earth Science, 21, 949–59.

Tsykin, R.A. (1990) Karst Sibiri. Krasnoyarsk University  Pub- lishing House, Krasnoyarsk (cited by Filippov 2004).
Tucker, M.E. and Wright, V.P. (1990) Carbonate Sedimentology, Blackwell Science, Oxford, 482 pp.
Tudhope,  A.W.  and  Risk,  M.J.  (1985)  Rate  of  dissolution  of carbonate sediments by microboring organisms, Davies Reef, Australia. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, 55, 440–447.
Tulipano, L. and Fidelibus, M.D. (1999) Groundwater saliniza- tion in the Apulia region, southern Italy, in Karst hydrogeology and human activities: impacts, consequences and implications (eds D. Drew and H. Ho¨tzl), Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 251–5.
Turkmen, S., O¨ zgu¨ler, E., Taga, H. and Karaogullarindan,  T.
(2002) Seepage problems in the karstic limestone foundation of the Kalecik Dam (south Turkey). Engineering Geology, 63, 247–57.
TVA (1949) Geology and Foundation Treatment, Tennessee Valley Authority Projects, Technical Report No. 22, 550 pp. Twidale, C.R. (1976) Analysis of Landforms, John Wiley & Sons,
Sydney, 572 pp.
Twidale, C.R. (1984) The enigma of the Tindal Plain, Northern Territory. Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia 108(2), 95–103.
Twidale, C.R. and Bourne, J.A. (2000) Dolines of the Pleistocene dune calcarenite terrain of western Eyre  Peninsula, South Australia: a reflection of underprinting? Geomorphology, 33, 89–105.
UNESCO (1970) International Legend for Hydrogeological Maps, UNESCO, Paris.
UNESCO/IAHS (1983) Methods and Instrumentation for the Investigation of Groundwater Systems, International  Sympo- sium Proceedings, Noordwijkerhout, Netherlands.
Urai, J.L., Spiers, C.J., Zwart, H.J. and Lister, G.S. (1986) Weakening of rock salt by water during long-term creep. Nature, 324, 554–7.
Urbani, F. (1994) Cavidades estudias en la expedicion al Macizo de Chimanta. Bolletino Sociedad Venezolana Espeleologia, 28, 33–50.
Urbani, F. (2005) Quartzite caves: the Venezuelan  perspective.
National Speleology Society News, 63(7), 20–1.
Urbani, F. and Szcerban, E. (1974) Venezuelan caves in  non- carbonate rocks: a new field in karst research.   National Speleological Society News, 32, 233–5.
Urich, P.B. (1989) Tropical karst management and  agricultural development: example from Bohol, Philippines.  Geografiska Annaler, 71B(2), 95–108.
Urich, P.B. (1993) Stress on tropical karst cultivated with  wet rice: Bohol, Philippines. Environmental Geology, 21, 129–36. Urich, P.B. and Reeder, P. (1996) Environmental degradation in the Loboc River watershed, Bohol Province, Philippines. Asia
Pacific Viewpoint, 37(3), 283–93.
Urushibara-Yoshino, K. (1991) Land use and soils in karst areas of Java, Indonesia, Proceedings, International Conference on Environmental Changes in Karst Areas, International Geogra- phical Union/International Speleological Union, pp. 61–7.
Urushibara-Yoshino, K. (2003) Karst terrain of raised coral islands, Minamidaito and Kikai in the Nansei Islands of Japan. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplement-Band, 131, 17–31.




Urushibara-Yoshino, K., Miotke, F.-D., Kashima, N., et al. (1999) Solution rate of limestone in Japan. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Series A, 24(10), 899–903.
US Bureau of Land Management (1987) Cave Resources Man- agement, US Department of the Interior, Washington, DC, 12 pp.
US Department of the Interior (1981) Ground Water  Manual, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
US EPA (1993) A Review of Methods of Assessing Aquifer Sensitivity and Groundwater Vulnerability to Pesticide  Con- tamination, Environmental Protection Agency,  Washington, DC, 147 pp.
US   EPA   (1997)   Guidelines   for   Wellhead   and   Springhead Protection Area Delineation in Carbonate  Rocks, EPA 904- B-97-003, Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, 120 pp.
US EPA (2000) National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Ground Water Rule. Federal Register, 65(91), 82 pp.
US   EPA(2002)   The   QTRACER2   Program   for   Tracer- Breakthrough  Curve  Analysis  for  Tracer  Tests  in  Karst Aquifers and Other Hydrologic Systems, EPA/600/R-02/001, US Environmental Protection Agency, 179 pp. plus diskette.   US Forest Service (1986) Forest Service Manual: Directive 2356, Cave Management, US Forest Service, Washington, DC, 6 pp. Vacher, H.L. (1988) Dupuit–Ghyben–Herzberg analysis of strip island  lenses.  Geological  Society  of  America   Bulletin,
100, 580–91.
Vacher, H.L. and Mylroie, J.E. (2002) Eogenetic karst from the perspective of an equivalent porous medium. Carbonates and Evaporites, 17(2), 182–96.
Vacher,  H.L.   and  Quinn,   T.M.   (eds)  (1997)   Geology   and Hydrogeology    of    Carbonate    Islands,    Developments in Sedimentology 54. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 948 pp.
Vajoczki, S. and Ford, D.C. (2000) Underwater dissolutional pitting on dolostones, Lake Huron-Georgian Bay, Ontario. Physical Geography, 21(5), 418–32.
Valen, V., Lauritzen, S-E. and Løvlie, R. (1997) Sedimentation in a high-latitude karst cave: Sirijordgrotta, Nordland,  Norway. Norsk Geologisk Tidsskrift, 77, 233–50.
Valvasor, J.W. (1687) Die Ehre des Hertzogthums Crain, 4 Vols, Endter, Lubljana.
Van Beynen, P.E., Ford, D.C. and Schwarcz, H.P. (2000) Seasonal variability in organic substances in surface and  cave waters at Marengo Cave, Indiana. Hydrological Processes, 14, 1177– 97.
Van Beynen, P.E., Bourbonniere, R., Ford, D.C. and Schwarcz,
H.P. (2001) Causes of colour and fluorescence in speleothems.
Chemical Geology, 175(3–4), 319–41.
Van Everdingen, R.O. (1981) Morphology, hydrology and hydro- chemistry of karst in permafrost near Great Bear  Lake, Northwest Territories, Paper 11, National  Hydrological Re- search Institute of Canada.
Van Gassen, W. and Cruden, D.M. (1989) Momentum  transfer and friction in the debris of rock avalanches.   Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 26, 623–8.
Vanara, N. (2000) Le fonctionnement actuel du re˙seau Ne˙be˙le˙.
Spelunca, 77, 35–8.

Vandycke, S and Quinif, Y. (1998) Live faults in Belgian Ardenne revealed in Rochefort karstic network (Belgium). Terra Nova, 8, 16–19.
Veni, G. and DuChene, H. (2001) Living with Karst: a Fragile Foundation, Environmental Awareness Series 4, American Geological Institute, 64 pp.
Veress, M. (2000a) The main types of karren development  of limestone surfaces without soil covering. Karsztfejlo¨de´s, IV, 7–30.
Veress,  M.  (2000b)  The  history  of  the  development  of   a karren trough based  on  its  terraces.  Karsztfejlo¨de´s,   IV, 31–40.
Veress, M. (2000c) The morphogenetics of the karren meander and its main types. Karsztfejlo¨de´s, IV, 41–76.
Veress, M. and Toth, G. (2004) Types of meandering karren.
Zeitschrift fur Geomorphologie NF, 48(1), 53–77.
Veress, M. and Zentai, Z (2004) Karren development on Triglav.
Karsztfejlo¨de´s, IX, 177–96. [In Hungarian.]
Veress, M., Pe`ntek, K. and Horva`th, T. (1992) Evolution  of Corrosion  Caverns:  O¨ rdo¨g-lik,  Bakony,  Hungary.  Cave Sci- ence, 19(2), 41–50.
Veress, M., Toth, G., Zentai, Z. and Czo¨pek, I. (2003) Vitesse de recul d’un escarpement lapiaze´ (Ile  Diego  de   Almagro, Patagonie, Chili. Karstologia, 41(1); 23–6.
Verstappen, H. (1964) Karst morphology of the Star Mountains (central New Guinea) and its relation to lithology and climate. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, 8, 40–9.
Vesper, D.J., Loop, C.M. and White, W.B. (2000) Contaminant transport in karst aquifers. Theoretical and Applied Karstology, 13, 101–11.
Viles, H. (1984) Biokarst: review and prospect. Progress in Physical Geography, 8(4), 523–42.
Viles, H.A. (1987) Blue-green algae and terrestrial limestone weathering on Aldabra Atoll: an S.E.M. and light micro- scope study. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 12, 319–30.
Viles, H.A. (ed.) (2000) Recent advances in field and laboratory studies of rock weathering. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geomorphologie, Supplement-Band, 120, 193 pp.
Viles, H.A. (2003) Biokarst, in Encyclopedia of Geomorphology
(ed. A.S. Goudie), Routledge, London, pp. 86–7.
Viles, H.A. and Pentecost, A. (1999). Geomorphological controls on tufa deposition at Nash Brook, South Wales, United King- dom. Cave and Karst Science, 26, 61–8.
Viles, H.A. and T. Spencer (1986) ‘Phytokarst’, blue-green algae and limestone  weathering, in New  Directions in  Karst  (eds
K.  Paterson  and  M.M.  Sweeting),  Geo  Books,   Norwich, pp. 115–40.
Villar, E., Bonet A., Diaz-Caneja, B., et al. (1984) Ambient temperature variations in the hall of the paintings of Altamira cave due to the presence of visitors. Cave Science, 1120, 99–104.
Villar, E., Fernandez, P.L., Gutierrez, I., et al. (1986) Influence of visitors on carbon concentrations in Altamira Cave.  Cave Science, 13(1), 21–3.
Vincent, P.J. (1987) Spatial dispersion of polygonal karst sinks.
Zeitschrift fur Geomorphologie, N.F., 31, 65–72.




Vincent, P. (2004) Polygenetic origin of limestone pavements in northern England. Zeitschrift fur Geomorphologie, N.F., 48(4), 481–90.
Wagener, F.V.M. and Day, P.W. (1986) Construction on dolomite in South Africa. Environmental Geology and  Water Science, 8(1/2), 83–9.
Waltham, A.C. (1970) Cave development in the limestone of the Ingleborough district. Geographical Journal, 136, 574–84.
Waltham, A.C. (1996) Ground subsidence over underground cavities. Journal of the Geological Society of China,  39(4), 605–26.
Waltham,  A.C.  and.  Brook,  D.B.  (1980)  Geomorphological observations in the limestone caves of Gunung Mulu National Park, Sarawak. Transactions of the  British Cave Research Association, 7(3), 123–40.
Waltham, A.C. and Fookes, P.G. (2003) Engineering classifica- tion of karst ground conditions. Quaterly Journal of Engineer- ing Geology and Hydrogeology, 36, 101–18.
Waltham, A.C. and Hamilton-Smith, E. (2004) Ha Long  Bay, Vietnam, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 413–13.
Waltham, A.C., Vandeven, G. and Ek, C.M. (1986) Site  inves- tigations on cavernous limestone for the Remouchamps Via- duct, Belgium. Ground Engineering, 19(8), 16–18.
Waltham, A.C., Bell, F. and Culshaw, M. (2005) Sinkholes and Subsidence: Karst and Cavernous Rocks in Engineering and Construction. Praxis Publishing, Chichester, 382 pp.
Wang, F., Li, H., Zhu, R. and Qin, F. (2004) Late  Quaternary downcutting rates of the Qianyou River from U/Th speleothem dates, Qinling mountains, China. Quaternary  Research, 62, 194–200.
Wang, Y.J., Chen, H., Edwards, R.L., et al. (2001) A high- resolution absolute-dated late Pleistocene monsoon record from Hulu Cave, China. Science, 294, 2345–8.
Ward, R.C. (1975) Principles of Hydrology, 2nd edn,  McGraw Hill, London, 403 pp.
Ward, R.C. and Robinson, M. (2000) Principles of Hydrology, 4th edn, McGraw-Hill, London, 448 pp.
Ward, R.S, Harrison, I., Leader, R.U. and Williams, A.T. (1997a) Fluorescent polystyrene microspheres as tracers of  colloidal and particulate materials: examples of their use and develop- ments in analytical technique, in Tracer  Hydrology 97 (ed.
A. Kranjc), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 99–103.
Ward, R.S, Williams, A.T and Chadha, D.S. (1997b) The use of groundwater tracers for assessment of protection zones around water supply boreholes – a case study, in Tracer Hydrology 97 (ed. A. Kranjc), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 369–76.
Warren, J.K. (1989) Evaporite Sedimentology, Prentice Hall. New Jersey, 285 pp.
Warren, J.K. (2000) Dolomite: occurrence, evolution and  eco- nomically important associations. Earth Science Reviews, 52, 1–81.
Waterhouse, J.D. (1984) Investigation of pollution of the karstic aquifer of the Mount Gambier area in South Australia, in Hydrogeology of Karstic Terrains, Vol. 1(1) (eds A. Burger and
L. Dubertret), International Union of Geological Sciences, Heise, Hannover, pp. 202–5.

Waters, A. and Banks, D. (1997) The Chalk as a karstified aquifer: closed circuit television images of macrobiota.  Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 30, 143–6.
Watson, J., Hamilton-Smith, E., Gillieson, D. and Kiernan,  K. (eds) (1997) Guidelines for Cave  and  Karst   Protection, International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, Gland, 63 pp.
Webb, G.E., Jell, J.S. and Baker, J.C. (1999) Cryptic intertidal microbialites in beach rock, Heron Island, Great Barrier Reef: implications for the origin of microcrystalline  beach rock sediment. Sedimentary Geology, 126, 317–34.
Webb, J.A., Fabel, D., Finlayson, B.L., et al. (1992) Denudation chronology from cave and river terrace levels: the case of the Buchan Karst, southeastern Australia. Geological  Magazine, 129(3), 307–17.
Webb, J.A., Grimes, K. and Osborne, A. (2003) Black  holes: caves in the Australian landscape, in Beneath the  Surface: a Natural History of Australian Caves (eds B. Finlayson and E. Hamilton-Smith), UNSW Press, Sydney, pp. 1–52.
Werner, A., Hotzl, H., Maloszewski,  P. and Kass, W.  (1998) Interpretation of tracer tests in karst systems with  unsteady flow conditions, in Karst Hydrology (eds C.  Leibundgut,
  J. Gunn and A. Dassargues), Publication 247,  International Association of Hydrological Sciences, Wallingford, pp. 15–26. Weyl,  P.K.  (1958)  Solution  kinetics  of  calcite.   Journal  of
Geology, 66, 163–76.
Wheeler, C. and Aharon, P. (1997) Geology and hydrogeology of Niue, in Geology and Hydrogeology of Carbonate Islands (eds
H.L. Vacher and T. Quinn), Developments in Sedimentology 54, Elsevier, pp. 537–64.
Whitaker, F.F. and Smart, P.L. (1994) Bacterially mediation  of organic matter: a major control on groundwater geochemistry and porosity generation in oceanic carbonate  terrains, in Breakthroughs in Karst Geomicrobiology and  Redox Chem- istry (eds I.D. Sasowsky and M.V. Palmer),  Karst Waters Institute of America, Special Publication 1, 72–4.
White, E.L. and White, W.B. (1969) Processes of cavern break- down. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 31, 83–96.
White, E.L., Aron, G. and White, W.B. (1984) The influence of urbanization on sinkhole development in central Pennsylvania, in Sinkholes: their Geology, Engineering and  Environmental Impact (ed. B.F. Beck), Balkema,  Rotterdam, pp. 275–81. [Also published in Environmental Geology and Water Science,
8(1/2), 91–7 (1986).]
White, S.  (1994) Speleogenesis in  aeolian calcarenites: A  case study in western Victoria.  Environmental  Geology,   23, 248–55.
White, W.B. (1969) Conceptual models for carbonate aquifers.
Ground Water, 7(3), B97515–21.
White, W.B. (1976) Cave minerals and speleothems, in The Science of Speleology (eds T. D. Ford and C.H.D. Cullingford), Academic Press, London, pp. 267–327.
White,  W.B.  (1977a)  The  role  of  solution  kinetics  in   the development of karst aquifers, in Karst Hydrogeology  (eds
J.S. Tolson and F.L. Doyle), Memoir 12, International Asso- ciation of Hydrogeologists, pp. 503–17.




White, W.B. (1977b) Conceptual models for carbonate aquifers: revisited, in Hydrologic Problems in Karst Regions (eds R.R. Dilamarter and S.C. Csallany), Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, pp. 176–87.
White, W.B. (1984) Rate processes: chemical kinetics and karst landform development, in Groundwater as a Geomorphic Agent (ed. R. G. LaFleur), Allen & Unwin, London, pp. 227–48.
White,   W.B.   (1997a)   Thermodynamic   equilibrium,   kinetics, activation barriers reaction mechanisms for chemical reactions in Karst Terrains. Environmental Geology, 30(1/2), 46–58.
White, W.B. (1997b) Color of speleothems, in Cave Minerals of the World, 2nd edn (eds C.A. Hill and P. Forti), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 239–4. White, W.B. (2000) Dissolution of limestone from field observa- tions, in Speleogenesis; Evolution of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL,
pp. 149–55.
White, W.B. (2002) Karst hydrology: recent developments and open questions. Engineering Geology, 65, 85–105.
White, W.B. (2004) Paleoclimate records from speleothems  in limestone caves, in Studies of Cave Sediments: Physical and Chemical Records of Paleoclimate (eds I.D. Sasowsky  and
  J. Mylroie), Kluwer Academic, New York, pp. 135–76.  White, W.B. and White, E.L. (eds) (1989) Karst Hydrology:
Concepts from the Mammoth Cave Area. Van Nostrand Rein- hold, New York, 346 pp.
White, W.B. and White, E.L. (1995) Correlation of contemporary karst landforms with paleokarst landforms:  the problem of scale. Carbonates and Evaporites, 10(2), 131–7.
White, W.B. and White, E.L. (2003) Gypsum wedging and cavern breakdown: studies in the Mammoth Cave System, Kentucky. Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, 65(1), 43–52.
Wicks, C., Kelley, C. and Peterson, E. (2004) Estrogen in a karstic aquifer. Groundwater, 42(3), 384–9.
Wigley, T.M.L. (1971) Ion pairing and water quality  measure- ments. Canadian Journal of Earth Science, 8(4), 468–76.
Wigley, T.M.L. and Brown, M.C. (1976) The physics of caves, in The Science of Speleology (eds T.D. Ford and C.H.D. Cullingford), Academic Press, London, pp. 329–58.
Wilcock, J.D. (1997) Simulation of cave hydrology using a conventional computer spreadsheet, in Tracer Hydrology  97 (ed. A. Kranjc), Rotterdam, Balkema, pp. 443–8.
Wilford, G.E. (1966) ‘Bell holes’ in Sarawak caves. Bulletin of the National Speleological Society, 28(4), 179–82.
Wilk, Z. (1989) Hydrogeological problems of the Cracow–Silesia Zn–Pb ore, in Paleokarst – a Systematic and Regional Review (eds P. Bosa´k, D.C. Ford, J. Glazek and I. Hora´cˇek), Academia Praha/Elsevier, Prague/Amsterdam, pp. 513–31.
Williams, K.M. and Smith, G.G. (1977) A critical evaluation of the application of amino acid racemization to geochronology and geothermometry. Origins of Life, 8, 1–44.
Williams, P.W. (1963) An initial estimate of the speed of lime- stone solution in County Clare. Irish Geography, 4, 432–41. Williams, P.W. (1966) Limestone pavements: with special refer- ence to western Ireland. Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers, 40, 155–72.

Williams, P.W. (1968) An evaluation of the rate and distrubution of limestone solution and deposition in the River Fergus basin, western Ireland, in Contributions to the Study of Karst (eds P.W. Williams & J.N. Jennings), Publication G5, Research  School for  Pacific  Studies,  Australian  National     University, pp. 1–40.
Williams, P.W. (1969) The geomorphic effects of groundwater, in Water, Earth and Man (ed. R. J. Chorley), Methuen, London, pp. 269–84.
Williams, P.W. (1970) Limestone morphology in Ireland, in Irish Geographical Studies (eds N. Stephens and R. E. Glasscock), Queens University, Belfast, pp. 105–24.
Williams, P.W. (1971) Illustrating morphometric analysis of karst with examples from New Guinea. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorpho- logie, 15, 40–61.
Williams, P.W. (1972a) Morphometric analysis of polygonal karst in New Guinea. Geological Society of America  Bulletin, 83, 761–96.
Williams, P.W. (1972b) The analysis of spatial characteristics of karst terrains, in Spatial Analysis in Geomorphology (ed.
R. J. Chorley), Methuen, London, pp. 136–63.
Williams, P.W. (1977) Hydrology of the Waikoropupu Springs: a major tidal karst resurgence in northwest Nelson (New Zealand). Journal of Hydrology, 35, 73–92.
Williams, P.W. (1978) Interpretations of Australasian karsts, in Landform Evolution in Australasia (eds J.L. Davies and M.A.J. Williams), ANU Press, Canberra, pp. 259–86.
Williams, P.W. (1982a) Karst landforms in New Zealand, in Landforms of New Zealand (eds J. Soons and M.J.  Selby), Longman Paul, Auckland, pp. 105–25.
Williams, P.W. (1982b) Speleothem dates, Quaternary  terraces and uplift rates in New Zealand. Nature, 298, 257–60.
Williams, P.W. (1983) The role of the subcutaneous zone in karst hydrology. Journal of Hydrology, 61, 45–67.
Williams, P.W. (1985) Subcutaneous hydrology and the  devel- opment of doline and cockpit karst. Zeitschrift fu¨r  Geomor- phologie, 29(4), 463–82.
Williams, P.W. (1987) Geomorphic inheritance and the develop- ment of tower karst. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 12(5), 453–65.
Williams, P.W. (1988a) Hydrological control and the  develop- ment of cockpit and tower karst, Proceedings of  the 21 Congress of the International Association of Hydrogeologists, Guilin, China, Vol. XXI(Part 1), pp. 281–90.
Williams, P.W. (1988b) Karst water resources, their allocation the determination of ecologically acceptable minimum flows: the case of the Waikoropupu Springs, New Zealand, Proceedings of the 21 Congress of the International Association of Hydro- geologists, Guilin, China, Vol. XXI(Part 2), pp. 719–23.
Williams, P.W. (1992) Karst hydrology, in Waters of New Zealand (ed. M.P. Mosley), New Zealand Hydrological Society, Well- ington, pp. 187–206.
Williams,  P.W.  (ed.)  (1993)  Karst  Terrains;   Environmental Changes and Human Impacts. Catena Supplement, 25, 268 pp. Williams, P.W. (1996) A 230 ka record of glacial and interglacial events   from   Aurora   Cave,    Fiordland,   New   Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Geology and Geophysics, 39, 225–41.




Williams, P.W. (2004a) Polygonal karst and palaeokarst of  the King Country, North Island, New Zealand. Zeitschrift  fu¨r Geomorphologie, Suppl.-Vol 136, 45–67.
Williams, P.W. (2004b) Karst systems, in Freshwaters of  New Zealand (eds J. Harding, P. Mosley, C. Pearson and B. Sorrell), New Zealand Hydrological Society and New Zealand Limno- logical Society, Christchurch, pp. 31.1–31.20.
Williams, P.W. (2004c) Dolines, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 304–10.
Williams, P.W. and Dowling, R.K. (1979) Solution of marble in the karst of the Pikikiruna Range, northwest Nelson, New Zealand. Earth Surface Processes, 4(B1010), 15–36.
Williams, P.W. and Fowler, A. (2002) Relationship between oxygen  isotopes  in  rainfall,  cave  percolation  waters   and speleothem calcite at Waitomo, New Zealand. New  Zealand Journal of Hydrology, 41(1), 53–70.
Williams, P.W., Lyons, R.G., Wang, X., et al. (1986) Interpreta- tion of the paleomagnetism of cave sediments from a  karst tower at Guilin. Carsologica Sinica, 5(2), 113–26.
Williams, P.W., King, D.N.T., Zhao, J.-X. and Collerson,  K.D. (2004) Speleothem master chronologies: combined Holocene d18O and d13C records from the North Island of New Zealand and their palaeo-environmental interpretation. The Holocene, 14(2), 194–208.
Williams, P.W., King, D.N.T., Zhao, J.-X. and Collerson,  K.D. (2005) Late Pleistocene to Holocene composite  speleothem chronologies from South Island, New Zealand – did a global
Younger Dryas really exist? Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 230(3–4), 301–17.
Williams, R.G.B. and Robinson, D.A. (1994) Weathering flutes on siliceous rocks in Britain and Europe, in (eds Rock Weathering and Landform Evolution D.A. Robinson and R.G.B. Williams), J. Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp. 413–32.
Wilson, A.M., Sanford, W.E., Whitaker, F.F. Smart, P.L. (2001) Spatial  patterns  of  diagenesis  during  geothermal  circulation in carbonate platforms: American Journal of  Science, 301, 727–52.
Wilson, J.F. (1968) Fluorometric procedures for dye tracing, in Techniques of Water Resources Investigations of the  United States Geological Survey, Book 3, Chapter A12.
Wilson, J.L. (1974) Characteristics of carbonate platforms margins.
  American Association of Petrologists, Bulletin, 58, 810–24.
Wilson, W.L. and Beck, B.F. (1988) Evaluating Sinkhole Hazards in Mantled Karst Terrane, American Society of  Civil Engi- neers, Nashville, 23 pp.
Wilson, W.L. and Morris, T.L. (1994) Cenote Verde: a  mero- mictic karst pond, Quintana Roo, Mexico. in Breakthroughs in Karst Geomicrobiology and Redox  Geochemistry (eds I.D. Sasowsky and M.V. Palmer),  Special Publication 1, Karst Waters Institute, pp. 77–79.
Winograd, I.J., Coplen, T.B., Landwehr, J.M., et al. (1992) Continuous 500,000-year climate record from vein calcite in Devils Hole, Nevada. Science, 258, 255–60.
Witherspoon, P.A., Amick, C.H., Gale, J.E. and Iwai, K. (1979) Observations of a potential size effect in experimental deter-

mination  of  the  hydraulic  properties  of  fractures.   Water Resources Research, 15, 1142–6.
Wolfe, T.E. (1973) Sedimentation in karst drainage basins along the  Allegheny  Escarpment  in  southeastern  West   Virginia,
U.S.A. McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, 455 pp.
Wolman, M.G. and Miller, J.P. (1960) Magnitude and frequency of forces in geomorphic processes. Journal of Geology,  68, 54–74.
Wong, T., Hamilton-Smith, E., Chape, S. and Friederich, H. (eds) (2001) Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific Forum on   Karst Ecosystems and World Heritage, UNESCO World  Heritage Centre, Sarawak, Malaysia.
Woo, M.-K. and Marsh, P. (1977) Effect of vegetation on limestone solution in a small high Arctic basin. Canadian Journal of Earth Science, 14(4), 571–81.
Woodhead, J., Hellstrom, J., Maas, R., et al. (2006) U–Pb geochronology  of  speleothems  by  MC–ICPMS,  in  Archives of Climate Change in Karst (eds B.P. Onac, T.  Tudor, S. Constantin and A. Persoiu) Special Publication  10, Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 69–71.
Worthington, S.R.H. (1984) The paleodrainage of an  Appala- chian Fluviokarst: Friars Hole, West Virginia. McMaster Univ. MSc. thesis, 218 pp.
Worthington, S.R.H. (1994) Flow velocities in unconfined  car- bonate aquifers. Cave and Karst Science, 21(1), 21–2.
Worthington,   S.R.H.   (1999)   A   comprehensive   strategy   for understanding flow in carbonate aquifers, in Karst Modelling (eds A.N. Palmer, M.V. Palmer and I.D.  Sasowsky), Special Publication 5, Karst Waters Institute,  Charles Town, WV, pp. 30–7.
Worthington, S.R.H. (2001) Depth of conduit flow in unconfined carbonate aquifers. Geology, 29(4), 335–338.
Worthington, S.R.H. (2002) Test methods for characterizing contaminant transport in a glaciated carbonate aquifer. Envir- onmental Geology, 42, 546–51.
Worthington, S.R.H. and Smart, C.C. (2003) Empirical determi- nation of tracer mass for sink to spring tests in karst. In: Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst; Proceedings of the ninth multidisciplinary conference, Huntsville, Alabama, Ed. B.F. Beck, Americal Society of Civil
Engineers, Geotechnical Special, Publication No. 122, 287–295.
Worthington, S.R.H. (2004) Hydraulic and geologic factors influencing conduit flow depth. Caves and Karst Science, 31(3), 123–34.
Worthington,  S.R.H.  and  Ford,  D.C.  (2001)  Chemical  Hydro- geology of the Carbonate Bedrock at Smithville,  Smithville Phase IV Bedrock Remediation Program,  Ministry of the Environment, Ontario.
Worthington, S.R.H., Davies, G.J. and Quinlan, J.F. (1992) Geochemistry of springs in temperate carbonate aquifers: recharge type explains most of the variation. Colloque d’Hy- drologie en Pays Calcaire et en Milieu Fissure´ (5th, Neuchaˆtel, Switzerland), Proceedings. Annales Scientifiques de l’Univer- site´ de Besancon, Ge´ologie – Me´moires Hors Se´rie, 11, 341–7.
Worthingtom,  S.R.H.,  Smart,  C.C.  and  Ruland,  W.W.  (2003) Assessment of Groundwater Velocities to the Municipal Wells at Walkerton. in Stolle, D., Piggott, A.R.  and Crowder, J.J.




(eds.) Ground to Water: Theory and Practice; Proceedings of the 55th Canadian Geotechnical Conference,1081–6. See also www.worthingtongroundwater.com/Walkerton.htm
Worthington, S.R.H., Ford, D.C. and Beddows, P.A. (2000) Porosity and permeability enhancement in unconfined carbo- nate aquifers as a result of solution, in Speleogenesis; Evolu- tion of Karst Aquifers (eds A.V. Klimchouk, D.C. Ford, A.N. Palmer and W. Dreybrodt), National Speleological Society of America, Huntsville, AL, pp. 220–3.
Worthington, S.R.H., Schindel, G.M. and Alexander, E.C. (2002) Techniques for investigating the extent of karstification in the Edwards Aquifer, Texas, in Hydrogeology and Biology of Post- Paleozoic Carbonate Aquifers (eds J.B. Martin,  C.M. Wicks and I.D. Sasowsky), Special Publication 7,  Karst Waters Institute, Charles Town, WV, pp. 173–5.
Worthy, T.H. and Holdaway, R. (2002) The Lost World of  the Moa: Prehistoric Life of New Zealand, Indiana  University Press, Bloomington, Indianapolis, 718 pp.
Wray, R.A.L. (1997) A global review of solutional weathering forms on quartz sandstones. Earth-Science Reviews 42, 137– 160.
Wright, V.P. and Tucker, M.E. (eds) (1991) Calcretes, Blackwell Scientific, Oxford, 352 pp.
Wright, V.P., Esteban, M. and Smart, P. L. (1991) Paleokarsts and Paleokarstic Reservoirs, PRIS Contribution 152, University of Reading, 157 pp.
Xia,  Q.K.,  Zhao,  J.-X.  and  Collerson,  K.D.  (2001)  Early-mid Holocene climatic variations in Tasmania,  Australia: multi- proxy records in a  stalagmite  from   Lynds  Cave.  Earth Planetary Science Letters, 194: 177–187.
Xiong, K. (1992) Morphometry and evolution of fenglin karst in the Shuicheng area, western Guizhou, China. Zeitschrift  fur Geomorphologie, N.F., 36(2), 227–48.
Yanes, C.E and Briceno, H.O. (1993) Chemical weathering and the formation of pseudo-karst topography in the Roraima Group, Gran Sabana, Venezuela. Chemical Geology, 107, 341–343.
Yeap, E.B. (1987) Engineering geological site investigation of former mining areas for urban development in Peninsular Malaysia in The Role of Geology in Urban Develop- ment.   Geological    Society    of    Hong    Kong    Bulletin,    3,
319–34.
Yonge, C.J. (1982) Stable isotope studies of water extracted from speleothems. McMaster Univ. PhD thesis, 298 pp.
Yonge,  C.J.,  Ford,  D.C.,  Gray,  J.  and  Schwarcz,  H.P.  (1985) Stable isotope studies of cave seepage water.   Chemical Geology, 58, 97–105.
Yoshikawa, M. and Shokohifard, G. (1993) Underground dam: a new technology for groundwater resource development, Pro- ceedings of the International Symposium on Water Resources in Karst with Special Emphasis on Arid and Semiarid Zones, Shiraz, Iran, pp. 205–27.
Yoshimura, K., Liu, Z., Cao, J., Yuan, D., Inokura, Y. and Noto,
M. (2004) Deep source CO2 in natural waters and its role in extensive tufa deposition in the Huanglong Ravines, Sichuan, China. Chemical Geology, 205(1–2), 141–53.

Young, R.W.  and  Young,  A.  (1992)  Sandstone   Landforms, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 163 pp.
Younger, P.L., Teutsch, G., Custodio, E., et al. (2002)  Assess- ments of the sensitivity to climate change of flow and natural water quality in four major carbonate aquifers of Europe, in Sustainable Groundwater Development (eds  K.M. Hiscock,
M.O. Rivett and R.M. Davison), Special Publication 193, Geological Society Publishing House, Bath, pp. 303–23.
Yuan Daoxian (1981) A Brief Introduction to China’s Research in Karst, Institute of Karst Geology, Guilin, Guangxi, China.
Yuan Daoxian (1983) Problems of Environmental Protection of Karst Areas, Institute Karst Geology, Guilin, Guangxi, China, 15 pp.
Yuan, D. (1986) New observations on tower karst, in International Geomorphology, Part 2, (ed. V. Gardiner), J.  Wiley & Sons, pp. 1109–23.
Yuan, D. (1996) Rock desertification in the subtropical karst of South China. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geomorphologie, Supplement- Band, 108, 81–90.
Yuan, D.  (ed.)  (2001) Guidebook  for  Ecosystems  of  Semiarid Karst in North China and Subtropical Karst in  Southwest China, IGCP  448,  Karst  Dynamics   Laboaratory,  Guilin, 94 pp.
Yuan, D. (2004) Yangshuo karst, China, in Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science (ed. J. Gunn), Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, pp. 781–3.
Yuan,  D.  and  Liu,  Z.  (eds)  (1998)  Global  Karst  Correlation (IGCP 299), Science Press, Beijing, 308 pp.
Yuan,  D.  and  nine  others  (1991)  Karst  of  China,  Geological Publishing House, Beijing, 224 pp.
Yuan, D., Cheng, H., Edwards, R.L., et al. (2004) Timing, duration  transitions  of  the  last  interglacial  Asian  monsoon. Science, 304, 575–8.
Yurtsever, Y. (1983) Models for tracer data analysis, in Guide- book on Nuclear Techniques in Hydrology, Technical Report Series No. 91, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, pp. 381–402.
Za´mbo´, L. (2004) Hyrological and geochemical  characteristics of  the  epikarst  based  on  field  monitoring,  in Epikarst (eds
W.K.  Jones,  D.C.  Culver  and  J.S.  Herman),  Special  Publi- cation 9, Karst Waters Institute, Charles  Town,   WV, pp. 135–9.
Za´mbo´, L. and Ford, D.C. (1997) Limestone dissolution  pro- cesses in Beke doline, Aggtelek National Park, Hungary. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 22, 531–43.
Zenis, P. and Gaal, L. (1986) Magnesite karst in the Slovenske Rudohorie Mts, Czechoslovakia, Comunicacions, 90 Congreso Internacional de Espeleologia, Vol. 2, pp. 36–9.
Zhang, D. (1997) Contemporary karst solution processes on the Tibetan Plateau. Mountain Research and Development, 17(2), 135–44.
Zhang, Z. (1980) Karst types in China. Geological Journal, 4(6), 541–70.
Zhang, Z. (1996) Impacts of rice field irrigation on water budget in  South  China  Karst.  Quaternary  Research,  2,  10–17.  [In Chinese, with English abstract.]




Zhao, J.-X.,  Xia,  Q.K.  and  Collerson,  K.D.  (2000)   Timing and duration of the Last Interglacial inferred from high resolu- tion U-series chronology of stalagmite growth in  Southern Hemisphere. Earth Planetary Science Letters, 184, 633–44.
Zhao, J.-X., Wang, Y-J., Collerson, K.D. and Gagan, M.K. (2003) Speleothem U-series dating of semi-synchronous   climate oscillations during the last deglaciation. Earth   Planetary Science Letters, 216, 155–61.
Zhong, S. and Mucci, A. (1993) Calcite precipitation in seawater using a constant addition technique: A new overall  reaction kinetic expression. Geochimica et Cosmochimica  Acta, 57, 647–59.
Zhu Dehau (1982) Evolution of peak cluster depressions in the Guilin  area   and   morphometric   measurement.   Carsologica Sinica, 10(2), 127–34.
Zhu, R., An, Z., Potts, R. Hoffman, K.A. (2003) Magnetostrati- graphic  dating  of  early  humans  in  China.   Earth-Science Reviews, 61, 341–59.

Zhu  Xuewen  (1988)  Guilin  Karst,  Shanghai  Scientific   and Technical Publishers, 188 pp.
Zhu, X. and Chen, W. (2005) Tiankengs in the karst of China.
Cave and Karst Science, 32(2), 55–66.
Zibret, Z. and Z. Simunic (1976) A rapid method for determining water budget of enclosed and flooded karst plains, in  Karst Hydrology and Water Resources: Vol. 1 Karst  Hydrology (ed. V. Yevjevich), Water Resources  Publications, Colorado, pp. 319–339.
Zisman, E.D. (2001) Application of a standard method of sink- hole detection in the tampa, Florida, area, in Geotechnical and Environmental Applications of Karst Geology and Hydrology (eds    B.F.    Beck,    and    J.G.    Herring),    Balkema,    Lisse, pp. 187–192.
Zo¨tl, J. (1974) Karsthydrogeologie, Springer-Verlag, Vienna. Zupan Hajna, N. (2003) Incomplete Solution: Weathering of Cave
Walls  and  the  Production,  Transport  and  Deposition   of Carbonate Fines, Carsologica Series, Zalozba ZRC, 167 pp.


Index



Abrakurrie Cave, Nullarbor, Australia, 408
Abris, 271
Acid rain, 58–9
Acids, 45
aliphatic, 57
carbonic, 46–8
fulvic, 61, 74
humic, 61, 74
hydrochloric, 58
Ankerite, 9
Antarctica, 37
Anticosti Island, Quebec, 32
Aonda Cave, Venezuela, 231 (Fig.) Apatite, 24
Aqueous solutions, 41
Aquiclude, 103
Aquifer, 103, 104 (Fig.),
106 (Fig.)
anisotropic, 114
Western Australia, 319, 381 (Fig.),
410–12, 431
Australopithecus, 505
Austria, 87, 296, 419
Autogenic recharge, 79 (Fig.), 117,
153
Aven Armand, France, 285
Axel Heiberg Island, Canada, 424

Bacteria, 54
nitric, 59
conduit, 104
chemoautotrophic, 61
silicic, 45
confined, 103
chemolithotrophic, 61
sulphuric, 56
fracture, 104
cyanobacteria, 61
Activity, ionic, defined, 42
granular, 104
desulfovibrio, 54
activity coefficients, defined, 43
isotropic, 114
heterotrophic, 61
ion activity product, defined, 44
karst, 135
Thiobacillus, 56
ion pairs, 59
modelling, 202–8
Bahamas, 100, 248, 431, 434
common ions, 59
perched, 103, 107
Baikal, Lake, Russia, 24
Aeolianite, 19
unconfined, 103
Baiyun Cave, China, 56
Afghanistan, 380
Aquifuge
Baradla-Domica Caves, Hungary-
Africa
Aragonite, 9, 10, 42, 281
Slovakia, 217
Saharan, 391
Aragonite speleothems, 281–6
Barbados, 155, 431
Aggregate, 9
whiskers, hair 282
Barkly Tableland, Queensland,
Agha Jari Oil Wells, Iran, 494
moonmilk, 288
Australia, 438, 441 (Fig.)
Ait Abdi Plateau, Morocco, 422
Arcy-sur-Cure, France, 217 (Fig.)
Baselevel, 367
Akpatok Island, Canada, 430 (Fig.)
Argostoli Sea Mills, Greece, 436
Bathyphreatic, 107 (Table),
Algae, red, 61
Arid zone, 404
224 (Fig.)
Alizarin red, 12
Artesian, 106
Ba´tori Cave, Hungary, 245
Allogenic recharge, 79 (Fig.), 117,
Ash Meadows springs, Nevada,
Bauxite, 9
120 (Fig.)
USA, 405
10Be/26Al dating, 299
Alpine karst
Atlantida Cave, Ukraine, 246 (Fig.)
Beach-rock, 435–6 (Fig.)
Canadian type, 415
Atomic bomb tests (impact), 496
Bear Rock Karst, NWT, Canada, 426
Pyrenean type, 415
Aufeis, 427
Bedding planes, 31
Alps
Aurisina Marble, 491
Belgium, 6, 77
French, 91
Australia
Belize, 95, 255 (Fig.), B333316, 361
Southern, 97, 415
Arnhem Land, 93, 391
Bell holes, 265
Swiss, 88
Barkly Tableland, Queensland,
Bell pits, 265
Altamira Cave, Spain, 504
438, 441 (Fig.)
Benchmarks, telescopic, 481
Alunite dating, 245, 302
Flinders Ranges, 409
Benson River valley, Vancouver
Alvar, 475
Great Barrier Reef, 435
Island, Canada, 476
Amino acid racemization (AAR)
Kimberley region, 410–12, 439–42
Bereznikovsky Potash Mine,
dating, 306
New South Wales, 88, 90
Russia, 484
amphibolite, 23
Northern Territory, 333, 382
Best management practices, 475
Anastomoses, 250
(Fig.), 437–40
Bevel, cave corrosional,
Angara-Lena Platform, Siberia,
Nullarbor Plain, 90, 144, 405–10
259–61 (Fig.)
Russia, 424
Queensland, 372, 437
Bible, The, 476
Anhydrite, 10, 25–7
South Australia, 349 (Fig.), 458–9
Biokarst, 61, 94, 380

dissolution, 44

Tasmania, 475, 500

forms, 382 (Table)




phytokarst, 61, 94
  processes, 61–2 Biostratigraphic dating (cave
deposits), 305–6
Bir al Ghanam, Libya, 404 Birnessite, 294
Black holes, 350
Blind valleys, 359
Blowholes, 408
Blue holes, 350, 435–6
Blue Spring Cave IN, USA, 222 (Fig.)
Blue Spring Cave, TN, USA, 222 (Fig.)
Bohai Oilfield, China, 57 Borehole
logging, 169–71
hydrograph analysis, 171
multiple testing, 187
pumping tests, 166
recharge tests, 164
tracer tests, 171
Botovskaya Cave, Russia, 236 Boundary conditions, 146 (Table) Box valleys, 412
Brazil, 230, 316, 359, 382 (Fig.),
391
Breakdown in caves, 265–9 block, 269
chip, 269
slab, 269
Breccia, 22
crackle, 22
float, 22
pack, 22
Breccia pipes, 386
Brine, 24
Building foundations (on karst), 488–9 (Fig.)
damage scales, 489, 490 (Fig.)
Bulgaria, 241
Bypass passage, 232 (Fig.) crystallites, 74
dipyramids, 9
Iceland spar, 67
pinacoids, 9
prisms, 9
rhombohedrons (Iceland spar, nailhead) 9, 67, 241
scalenohedrons (dogtooth), 9, 67,
241
screw dislocations, 68

Calcite, 9, 281
dissolution, 47, 68–9
precipitation, 73–6
subglacial precipitates, 417

Calcite crystals anemolites, 287
calcite ice, 288
calcite rafts, 288
cave coral, 287
cave pearls, 287
colour, 288–90
crystal ontogeny, 282–3 (Fig.) distribution, 292
draperies, 285 (Fig.) excentric speleothems fluid inclusions, 283
gours, 287–8
helictites, 286–7
length-fast crystal growth, 283 luminescence (fluorescence,
phosphorescence), 290–1
luminescent banding, 317–9
moonmilk, 288
18O:16O palaeoenvironmental analysis, 306–16
optical banding, 317–9
pisoliths, 287
popcorn, 287
rates of growth, 291–2 rimstone dams, 287–8 soda straw, 283–5 (Fig.) stalactites, 283–5 (Figs.)
stalagmites, 285–6
trace elements, 316–7
Calcite speleothems, 281–8
  length-slow crystal growth, 281–3 Calcrete, 19, 378
Caliche, 19, 378 Canada
Alberta, 384 (Fig.), 421
British Columbia, 475, 501
Castleguard, 203 (Fig.), 419
Maligne, 202
Nahanni, 295, 298, 336 (Fig.),
425–6 (Figs.)
Newfoundland, 420
Northwest Territories, 384 (Fig.), 429
Nova Scotia, 385
Ontario, 114, 140 (Fig.), 449, 475
Quebec, 217, 414, 420
Rocky Mts, 82, 97, 415
Saskatchewan, 386–7, 422
Vancouver Is., 317, 475–6
Cantilever (breakdown), 266 Carbon dioxide (CO2), 46
partial pressure (pCO2), 46, 48
(Table), 49–51, 52 (Table), 58, 60
soil, 49–51
solubility (Table), 46
Carbon-14 dating, 298–9

Carbonate rock
as hydrocarbon reservoirs, 493 breccias, 22
classification, 10 (Fig.), 16 (Fig.)
components, 14 (Table) depositional facies and
sequences, 13 (Fig.), 18 (Fig.),
25 (Fig.)
diagenesis, 19 (Fig)
dissolution, 45, 51–3, 77
facies, 13–15
global distribution, 1, 2 (Fig.), 5
lithological properties, 28–30
micrite, 14
mineral bearing, 494–6
mineralogy, 9
porosity, 29, 30 (Fig.)
sequence stratigraphy, 15
strength, 29, 30 (Table), 35
terrestrial, 16
  thin sections, 17 (Fig.) Carbonatite, 24
Carbonic acid, 46
Caribbean, 91, 378
Carlin Trend, Nevada, USA, 496 Carlsbad Caverns, USA, 53,
245–7 (Fig.)
Carnallite, 10
Carso, Carsus, 1
Case hardening, 100, 135, 378 Castleguard Cave, Alberta, Canada,
227, 414
Catalyud, Spain, 404
Caucasus Mts, 155
Cave earth, 276
Cave interior deposits, 273 (Table) Cave management, 502
Cave mineral deposits, 280 (Table) Cave of the Winds, USA, 57
Cave passage forms, 249–56 Cave sediments (clastic)
bioturbation, 281
boulders, 273–5
cut-and-fill, 274–5
diagenesis, 281
diamictons, 274
evapoturbation, 281
facies, 271–9
open channel mode, 274–8 particle shape, 279
pipefull mode, 272–5
provenance, 279–80
sands, 275–6
shoals, 274–6
silts and clays, 276–8 stratification, 273–9 (Table)
varved clays, 277–8




Caves Branch Caves, Belize, 225 (Fig.)
Caves
bathyphreatic, 223–5
breakdown, 210
cross sections, phreatic, 249–52 cross-sections, vadose, 252–6 (Fig.) drawdown vadose, 228–9
epiphreatic, 226
Four-State Model, 223–6
hydrothermal, 239–43
hypogene (or per ascensum), 213 invasion vadose, 228–9
juvenile, 226 (Fig.)
maze, rectilinear, 210
maze, artesian, 235
multi-loop, 224
multi-phase (or multi-level), 233 multi-rank, 219–221
paraphreatic, 228
perched, 226 (Fig.)
phreatic, 210
primary vadose, 228
ramiform, 210
restricted input, 221, 223 (Fig.)
single input, 215
storey, 237–9
strike subsequent, 216–9
tube, primary, 216
unconfined, 212

Cheddar Caves, England, 234–5 (Fig.)
Chemograph interpretation, 182–7
Chert, 23
Chichen Itza, Mexico, 493 Chicxulub Crater, Mexico, 23 China, 57, 437, 501
Chongqing, 345, 347
Guangxi, 345, 373 (Fig.), 480 (Fig.)
Guilin, 351, 356, 371–8
Guizhou, 356, 369
Hunan, 481, 483 (Table)
Qinling Mts, 97
Shandong, 446 (Fig.)
Sichuan, 380
speleothems, 316, 319
stone forest (Shilin), 155, 156
(Fig.), 334 (Fig.)
Three Gorges dam, 488 Yunnan, 333–4
Chlorite, 23, 279
Ciemniak Ice Cave, Poland, 298 Cirques, 415
Clastic sediments in caves, 271–81
36Cl dating, 408
Climatic geomorphology, 403
Clints, 326, 333
Coastal karst, 429
Cobre Cave, Spain, 234–5 (Fig.)

Cosmogenic dating, 90, 99, 299,
408
Coulthard Cave, Canada, 298 Croatia, 177, 345, 370 (Fig.), 380,
447, 470
Crossroads cave, USA, 236, 238 (Fig.)
Crystallites, 74
Crystals and crystal growth, 11, 281–3
Cuba, 372, 378
Cueva de Villa Luz, Mexico, 69 Cueva del Agua, Spain, 234–5 (Fig.) Cueve Ojos de Cristal, Venezuela,
230
Cupolas, cave, 252
Cutters, 326
Cvijic´, 7–8, 391–4, 437
Cycle of erosion (landforms), 436 Czarna Cave, Poland, 224 Czerszegtomaj Well Cave, Hungary,
236, 238 (Fig.)

Dam construction on karst, 466 Dansgaard-Oeschger events, 316
Darcy’s law, 109
  applicability to karst, 136–40 Dating of speleothems, 298–304 Dayas, 412
Dead Sea, 18

vadose, 210
Cocklebiddy Cave, Nullarbor,
Death Valley, California, USA, 404
water table cave, 224–6
Australia, 225, 408
Diagnostic tests for karst, 172–3
Caves, branchwork
Cockpit karst, 339, 403, 505
Diamonds, 9
classification, 210 (Table), 213
Coldwater Cave, Iowa, 318
Diatoms, 61
(Table)
Collapse, 265
Diffuse recharge, 79 (Fig.)
deepest, 211
Collapse and subsidence depressions,
Diffusion boundary layer (DBL), 47,
definition, 209
245–50, 480–6
65–76
eogenetic, 246
Collapse in caves (see Breakdown)
adsorption sub-layer, 47
flank margin, 248
Columbia Icefield, Canada, 414,
Dinaric Karst, 1, 118, 124, 193,
floodwater maze, 232
Computer modelling, 72–3, 75,
478 (Fig.)
glacier, 230
202–8, 215–21, 331,
Dissociation, 42
gypsum, 237–40
398–401, 454
Dissolution, 39
hydrothermal, 240–3
Computer programs, 65, 192, 316
anhydrite, 44
integrated, 209
Condensation corrosion, 261–5
calcite, 45–8
isolated-, 209
(Figs.)
carbonate rocks, 45
longest, 211
Condensation in caves, 261–4, 405
closed system, 48, 51–3
multiphase, 233
Conglomerate, 24
computation 65,
plan patterns, 214
Conservation of Nature, International
congruent and incongruent, 39–40
proto-, 209
Union (IUCN), 474
dolomite, 45–8
quartzite, 230
Constant, thermodynamic equili-
gypsum, 44, 90
salt, 256–8
brium, Keq, 42
hydrogen sulphide influence, 53–6
syngenetic, 246
Convection flow
incongruent, 40
Cayman Brac, Cayman Islands, 262
forced, 239–40 (Fig.)
kinetics, 65–71
Cement, Portland, 9
natural, 239
mixing corrosion, 59
Cenotes, 33, 350
Corestones, 438
open system, 51–3
Chad, Lake, 18
Cornwallis Island, Canada, 429
rate kinetics, 67–71
Chalk, 18–19, 114, 140
Corrosion plains, 365–70
salt, 44–5, 90




saturation index (SI), defined, 44–5, 48
silica, 45
spatial distribution, 95
three-phase, 52
two-phase, 52
  vertical distribution, 93 Dobsina Ice Cave, Slovakia, 296 Dolines, 337–50
solution, 341
collapse and subsidence, 345–50, 480–6
morphometric analysis, 353–6
nomenclature, 340 (Table)
types, 342 (Fig.)
Dolomite, 9–12,18–22
dedolomite, 22
dissolution, 47–8, 69–71
reflux models, 21
saccharoidal, 12
stoichiometric, 9, 71
sucrose, 12
Domepit, 256
Dongas, 408
Downcutting rates, 97
Drowned karsts, 369 Drumlinoid (form), 417 (Fig.) Dry stone walls, 477, 491

Earth tides, 127
Edwards Plateau, Texas, USA, 404
Egypt, 405
Eisriesenwelt (cave), Austria, 419 El Paso Oilfield, Texas, USA,
494
El Sotano, Mexico, 268 (Fig.)
El Zacaton, Mexico, 241–2 (Fig.) Electron spin dating (ESR), 302–4 Elevation head, 107 (Fig.) Ellesmere Island, Canada, 429 Endless Caverns, USA, 232
Enkou Mine, Hunan, China, 481, 483 (Table)
Epikarst (or subcutaneous zone), 116, 119 (Fig.), 132–5, 155
‘instant epikarst’, 479
Epiphreatic, 107 (Table), 130
Equipotential, 107, 108 (Fig.) Equivalents (chemical) defined, 41 Esker deposits, 274–5
Estavelle, 118 Evaporite
dissolution kinetics, 71 global distribution, 4 (Fig.) karst, 382–9
rocks, 24–7

Exhumation (of landforms), 436–7 Exhumed karsts, 436–7

Facet, cave corrosional, 259–61 (Fig.) Faults
Lateral, 33
Normal, 33
Reverse, 33
  Thrust (de´collement), 33 Felsenmeer, 427
Fengcong, 371
Fenglin, 371
Fersman Cave, Khirgizstan, 242 Fertile Crescent, 476
Fick’s first law, 66
Field capacity (of soil), 50 Firn, 230
Fissure frequency, 214
Flank-margin caves, 434 Flinders Ranges, Australia, 409 Flint, 23
Florida Sinkhole Research Institute, 481
Flow net, 107
Flutes, 257, 327–9, 331
Forat Mico Salt Cave, Spain, 256 Forest
deforestation, 475–6 (Fig.),
480 (Fig.)
  reforestation, 479 Fracture
parallel plate, 72–3
traces, 33
Framestone, 14
France, 120, 150, 161, 191 (Fig.),
447, 474, 502–5
Aven Armand, 285
Grand Causses, 155
Vaucluse, 147
Frank Slide, Alberta, Canada, 488 Frasassi Cave, Italy, 53, 56
Friar’s Hole, USA, 210 Friction factor, 111
Friction, internal angle, 487

Gahr Alisadr Cave, Iran, 261 (Fig.) Gaping Ghyll Cave, England, 28 Garnet, 23
Garrigue, 477
General Systems Theory, 221 cascading systems, 221
Geographical Cycle of Erosion, 222 Geographical Information Systems
(GIS), 353, 449
geohazard (collapse) detection, 484–7
cross-hole tomography, 486

electrical resistivity/conductivity, 486
ground-penetraing-radar (GPR), 480, 486
seismic methods, 485–6
Geoparks, 506
Geophysical techniques, 148–53,
480–6
Georgia, 228
Geothermal conditions, 126
Germany, 101, 140 (Fig.), 153, 163,
170
Ghyben-Herzberg principle, 141–44
Giant grikes, 412 Gibbs free energy, 42 Gibbsite, 40
Glacial effects on karst deep injection, 421
dissection, 419
erasure, 419
focusing flow, 420
infilling, 419
injection, 419–20
preservation, 420
shielding, 420
superimposing a glacial aquifer, 420
Glacier de Tsanfleuron, Switzerland, 417
Glacier flour, 276
Glacierisation, 412
Canadian type, 415
  Pyrenean type, 415 Glaciers
alpine, 414
continental, 414
flow, 413
N channels, 413
polar, 413
pressure melt, subglacial, 417 R channels, 413
temperate, 413
Glaciokarst, 413
Glaciotectonics, 413 (Fig.) Glowworm Cave, New Zealand, 504 Gold, 9, 496
Gondwana Glaciation, 439
Good Luck Cave, Sarawak, 268 (Fig.) Goose Arm, Newfoundland, Canada,
420
Gorges, 359
Gort Lowland, Ireland, 367 (Fig.), 433
Gradient, geothermal, 54
Granulite, 23
Great Bear Lake, NWT, Canada, 428 Great Salt Lake, USA, 18



Greece, 436
Greenschist, 23
Grikes, 325
Grotta del Frassino, Italy, 34 Grotte Chauvet, France, 504 Grotte Cosquer, France, 504 Grotte de Bedeilhac, France, 51
induced sink-holes, 480–6
landfills, 460–2
rocky desertification, 475–80
Hungary, 95–6, 148, 236, 238 (Fig.),
242–5, 443
Huntite, 288
Huon Peninsula, Papua New Guinea,
Gort Lowland, 367 (Fig.), 433
Leitrim, 89
Irian Jaya, 89
Iron, 10
Isostatic rebound (glacial), 421 Israel, 91, 404
speleothems, 312 (Fig.)
Grotte de L’entre de Ve´nus, France,
430, 432 (Fig.)
Italy, 1, 97, 134, 241, 319
278 (Fig.)
Hurricane River Cave, USA, 255

Grotte de RoufFignac, France, 236,
238 (Fig.)
Grotte di Castellana, Italy, 503 (Fig.) Grotte Valerie, Canada, 295–7 (Figs.) Grottes des Fontanilles, France,
225
Ground penetrating radar, 150, 480, 486
Groundwater hazard, 465
tracing, 191–202
(Fig.)
Hydraulic conductivity, 105 (Fig.), 109, 170 (Fig.)
Hydraulic gradient, 109
Hydraulic head, 106, 107 (Fig.)
Hydraulic potential, 106, 107 Hydrogen sulphide dissolution, 53–6 Hydrograph analysis, 173–82
Hydrograph recession, 175–80
Hydrolysis, 45
Hydromagnesite speleothems, 286–8
Japan, 87, 95, 435, 447
Java, 34, 339, 403, 474, 479
Jenolan Caves, Australia, 74 Jericho, Israel, 476
Jewel Cave, USA, 239 (Fig.), 243 Jewel Cave, USA, 38
Joints and fractures, 32–5 Jokulhaup (glacial), 421
Judean Hills, Israel-Palestine, 404 Jura Mts, 113, 123, 192
vulnerability and risk mapping,
462–6
Grus, 242
Hydrostatic, 106

Ice in caves, 295–8
Kaolinite, 279
Karra, 1
Karren, 321–36
Guam, 152
Gunung Sewu, Indonesia, 34 Gypsum speleothems, 293
flowers, 293
needles, 293
Gypsum, 10, 11
alabaster, 27
dehydration, 25
dissolution, 44
rehydration, 25
selenite, 27
distribution, 296–7
dynamic cave, 295–6 glacie`re, 296 hoarfrost, 296
needle ice (pipkrake), 296 seasonality, 298
stalactites, stalagmites, flowstones, 295–8
static cave, 295–6
Illite, 279
Incasion, 265
classification, 323
eogenetic, 332
littoral, 336–7
micro, 323–4
rillen, 327–9
Karrenfeld, 322
Karrentische, 88 Karst
alpine, 415
aquifers, 135
barre´, 4 

Inception horizons, 31
buried, 37
Ha Long Bay, Vietnam, 338, 370 (Fig.), 435–6
Half-tubes, 250–2
Halite (rock salt), 10, 39 Hammada de Guir, Morocco, 405 Hammadas, 405, 408
Incision rates
caves, 97
gorges, 359
Inheritance, 102, 404, 428
Interferometry, optical, 66 International Association of
coastal, 429
contact, 4
crypto, 3, 332
definition, 1
denudation, 77
diagnostic tests, 172–3

Hawkill Lough, Ireland, 433 Hazard prediction, 484
Heinrich events, 316
Henry’s Law, 46, 57
Holloch Cave, Switzerland, 32, 218 (Fig.)
Homo antecessor, 506
Homo erectus pekinensis, 505
Homo floresiensis, 506
Homo habilis, 505
Horton’s Laws, 220
Howe Lake, Saskatchewan, Canada, 422
Huanglong travertines, China, 74 Human impacts on karst, 449–62,
474 (Fig.)
    
Geomorphologists, 506
International Association of Hydrogeologists, 506
International Show Caves Association (ISCA), 502
International Speleological Union, 506
Ionic strength (I) defined, 41
effect, 60
Iran, 261, 380, 387, 470
Ireland, 189 (Fig.), 339 (Figs.),
416, 418, 433
Aran Islands, 89, 339
Burren, 88, 255, 322 (Figs.),
333, 367, 497

drowned, 369
endo, 3
evaporite, 382–9
exhumed, 3
exo, 3
fluvio, 4, 6
glacio, 413
holo, 6
hyper, 3
hypo, 3
inheritance, 102, 404, 428
interstratal, 3
mero, 6
nival, 422
palaeo, 3, 36–8, 148
polygonal, 219




pseudo, 4
quartzite, 389–91
relict, 3
rocks, 9–11
stripe, 4
syngenetic, 379
system, 2–3
thermo, 4
tower, 369–78
  volcano, 4, 361 Karst en vagues, 423
Karst landscape modelling, 398–401 Karstland restoration, 496
Kartchner Caverns, USA, 261 Katherine, NT, Australia, 437 Kaumajet Mountains, Canada, 420 Kegelkarst, 403
Kerogen, 54
Kettleholes, 416
Khirgizstan, 242
Kimberley region, Western Australia, 410
Kinetics
dissolution, 65–73
heterogeneous, 65
homogeneous, 65
precipitation, 73–76
Kotlic, 415
Kras, 1
Krk Island, Croatia, 477 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
496–7 (Fig.)

La Hoya de Zimapan (cave), Mexico, 225 (Fig.)
Lake Glomdal Caves, Norway, 219 (Fig.)
Laminar flow, 109
Landslides, 487–8 (Fig.) Langtry Cave, USA, 225 (Fig.) Lapao Cave, Brazil, 230
Lapie´s (see Karren)
Lascaux Cave, France, 474 Law of Mass Action, 42 Lead, 9
Lebanon, 443
Lechuguilla Cave, USA, 53, 245–7 (Fig.)
Liang Bua Cave, Indonesia, 506 Limestone pavement, 322 (Fig.),
333, 420
Limestone, 10 (Fig), 12
aphanitic, 28
argillaceous, 28
bafflestone, 16
bindstone, 16
bioherms, 15

biolithite, 15
biostromes, 15
building stone, 491
calcarenites, 15
calcilutites, 15
calcirudites, 15
calcisiltites, 15
calcrete, 19
caliche, 19
diagenesis, 18–19
dismicrite, 15
Dunham classification, 16
eogenesis, 18
floatstone, 16
Folk classification, 16
grainstone, 16
hardground, 15
mesogenesis, 18
mudstone, 16
packstone, 16
petrological classification, 15
rudstone, 16
sequence stratigraphy, 15
stromatactic, 19
stromatolites, 15
telogenesis, 18
travertine, 16
tufa, 16
  wackestone, 16 Limonite in caves, 294 Linears or lineaments, 33
Lirio Cave, Puerto Rico, 248 (Fig.) Liuhua Oilfield, South China Sea,
494
Lough Caherglassaun, Ireland, 433 Lower Kane Cave, USA, 56
Ludi Cave, China, 285
Lune River Quarry, Tasmania, Australia, 500 (Fig.)
Lybia, 404
Lysocline, 9

Mackenzie Mountains, Canada, 416 Madagascar, 334–5, 363 (Fig.) Madan Chamber, Bulgaria, 241 Magnesite, 23
Magnesite, 9, 10
Makatea, 332, 433, 435
Malaysia, 95–6, 212, 496
Mallorca, Spain, 22
Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, 32 Mammoth Cave, USA, 222 (Fig).
Management, sustainable, 501–4
agriculture, 501
CO2 (visitors in caves), 503 (Fig.) forests, 501–2
glowworms, 503

heat energy (visitors in caves), 503 lampenflora, 504
radon (222Rn) hazard, 503 show caves, 502–4
Mangaia Island, Pacific, 435 Manganese oxides in caves, 294 Manus Island, Papua New Guinea,
432 (Fig.)
Marble, 23
Carrera, 67
Marl, 18
Martinska Cave, Slovenia, 264 (Fig.) Mass spectrometry, induction-
    coupled plasma (ICPMS), 300 Mass spectrometry, thermal
    ionization (TIMS), 300 Mayan civilization and empire,
    Mexico, 477, 491–3 (Fig.) Meandering trench (cave),
254–5 (Fig.)
Medicine Lake, Alberta, Canada, 419
Mendip Hills, England, 428 Messinian Salinity Crisis, 24, 25
Metacarbonates, 23
Meteoric water line, 200, 201 (Fig.)
Methane, 54
Mexico, 187 (Table), 241, 268
Yucatan, 60, 114, 140 (Fig.), 142,
369, 432, 443
Meyer-Peter, Muller formula, 272 Micrite, 14
Micro-erosion meter (MEM), 87, 89, 93
Microscopy
atomic force (AFM), 66 transmission electron (TEM), 68
Mimbi Caves, Western Australia, 440
Minamidaito Island, Japan, 435 Minerals in caves, 280 (Table) Mines (in karst), 489–91 Mishqafaim Salt Cave, Israel, 256,
258 (Fig.)
Mississippi Valley Type deposits (MVT), 22
Mixing corrosion, 59–60 Mole (chemical unit), 41
  molarity, 41 Montello Fan, Italy, 24 Montmorillonite, 279
Montserrat, Spain, 28 Moraine
moraine dammed, 416
terminal, 416
Morocco, 405, 422–3
Morphometric analysis, 353–6




Moulins, 230, 413
Mount Arthur, New Zealand, 420 Mount Sedom salt dome, Israel, 71 Mullamullang Cave, Nullarbor,
Australia, 408
Mulu Caves, Sarawak, 212 Mylonite, 33

Nahanni Karst, NWT, Canada, 425–6 (Fig.)
Naledi, 427
Nanisivik Mine, Baffin Island, Canada, 428–9 (Fig.)
Nanxu River Cave, China, 213 (Fig.) Naracoorte, Australia, 409
Nare Cave, New Britain, 212 Natural bridge, 360 (Fig.) Natural gas (in karst), 9, 493–4
Nauru Island, 153
Neomorphism, 18
New Guinea (see Papua New Guinea and Irian Jaya)
New Lahat Mine, Malaysia, 497 (Fig.) New Zealand, 79, 87, 91, 95, 97, 111,
133, 142, 415, 432–3
Cave Creek/Bullock Creek, 111, 203 (Fig.), 233
speleothems, 315 (Fig.) Cave Creek, 203 (Fig.)
Mts Arthur/Owen, 89, 330, 351
(Fig.), 420
Waikoropupu Springs, 189, 198–9,
436, 446, 452
Waitomo, 94, 162 (Fig.), 255, 340
(Fig.)
Niue Island, Pacific, 129, 143,
153, 433
Nival karst, 422–3
Norway, 93, 111, 415
Notch caves, 259–61 (Fig.) Novy Afonskaya (Akhali Atoni)
Cave, Georgia, 53, 246
Nullarbor Plain, 405–10
Nunataks, 413

Ochtina Cave, Slovakia, 260 Ogle Cave, USA, 284 (Fig.) Ogof Ffynon Ddu (cave), Wales,
227
Oilfields (in karst), 493–4
Old Homestead Cave, Nullarbor, Australia, 408
Olkusz Mine, Poland, 491 Oman, 176, 319
Opal, 10
Optically stimulated luminescence dating, 302–4

Optimists’ Cave, Ukraine, 238–9 (Fig.)
Ores, carbonate-hosted, 494–6
bauxite, 495–6 (Fig.)
cassiterite (tin), 496
copper, 494
fluorite, 494
gold, 496
hypogene, 495 (Fig.)
iron, 494
lead/zinc, 494–6
placer deposits, 494
uranium, 496
Ottawa River caves, Canada, 217 (Fig.)
Ozernaya Cave, Ukraine, 238–9 (Fig.)

P forms, 415
Paddy fields (wet rice), 474 Palaeoenvironmental analysis of
speleothems, 306–316
13C:12C analysis, 313–6
18O:16O analysis, 306–13 C3  and C4  plants, 313–4
cave temperature effect, 310 drip water function, 312
fractionation, equilibrium, 308–9
fractionation, kinetic, 308–9 glacial atmosphere effect, 313 ice volume effect, 310 palaeothermometry, 309–10
trace elements, 316–7
Palaeokarst, 3, 36–8, 148, 412, 436–42
Post-Sauk, 38
Post-Kaskaskia, 38
Palaeomagnetic dating, 304–5
Palaeosol, 15
Palaeothermomtery, alkenone, 314 Palynology (cave deposits), 306 Papua New Guinea, 90, 430, 477
Mt. Kaijende, 155, 156 (Fig.), 334
  New Britain, 77, 212, 229 Paradise Ice Caves, USA, 231 Paragenesis, 232
Parthenon, Athens, 492 (Fig.) Patagonia, 77, 88, 331, 332 (Figs.),
430
Peak District, England, 428
Pecos Valley, New Mexico, USA, 404
Pediment (desert), 411
pediplanation, 412
Pendants, cave, 252
Periclase, 23
Permafrost, 423–9
active layer, 423
continuous, 423

glaciers, 423
karst model, 423 (Fig.) sporadic, 423
thermoactive layer, 424
widespread, 423
Permeability, 109
Petroleum, 9
pH, 42, 45, 46–9, 54–6, 58
field measurement, 64
Philippines, 474, 479
Phosphate deposits, 496 Phosphates in caves, 293–4 Photic zone, 14
Phreatic loop, 223–6
Phreatic zone, 106, 129–32
Phreatophytes, 61
Phuket Island, Thailand, 436 Phytokarst, 61, 94
Piezometric surface, 106, 187 Pine Point mines, Canada, 421 Pingo (karstic), 428
Plaster of Paris modelling, 72 Platforms, carbonate, 13
rimmed shelf, 13
ramp, 13
epeiric, 13
Pofaddergat Cave, South Africa, 261 Poland, 224, 298, 420, 491
Polje, 181–2, 416
Poljes, 361–5
Pollen in speleothems, 306 Polycyclic (landforms) and polyge-
netic karsts, 436–7
Polygonal karst, 219, 350–3
Polyhalite, 10
Ponor, 118
Pore throats, 32
Porosity, 103, 105 (Fig.), 106 (Table)
fracture, 104
matrix, 104
primary, 104
secondary, 104
tertiary, 104
Portland cement, 493
concrete, 493
Postojna Cave, Slovenia, 282 (Fig.) Potentiometric surface, 106
Pothole (stream), 253 (Fig.) Pozzo de Merro, Italy, 241 Precipitation (of solids), 24
calcite, kinetics of, 73–6 heterogeneous, 24
  homogeneous, 24 Pressure head, 107 (Fig.)
Puerto Rico, 100, 248, 372, 378–9
Pumping tests, 164, 166–9
PWP equation, 68




Pyramids, Giza, Egypt, 491 Pyrenees, 93, 157, 190, 330, 415

Quarry restoration, 496, 500
Quartz dissolution, 69–70
Quartz, 10
Quartzite karst, 27, 389–91

Racehorse Cirque, Alberta, Canada, 418
Recharge tests, 164 Recharge types, 129 (Fig.)
Reclamation, of quarries, 500 (Fig.) Redox processes, 41
Reefs, 14
patch, 14
pinnacle, 14
Rejuvenation, 368, 437
Re´seau Jean Bernard, France, 37 Re´seau Mirolda, France, 37
Re´seau Ne`be`le´, France, 234–5 (Fig.) Re´seau Pierre St Martin, France-
Spain, 37
Restoration, of water quantity, 497–8 Reynold’s number, 109
Riegel (glacial), 418
Rock mass strengthclassification, 35–6
Rock shelter, 271
Rock slides, 487–8 (Fig.) Rockhead, 480
Rocky desertification, 475–80
Romania, 295, 346
Roraima Formation, Brazil, Venezuela, 27
Rospo Mare Oilfield (palaeokarst), 436
Ro´szadomb, Hungary, 243–4 (Fig.) rotational failure; 487 (Fig.) Rudohorie Mountains, Slovakia, 23 Russia, 236, 384, 423–5, 428, 484,
487
  Pinega valley, 385 (Fig.) Ryukyu Islands, Japan, 478

S forms, 415
Sabkha, 21
Sabkha, 24
Salt (rock salt) (see halite), 26–7 dissolution, 44
Salt speleothems, 409
Saltpeter, 293
San Salvador Island, Bahamas, 19 Sarawak, 98, 334–5
Saskatoon Low, Canada, 421–2 (Fig.) Sa´torko¨puszta Cave, Hungary,
245 (Fig.)

Saturated zone, 106, 107 (Table)
Saturation index, 44
calcite, 48–9
Saudi Arabia, 405
Scallops, ablational (air), 259 Scallops, dissolutional, 256–9 (Figs.) Sca˘ris,oara Ice Cave, Romania,
295, 298
Schmidt hammer test, 29 Schneedoline, 415
Seismospeleology, 319
Severn Railway Tunnel, England- Wales, 489
Shaft, vadose, 256–7 (Fig.) Sibun River, Belize, 479 Siderite, 9
Siebenhengste-Hohgant (cave) System, Switzerland, 210
Silica, 45
dissolution, 45
opal, 45
Silica, amorphous, 27
Silver, 9
Sinkholes (see Dolines), 338 Skalisty Potok (cave), Slovenia, 224 Skarn, 23
Skocjanske Jama, Slovenia, 32 Slackwater deposits, 276
Slovakia, 295, 305
Slovenia, 1, 93, 147, 229, 305, 353
Slug tests, 164
Small River basin, Canada, 413 Sodium, 12
Sof Omar Cave, Ethiopia, 233 (Fig.) Solution breccias, 22, 242 (Fig.)
Solution mining, 483–4 Solution pockets, 250–2 (Fig.)
Solutional denudation, 85 determined from cosmogenic 36Cl
measurement, 90
weight loss of limestone tablets, 86
micro-erosion meter measure- ments, 87
  pedestal measurements, 88 Soreq Cave, Israel, 314
South Africa, 104, 316, 481, 505 Southern Oscillation Index, 316
Ebro valley, 489–0
Sierra Gorda, 148
Sorbas, 91, 385 (Fig.)
Spain, 234–5 (Fig.), 256, 404, 468,
470 (Fig.)
Spalling (pressure release), 267 Specific discharge, 109
Specific electrical conductivity, 62–4

Specific permeability, 165
Specific storage, 115, 116 (Fig.)
Specific yield, 115
Speleogenesis, 210–270
modeling, hardware, 215–6 modeling, electrical analogue, 215 modeling, flowfield analogue, 215 modeling, computer simulation,
215–6, 220–1
Speleogens, 249
Speleothem, 283–95, 306–19
dating, 298–304
distribution, 292
growth, 75, 291
gypsum, 293, 409
luminescence, 317–9
palaeoenvironmental analysis, 306
salt, 409
silica, 295
Sphinx, The, Egypt, 491 Spitzbergen, 59, 88
Springs, 119, 122 (Fig.)
confined, 120
dammed, 120
geothermal, 121
overflow and underflow, 175 periodic/rhythmic, 121
vauclusian, 120
  world’s largest, 121 (Table) St. Paul’s, London, 491
St. Peter’s, Rome, 491 Stalactites, stalagmites, etc (see
Speleothems)
Stari Trg Mine, Croatia, 242 Sterkfontein Cave, South Africa, 505 Stokes’ Law, 272
Stone forest, 155, 333–5
Stoping (breakdown), 268
Storativity, 115
Stream-sink, 118
Strontium (Sr), 10
Stylolites, 23
Subcutaneous zone, see Epikarst Subglacial calcites, 417
Suchodol, 425
Sulaimaniya, Iraq, 487
Sulphation, 59
Sulphur, native, 56
Surge marks, 276
Surprise Lake, 418
Sustainable management, 443,
501–4
Swallow hole, 118
Swartzkrans Cave, South Africa, 505
Swildon’s – Wookey Hole, England, 224–5 (Fig.), 234 (Fig.)



Switzerland, 236
Sylvite, 10
Syngenetic karst, 379

Tafoni, 325
Swildon’s-Wookey Hole, 130,
224–5 (Fig.), 234 (Fig.)
Yorkshire, 88, 97
Ukraine, 62, 90, 210, 239, 246, 384,
489
hardness, 40
hardness, English degrees, 40 hardness, French degrees, 41 hardness, German degrees, 41 hardness, measurement, 62–5
Taj Mahal, India, 491 Talc, 23
Talik, 103, 424
Tents, 27
Tepees, 27
Terra rossa, 276
Terroir (wine), 479 Thermoluminescence dating (TL),
302–4
Three Gorges Dam, Yangtse River, China, 488
Tiankeng, 345, 347 (Fig.) Toppling failure, 487 (Fig.) Torngat Mountains, Canada, 420 Tors, 438
Tower karst, 369–78
Trace elements, 61, 316–7
Transmissivity, 115
Travertine, 16, 19, 380 Trobriand Islands, Pacific, 433 Trollosen Spring, Svalbard, 413 Tsi-It-Toh-Choh Karst, Yukon,
Canada, 426–7
Tsingy, 334–5
Tufa, 16, 380
Tun Kul Cave, Belize, 268 (Fig.) Tunnels (in karst), 489–91 Turbulent flow, 109
Turkey, 157, 380, 443, 469
Turloughs, 416, 427
Tyuya Muyun, Khirgizstan, 496 Tyuyamuyunite, 242
Undercaptures (Fr. Soutirages),
233–4 (Fig.)
Uranium, 10
Ursus spelaeus, 306 USA
Alaska, 88
California, 471
Florida, 141 (Fig.), 349, 446, 480
Indiana, 185
Iowa, 318
Kentucky, 99, 114, 118, 140 (Fig.),
194 (Fig.), 437, 448
Minnesota, 350, 458
Nevada, 405, 496
New Mexico, 161, 243–7, 387,
404
Oklahoma, 389
Pennsylvania, 77
South Dakota, 97, 243, 316
Tennessee, 468, 470
Texas, 140, 170–1, 387, 404, 484
West Virginia, 237, 361
Wisconsin, 87

Vadose passages, 252–6
Vadose trench, 231–2 (Fig.), 253–6 (Fig.)
Vadose zone, 106, 107 (Table),
132–5, 153
Vajont Dam, Italy, 487–8 Vaucluse Plateau, France, 428
Vaucluse Spring, France, 225 (Fig.) Venezuela, 91, 230, 391
juvenile
Water budget and resources, 146–8, 444–5
Water table, 104 (Fig.), 106,
107 (Fig.), 129
Water tracing, 191–202
dyes, 192–6
isotopes, 197–200
microorganisms, 197
particulates, 196
pulse analysis, 200–2
salts, 196
toxicity, 192
Wavelet analysis (of speleothem records), 316
West Dreifontein Mine, South Africa, 481
Whitings, 14
Wild brine, 484
Wind Cave, USA, 38, 239 (Fig.),
243
Windjana Gorge, Western Australia, 411
Windsor, Nova Scotia, Canada, 420 Wink Sink, Texas, USA, 484–5 (Fig.) Winnipeg, Canada, 420
Winter Palace, Beijing, 493 (Fig.) Winter Park Sinkhole, Florida, USA,
481–2 (Fig.)
WIPP Site, New Mexico, USA, 484 Wollastonite, 23
World Heritage (site), 438, 506 Wuxuan, Guangxi, China, 480
U series dating, 299–302
Vermiculations, 276


RUBE dating, 301
U/Pb dating, 301
Uanh am Tartair Cave, Scotland, 317
United Kingdom Cheddar, 234–5 (Fig.)
Mendip Hills, 130, 133, 158–63,
227
Penninine Hills, 158
Scotland, 317, 319

Vermillion Creek, Northwest Terri-
    tories, Canada, 415 Victoria Cave, Australia, 304
Vietnam, 338, 369, 370 (Fig.), 435–6
Vruljas, 142

Water
chemical classification (Table), 40 conductivity, electrical, 63
connate, 21

Xu Xiake, 6

Yakutia, Russia, 424
Yalta, Ukraine, 489
Yemen, 91
Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico, 23

Zinc, 9
Zipf plot, 212 (Fig.) Zoloushka Cave, Ukraine, 62




























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































