Glossary of Cave and Karst Terminology
Modified and extended from that compiled by J. N. Jennings for the Australian Speleological Federation
Abbreviations and conventions
Abb. = abbreviation
Syn. = synonym (word with same meaning)
Cf. =confer (compare) with the following term which is not identical but
related to it
n. = noun
v. =verb


ACCIDENTAL (n.) An animal accidentally living in a cave.
ACTIVE CAVE A cave which has a stream flowing in it.
ADAPTATION An inherited characteristic of an organism in structure, function or behaviour which makes it better able to survive and reproduce in a particular environment. Lengthening of appendages, loss of pigment and modification of eyes are considered adaptations to the dark zone of caves.
AEOLIAN CALCARENITE A limestone formed on land by solution and redeposition of calcium carbonate in coastal dune sands containing a large proportion of calcareous sand from mollusc shells and other organic remains.
AGGRESSIVE Referring to water which is still capable of dissolving more limestone, other karst rock, or speleothems.
ALLOGENIC Referring to water or sediment which has a source on nonkarstic rocks.
ANASTOMOSIS A mesh of tubes or half-tubes.
ARAGONITE A less common crystalline form of calcium carbonate than calcite, denser and orthorhombic.
ARTHROPODS The most common group of animals inhabiting caves, including insects, crustaceans, spiders, millipedes, etc. They have jointed limbs and external skeletons.
AUTOGENIC Referring to water or sediment which is derived from karstic rocks.
AUTOTROPH A green plant, bacterium or protist which manufactures complex organic compounds (food) from simple inorganic raw materials, using a source of energy from light or chemical compounds.
BARE KARST Karst with much exposed bedrock.
BAT A member of the order Chiroptera, the only mammals capable of true flight as they have membranes between the toes of their forefeet.
BATHYPHREATIC Referring to water moving with some speed through downward looping passages in the phreatic zone.
BED A depositional layer of sedimentary bedrock or. Unconsolidated sediment.
BEDDING-GRIKE A narrow, rectilinear slot in a karst rock outcrop as a result of solution along a bedding-plane.
BEDDING PLANE A surface separating two beds, usually planar.
BEDDING-PLANE CAVE A cavity developed along a bedding-plane and elongate in cross-section as a result.
BENTHIC Bottom dwelling, usually on the bed of a stream, pond, lake or the sea.
BIOMASS The total weight of living matter in a given area, or in a community, at a particular trophic level, or of a particular type of organism at a site.
BIOSPELEOLOGY The scientific study of organisms living in caves.
BLIND SHAFf A vertical extension upwards from part of a cave but not reaching the surface; small in area in relation to its height.
BLIND VALLEY A valley that is closed abruptly at its lower end by a cliff or slope facing up the valley. It may have a perennial or intermittent stream which sinks at its lower end or it may be a dry valley.
BLOWHOLE (1) A hole to the surface in the roof of a sea cave through which waves force air and water. (2) A hole in the ground through which air blows in and out strongly, sometimes audibly; common in the Nullarbor Plain.
BONE BRECCIA A breccia containing many bone fragments.
BRANCHWORK A dendritic system of underground streams or passages wherein branches join successively to form a major stream or passage.
BREAKDOWN Fall of rock from the roof or wall of a cave.
BRECCIA Angular fragments of rock and/or fossils cemented together or with a matrix of finer sediment. Cf. Bone breccia.
CALCITE The commonest calcium carbonate (CaC03) mineral and the main constituent of limestone, with different crystal forms in the rhombohedral subsystem.
CANOPY A compound speleothem consisting of a flowstone cover of a bedrock projection and of a fringe of stalactites or shawls on the outer edge.
CANYON (1) A deep valley with steep to vertical walls; in karst frequently formed by a river rising on impervious rocks outside the karst area. (2) A deep, elongated cavity cut by running water in the roof or floor of a cave or forming a cave passage.
CARBIDE Calcium carbide, CaC2, used with water to make acetylene in lamps.
CAVE A natural cavity in rock large enough to be entered by man. It may be water-filled. If it becomes full of ice or sediment and is impenetrable, the term applies but will need qualification.
CAVE BLISTER An almost perfect hemisphere of egg-shell calcite.
CAVE BREATHING (1) Movement of air in and out of a cave entrance at intervals. (2) The associated air currents within the cave.
CAVE CORAL Very small speleothems consisting of short stalks with bulbous ends, usually occurring in numbers in patches.
CAVE EARTH Clay, silt, fine sand and/or humus deposited in a cave.
CAVE ECOLOGY The study of the interaction between cave organisms and their environment, e.g., energy input from surface, climatic influences.
CAVE FILL Transported materials such as silt, day, sand and gravel which cover the bedrock floor or partially or wholly block some part of a cave.
CAVE FLOWER Syn. gypsum flower.
CAVE PEARL A smooth, polished and rounded speleothem found in shallow hollows into which water drips. Internally it has concentric layers around a nucleus.
CAVE SPRING A natural flow of water from rock or sediment inside a cave.
CAVE SYSTEM A collection of caves interconnected by enterable passages or linked hydrologically or a cave with an extensive complex of chambers and passages.
CAVERN A very large chamber within a cave.
CAVERNICOLE An animal which normally lives in caves for the whole or part of its life cycle.
CAVING The entering and exploration of caves.
CENOTE A partly water-tilled, wall-sided doline.
CHAMBER The largest order of cavity in a cave, with considerable width and length but not necessarily great height.
CHERT A light grey to black or red rock, which fractures irregularly, composed of extremely fine crystalline silica and often occurring as nodules or layers in limestone.
CHOKE Rock debris or cave fill blocking part of a cave.
COLUMN A speleothem from floor to ceiling, formed by the growth and joining of a stalactite and a stalagmite, or by the growth of either to meet bedrock.
CONDUIT An underground stream course completely filled with water and under hydrostatic pressure or a circular or elliptical passage inferred to have been such a stream course.
COPROLITE Fossilized large excrement of animals, sometimes found in caves, especially those used as lairs.
COPROPHAGE A scavenger which feeds on animal dung, including guano.
CORRASION The wearing away of bedrock or loose sediment by mechanical action of moving agents, especially water.
CORROSION Syn. solution.
CRAWL (WAY) A passage which must be negotiated on hands and knees.
CROSS-SECI10N A section of a cave passage or a chamber across its width.
CRYPTOZOA The assemblage of small terrestrial animals found living in darkness beneath stones, logs, bark, etc. Potential colonizers of caves.
CRYSTAL POOL A cave pool generally with little or no overflow, containing well-formed crystals.
CURRENT MARKING Shallow asymmetrical hollows formed by solution by turbulent waterflow and distributed regularly over karst rock surfaces. Cf. Scallops.
CURTAIN A speleothem in the form of a wavy or folded sheet, often translucent and resonant, hanging from the roof or wall of a cave.
DARK ADAPTATION A change in the retina of the eye sensitizing it to dim light (the eye 'becomes accustomed to the dark'). Loss of sensitivity on re-exposure to brighter light is 'light adaptation'.
DARK ZONE The part of a cave which daylight does not reach.
DAYLIGHT HOLE An opening to the surface in the roof of a cave.
DEAD CAVE A cave without streams or drips of water.
DECOMPOSERS Living things, chiefly bacteria and fungi, that subsist by extracting energy from tissues of dead animals and plants.
DECORATION Cave features as a result of secondary mineral precipitation, usually of calcite. Syn. Speleothem.
DETRITIVORE Organisms which feed on organic detritus, such as the dead parts of plants or the dead bodies and waste products of animals.
DIG An excavation made (1) to discover or extend a cave or (2) to uncover artefacts or animal bones.
DIP The angle at which beds are inclined from the horizontal. The true dip is the maximum angle of the bedding-planes at right angles to the strike. Lesser angles in other directions are apparent dips.
DOG-TOOTH SPAR A variety of calcite with acute-pointed crystals.
DOLINE A closed depression draining underground in karst, of simple but variable form, e.g., cylindrical, conical, bowl- or dish-shaped. From a few to many hundreds of metres in dimension.
DOLOMITE (1) A mineral consisting of the double carbonate of magnesium and calcium CaMg(C03h. (2) A rock made chiefly of dolomite mineral.
DOME A large hemispheroidal hollow in the roof of a cave, formed by breakdown and/or salt weathering, generally in mechanically weak rocks, which prevents bedding and joints dominating the form.
DONGA In the Nullarbor Plain, a shallow, dosed depression, several metres deep and hundreds of metres across, with a flat day-loam floor and very gentle slopes.
DRIPHOLE A hole formed by water dripping onto the cave floor.
DRIPLINE A line on the ground at a cave entrance formed by drips from the rock above. Useful in cave survey to define the beginning of the cave.
DRIPSTONE A deposit formed from drops falling from cave roofs or walls, usually of calcite.
DRY CAVE A cave without a running stream. Cf. Dead cave.
DRY VALLEY A valley without a surface stream channel.
DUCK(-UNDER) A place where water is at or close to the cave roof for a short distance so that it can be passed only by submersion.
DUNE LIMESTONE Syn. Aeolian calcarenite.
DYE GAUGING Determining stream discharge by inserting a known quantity of dye and measuring its concentration after mixing.
DYNAMIC PHREAS A phreatic zone or part of a phreatic zone where water moves fast with turbulence under hydrostatic pressure.
ECCENTRIC A speleothem of abnormal shape or attitude. Cf. Helictite.
EPIPHREATIC Referring to water moving with some speed in the top of the phreatic zone or becoming part of the phreatic zone during floods.
EROSION The wearing away of bedrock or sediment at the surface or in caves by mechanical and chemical actions of all moving agents, such as rivers, wind and glaciers.
EXSURGENCE A spring fed only by percolation water.
FAULT A fracture separating two parts of a once continuous cock body with relative movement along the fault plane.
FAULT CAVE A cave developed along a fault or fault zone, either by movement of the fault or by preferential solution along it.
FAULT PLANE A plane along which movement of a fault has taken place.
FISSURE An open crack in rock or soil.
ASSURE CAVE A narrow, vertical cave passage, often developed along a joint but not necessarily so. Usually a result of solution but sometimes of tension.
FLATfENER A passage, which, though wide, is so low that movement is possible only in a prone position.
FLOE CALCITE Very thin flakes of calcite floating on the surface of a cave pool or previously formed in this way.
FLOWSTONE A deposit formed from thin films or trickles of water over floors or walls, usually of calcite. Cf. Travertine.
FLUORESCEIN A reddish yellow organic dye which gives a green fluorescence to water. It is detectable in very dilute solutions, so it is used in water tracing and dye gauging in the form of the salt sodium fluorescein.
FLUOROMETER An instrument for measuring the fluorescence of water; used in water tracing and dye gauging.
FOSSIL The remains or traces of animals or plants preserved in rocks or sediments.
GLACIER CAVE A cave formed within or beneath a glacier.
GOUR Syn. Rimstone darn.
GRIKE A deep, narrow, vertical or steeply inclined rectilinear slot in a rock outcrop as a result of solution along a joint.
GROTIO A room in a cave of moderate dimensions but richly decorated.
GROUNDWATER Syn. Phreatic water.
GUANO Large accumulations of dung, often partly mineralized, including rock fragments, animal skeletal material and products of reactions between excretions and rock. In caves, it is derived from bats and to a lesser extent from birds.
GYPSUM The mineral hydrated calcium sulphate CaSO...2H20.
GYPSUM FLOWER An elongated and curving deposit of gypsum on a cave surface.
HALF-BLIND VALLEY A blind valley which overflows its threshold when the streamsink cannot accept all the water at a time of flood.
HALF-TUBE A semi-eylindrical, elongate recess in a cave surface, often meandering or anastomosing.
HALITE The sodium chloride mineral NaCI in the cubic crystalline system.
HALL A lofty chamber considerably longer than it is wide.
HELICTITE A speleothem, which at one or more stages of its growth changes its axis from the vertical to give a curving or angular form.
HETEROTROPH An organism that cannot manufacture food from inorganic raw materials, and therefore must feed on available organic compounds contained in the tissues of other organisms.
HISTOPLASMOSIS A lung disease which may be caught from the guano of some caves, caused by a fungus, Histoplasmosis capsulatum. Usually mild in effect, it can be fatal in rare cases.
HYDROLOGY The scientific study of the nature, distribution and behaviour of water.
HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE The pressure due to a column of water.
ICE CAVE A cave with perennial ice in it.
INFLOW CAVE A cave into which a stream enters or is known to have entered formerly but which cannot be followed downstream to the surface.
INTERSTITIAL MEDIUM Spaces between grains of sand or fine gravel filled with water which may contain organisms.
INVERTED SIPHON A siphon of U~profile.
JOINT A planar or gently curving crack separating two parts of once continuous rock without relative movement along its plane.
JOINT-PLANE CAVE A cavity developed along a joint and elongated incross-section.
KANKAR (pronounced kunkar) A deposit, often nodular, of calcium carbonate formed in soils of semi-arid regions. Sometimes forms cave roofs.
KARREN The minor forms of karst as a result of solution of rock on the surface or underground.
KARST Tereain with special landforms and drainage characteristics on account of greater solubility of certain rocks in natural waters than is common. Derived from the geographical name of part of Slovenia.
KARST WINDOW A dosed depression, not a polje, which has a stream flowing across its bottom.
KEYHOLE (PASSAGE) A small passage or opening in a cave, which is round above and narrow below.
LAKE In caving, a body of standing water in a cave. The term is used for what on the surface would be called a pond or pool.
LAVA-CAVE A cave in a lava flow; usually a tube or tunnel formed by flow of liquid lava through a solidified mass, or by roofing of an open channel of flowing lava. Small caves in lava also form as gas blisters.
LEUCOPHOR A colourless water tracer, which fluoresces blue.
LIMESTONE A sedimentary rock consisting mainly of calcium carbonate CaC03•
LIVE CAVE A cave containing a stream or active speleothems.
MALADIE VERTE Overgrowths of the green alga Palmellococcus on speleothems.
MARBLE Limestone recrystallized and hardened by pressure and heat.
MAZE Syn. Network.
MEANDER An arcuate curve in a river course as a result of a stream eroding sideways.
MEANDER NICHE A hemispherically roofed part of a eave formed by a stream meandering and cutting down at the same time.
MICROCLIMATE The climate (i.e., temperature, humidity, air movements, etc.) of a restricted area or space, e.g., of a cave or, on a lesser scale, of the space beneath stones in a cave.
MICROGOUR Miniature rimstone dams with associated tiny pools of the order of 1em wide and deep on flowstone.
MOONMILK A soft, white plastic speleothem consisting of calcite, hydrocalcite, hydromagnesite or huntite.
MUD PENDULITE A pendulite with the knob coated in mud.
NATURAL ARCH An arch of rock formed by weathering.
NATURAL BRIDGE A bridge of rock spanning a ravine or valley and formed by erosive agents.
NECROPHAGE A scavenger feeding on animal carcases.
NETWORK A complex pattern of repeatedly connecting passages in a cave.
NICHE The unique life strategy of a species from an ecological viewpoint.
NOTHEPHREATIC Referring to water moving slowly in cavities in the phreatic zone.
OUTFLOW CAVE A cave from which a stream flows or formerly did so and which cannot be followed upstream to the surface.
PALAEOKARST 'Fossil' karst' - cave or karst features remnant from a previous period of karstification, characterized by the presence of ancient (buried) deposits, as lithified cave fills or breccias.
PASSAGE A cavity which is much longer than it is wide or high and may join larger cavities. '
PENDANT Syn. Rock pendant.
PENDULITE A kind of stalactite which has been partly submerged and the submerged part covered with dog-tooth spar to give the appearance of a drumstick.
PERCOLATION WATER Water moving mainly downwards through pores, cracks and tight fissures, in the vadose zone.
PERMEABILITY The property of rock or soil permitting water to pass through it. Primary permeability depends on interconnecting pores between the grains of the material. Secondary permeability depends on solutional widening of joints and bedding-planes and on other solution cavities in the rock.
PHREAS Syn. Phreatic zone.
PHREATIC WATER Water below the level at which all voids in the rock are completely filled with water.
PHREATIC ZONE Zone where voids in the rock are completely filled with water.
PHYTOPHAGE An animal that feeds on green plants.
PILLAR A bedrock column from roof to floor left by the removal of surrounding rock.
PIPE A tubular cavity projecting as much as several metres down from the surface into' karst rocks and often filled with earth, sand, gravel, breccia, etc.
PITCH A vertical or nearly vertical part of a cave for which ladders or ropes are normally used for descent or ascent.
PLAN A plot of the shape and details of a cave projected vertically onto a horizontal plane at a reduced scale.
PLUNGE POOL A swirlhole, generally of large size, occurring at the foot of a waterfall or rapid, on the surface or underground.
POLJE A large closed depression draining underground, with a flat floor across which there may be an intermittent or perennial stream and which may be liable to flood and become a lake. The floor makes a sharp break with parts of surrounding slopes.
POLYGONAL KARST Karst completely pitted by closed depressions so that divides between them form a crudely polygonal network.
POOL DEPOSIT (1) Any sediment which has accumulated in a pool in a cave. (2) Crystalline deposits precipitated in a cave pool,usually of crystalline shape as well as structure.
POPULATION Individuals of a species in a given locality which potentially form a single interbreeding group separated by physical barriers from other such populations (e.g., populations of the same species in two quite separate caves).
POROSITY The property of rock or soil of having small voids between the constituent particles. The voids may not interconnect.
POT(HOLE) A vertical or nearly vertical shaft or chimney open to the surface.
PREDATOR An animal which captures other animals for its food.
PROJECTED SECTION The result of projecting a section composed of several parts with differing directions onto a single plane. Usually the plane is vertical along the general trend of the cave. Only the vertical distance apart of points is correct, not the horizontal, so that slopes are distorted.
PSEUDOKARST Terrain with landforms which resemble those of karst but which are not the producer of karst processes.
RELICT KARST Old cave forms produced by earlier geomorphic processes within the present cycle of karstification and open to modification by present-day processes such as deposition of speleothems, sediments or skeletal deposits.
RELICT SPECIES Species belonging to an ancient group whose distribution is now restricted to a few locations and whose population is not increasing.
RESURGENCE A spring where a stream, which has a course on the surface higher up, reappears at the surface.
RHODAMINE A red organic dye which gives a red fluorescence to water. It is detectable in very dilute solutions so it is used in water tracing and dye gauging.
RIFT A long, narrow, high and straight cave passage controlled by planes of weakness in the rock. CE. Fissure.
RIMSTONE A deposit formed by precipitation from water flowing over the rim of a pool.
RIMSTONE DAM A ridge or rib of rimstone, often curved convexly downstream.
RIMSTONE POOL A pool held up by a rimstone dam.
RISING Syn. Spring.
ROCK PENDANT A smooth-surfaced projection from the roof of a cave as a result of solution. Usually found in groups.
ROCK SHELTER A cave with a more or less level floor reaching only a short way into a hillside or under a fallen block so that no part is beyond daylight.
ROCKHOLE A shallow, small hole in rock outcrops, often rounded in form and holding water after rains. Well known on the Nullarbor Plain.
ROCKMILK Syn. Moonmilk.
ROCKPILE A heap of blocks in a cave, roughly conical or part-conical in shape.
ROOF CRUST Thin speleothem on a cave precipitated from water films exuding from pores or cracks.
ROOM A wider part of a cave than a passage but not as large as a chamber.
SALT WEATHERING Detachment of particles of various sizes from a rock surface by the growth of crystals from salt solutions. Forms substantial features in desert caves.
SAPROPHAGE A scavenger feeding on decaying organic material.
SATURATED (1) Referring to rock with water-filled voids. (2) Referring to water which has dissolved as much limestone or other karst rock as it can under normal conditions.
SCALLOPS Current markings that intersect to form points which are directed downstream.
SCAVENGER An animal that eats dead remains and wastes of other animals and plants (d. Coprophage, Necrophage, Saprophage).
SEA CAVE A cave in present-day or emerged sea diffs, formed by wave attack or solution.
SECTION A plot of the shape and details of a cave in a particular intersecting plane called the section plane, which is usually vertical.
SEDIMENT Material recently deposited by water, ice or wind, or precipitated from water.
SEEPAGE WATER Syn. Percolation water.
SELENITE A crystalline form of gypsum.
SHAFT A vertical cavity roughly equal in horizontal dimensions but much deeper than broad.
SHAWL A simple triangular-shaped curtain.
SHOW CAVE A cave that has been made accessible to the public for guided visits.
SIPHON A water-filled passage of inverted V-profile which delivers a flow of water whenever the head of water upstream rises above the top of the inverted U.
SOLUTION In karst studies, the change of bedrock from the solid state to the liquid state by combination with water. In physical solution the ions of the rock go directly into solution without transformation. In chemical solution acids take part, especially the weak acid formed by carbon dioxide (C02).
SOLUTION FLUTE A solution hollow running down the maximum slope of the rock, of uniform fingertip width and depth, with sharp ribs between it and its neighbours.
SOLUTION PAN A dish-shaped depression on flatfish rock; its sides may overhang and carry solution flutes. Its bottom may have a cover of organic remains, silt, clay or rock fragments.
SOLUTION RUNNEL A solution hollow running down the maximum slope of the rock, larger than a solution flute and increasing in depth and width down its length. Thick ribs between neighbouring runnels may be
sharp and carry solution flutes.
SPECIES A group of actually or potentially interbreeding populations which is reproductively isolated from other such groups by their biology, not simply by physical barriers.
SPELEOGEN A cave feature formed erosionally or by weathering in cave enlargement, such as current markings (Cf. Scallop) or rock pendants.
SPELEOLOGY The exploration, description and scientific study of caves and related phenomena.
SPELEOTHEM A secondary mineral deposit formed in caves, most commonly calcite.
SPLASH CUP A shallow cavity in the top of a stalagmite.
SPONGEWORK A complex of irregular, interconnecting cavities intricately perforating the rock. The cavities may range from a few centimetres to more than a metre across.
SPRING A natural flow of water from rock or soil onto the land surface or into a body of surface water.
SQUEEZE An opening in a cave passable only with effort because of its small dimensions. Cf. Flattener, Crawl (way).
STALACTITE A speleothem hanging downwards from a roof or wall, of cylindrical or conical form, usually with a central hollow tube.
STALAGMITE A speleothem projecting vertically upwards from a cave floor and formed by precipitation from drips.
STEEPHEAD A steep-sided valley in karst, generally short, ending abruptly upstream where a stream emerges or formerly did so.
STRAW (STALACTITE) A long, thin-walled tubular stalactite less than about 1em in diameter.
STREAMSINK A point at which a surface stream disappears underground.
STRIKE The direction of a horizontal line in a bedding-plane in rocks inclined from the horizontal. On level ground it is the direction of outcrop of inclined beds.
STYLOLITE Suture in rock formed where pressure solution has taken place, often leaving a thin lamina of insoluble material along it.
SUBCUTANEOUS ZONE The uppermost layers of rock below the soil on a karst. This zone is distinguished from lower zones by a higher porosity and storage capacity for water as a result of the presence of many solutionally enlarged fissures.
SUBJACENT KARST Karst developed in soluble beds underlying other rock formations; the surface mayor may not be affected by the karst development.
SUMP A point in a cave passage when the water meets the roof.
SUPERSATURATED Referring to water that has more limestone or other karst rock in solution than the maximum corresponding to normal conditions.
SURVEY In caving, the measurement of directions and distances between survey points and of cave details from them, and the plotting of cave plans and sections from these measurements either graphically or after computation of coordinates.
SWIRLHOLE A hole in rock in a streambed eroded by eddying water, with or without sand or pebble tools.
SYNGENETIC KARST Karst developed in Aeolian calcarenite when the evolution of karst features has taken place at the same time as the lithification of dune sand.
TAFONI Roughly hemispherical hollows weathered in rock either at the surface or in caves.
TERRA ROSSA Reddish residual day soil developed on limestone.
THRESHOLD (1) That part of a cave near the entrance where surface climatic conditions rapidly grade into cave climatic conditions. Not necessarily identical with the twilight zone. (2) Slope or cliff facing up a blind or half-blind valley below a present or former streamsink.
THROUGH CAVE A cave which may be followed from entrance to exit along a stream course or along a passage which formerly carried a stream.
TOWER KARST Conekarst in which the residual hills have very steep to overhanging lower slopes. There my be alluvial plains between the towers and flat-floored depressions within them.
TRACER (1) A material introduced into surface or underground water where it disappears or into soil to determine drainage interconnections and travel time. (2) A material introduced into cave air to determine cave interconnections.
TRAVERTINE Compact calcium carbonate deposit, often banded, precipitated from spring, river or lake water. Cf. Tufa.
TROGLOBITE A cavernicole unable to live outside the cave environment.
TROGLODYTE A human cave dweller.
TROGLOPHILE A cavernicole which frequently completes its life cycle in caves but is not confined to this habitat.
TROGLOXENE A cavernicole which spends only part of its life cycle in caves and returns periodically to the surface for food.
TUBE A cave passage of smooth surface, and elliptical or nearly circular in cross-section.
TUFA Spongy or vesicular calcium carbonate deposited from spring, river or lake waters. Cf. Travertine.
TUNNEL A nearly horizontal cave open at both ends, fairly straight and uniform in cross-section.
TWILIGHT ZONE The part of a cave to which daylight penetrates.
UVALA A complex dosed depression with several lesser depressions within its rim.
VADOSE FLOW Water flowing in free-surface streams in caves.
VADOSE SEEPAGE 5yn. Percolation water.
VADOSE WATER Water in the vadose zone.
VADOSE ZONE The zone where voids in the rock are partly filled with air and through which water descends under gravity.
VAUCLUSIAN SPRING A spring rising up a deep, steeply inclined, waterfilled passage into a small surface pool.
VERMICULATION Pattern of thin, worm-shaped coatings of day or silt on cave surfaces.
WATER TABLE The surface between phreatic water, which completely fills voids in the rock, and ground air, which partially fills higher voids.
WATER TRACING Determination of water connection between points of stream disappearance or of soil water seepage and points of reappearance on the surface or underground.
WATERTRAP A place where a cave roof dips under water but lifts above it farther on. Cf. Duck(-under).
WELL A deep rounded hole in a cave floor or on the surface in karst.


Caves: Processes, Development and Management David Gillieson
© 1996 David Gillieson. ISBN: 978-0-631-19175-9

