COBISS: 1.01 
GLACIOKARST LANDFORMS IN THE SIERRA DE LOS GRAJOS, BABIA AND LUNA NATURAL PARK (CANTABRIAN MOUNTAINS, NW SPAIN) 

Karst affected by glacial erosion is currently located in some high latitude and high altitude areas. In mountains, the discharge of the melting glaciers occurs through the karstic aquifers. The infiltration of the subglacial water into the karst network reduces overland flow, which modi- fies the discharges of the pro-glacial streams and the sedi- ments they carry. Therefore, when glacier dynamics con- verge with a subglacial karst (Žebre & Stepišnik 2015), a type of landscape that combines the reliefs derived from both processes, named glaciokarst, is generated (Ford 1979; Smart 2004; Žebre & Stepišnik 2015).During cold stages of the Pleistocene, these dynamics has been common in the calcareous mountains at middle latitudes (Johnson & Stieg- lizt 1990; Bodgdan & Leszek 1999; Goldie 2006; Lepirica 2008; Hughes et al. 2010; Telbisz et al. 2011; Adamson et al. 2014; Stepišnik 2014; Žebre & Stepišnik 2015; Žebre et al. 2016), and also in limestone outcrops of the Cantabrian Mountains were the glacial processes were intense (Jalut et al. 2010; Serrano et al. 2012, 2013; Frochoso et al. 2013; Jiménez-Sánchez et al. 2013; Santos-González et al. 2013a; Gómez-Villar et al. 2015; Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 2016; Ruiz-Fernández et al. 2016). However, in lower zones where this association does not occur, karst processes are dominant. This is observed in numerous glacial landforms that hide or adapt to karst forms, like in the Picos de Eu- ropa, the highest part of the Cantabrian Mountains, where glaciers occupied the top of a karst massif (González True- ba 2007; Ruiz-Fernández et al. 2016). Glaciers also devel- oped in other areas of calcareous mountains such as the Sierra de los Grajos. However, previous studies have barely highlighted the combination of karst and glacial processes occurring in this range. 
By using geomorphological evidences and sedimen- tological analysis, the main objectives of this research are to establish the influence of glaciation on the karst systems, to identify the main landforms and to high- point the singular action of glacial systems in the karst areas. The research focused on paleo-glaciers within the Sierra de los Grajos, whose morpho-structural features favoured their development. The calcareous structures of this area where the basis for the creation of a pre-glacial karstic relief characterized by wide areas with gentle slope at a high altitude. The topography favoured the ac- cumulation of ice, in spite of the relatively low altitude of the Sierra de los Grajos. The result is a combination of karstic and glacial processes and landforms. 
STUDy AREA 
The Sierra de los Grajos is a part of the Babia and Luna Natural Park, located in the western area of the Cantabri- an Mountains, northwestern Spain. It is a karst platform mainly composed of Carboniferous limestone (Rodrígu- ez Pérez 2009) whose dimensions are 6 km long by 3 km wide and with elevations below 1900 m a.s.l. (1857 m in Peña Castillo) (Fig. 1A). To the south, this platform rises abruptly more than 500 m above the Vega del Panazal, which is a valley excavated in Carboniferous shales. To the north, the Sierra de los Grajos borders the Vega de Gorgaberos, a closed karstic depression around 1650 m (García de Celis 1997). In general, Paleozoic limestone tends to be prone to karstification, although the intensity of karst activity varies depending on the type of lime- stone facies and structural features. The main massif of the Sierra de los Grajos consists of Carboniferous lime- stone (Barcaliente and Valdeteja Formations), while in the Vega de Gorgaberos polje, Devonian limestone pre- vails (Santa Lucía Formation). Between these two zones there is an altitudinal difference of almost 200 m, which can be explained by the different intensity of karstifica- tion according to the type of limestone. 
Geologically, this area is part of the Fold and Nappe Province, belonging to the Cantabrian Zone (Alonso et al. 2009). The area is included in the Sobia-Bodón Unit and the main tectonic structures that appear are the Pi- nos and Villafeliz thrusts and the Los Grajos-Valgrande fault (Suárez Rodríguez et al. 1989). These structures are the result of the Variscan tectonics that caused a subver- tical disposition of the strata with considerable lithologi- cal diversity. From north to south, in less than 4 km long nine lithological formations have been identified, rang- ing from the Cambrian to the Upper Carboniferous peri- ods (Fig. 1B). Some of the units are duplicated as a result of the abovementioned faulted anticline (van den Bosch 1969).This geological structure favoured intense pre-gla- cial processes that included karstic dissolution. The abun- dance of limestone outcrops allowed the development of a karst system with a dominant underground circulation versus the surface runoff from adjacent non-calcareous areas. Thus, a high and broad karst platform developed and the favourable conditions to the accumulation of ice during the Pleistocene glaciations were established. 
ACTA CARSOLOGICA 46/2–3 – 2017 166 
GLACIOKARST LANDFORMS IN THE SIERRA DE LOS GRAJOS, BABIA AND LUNA NATURAL PARK (CANTABRIAN ... 
fig. 1: A – The location of study area. B – The geological section from south to north between La Serrona Peak and La Cubilla Pass. 
The first references to glacial and karst elements in the study area are those of García de Celis (1997) in a geomorphological map at scale 1:50,000 next to the Vega de Gorgaberos polje where sinkholes, karstic sinks, mo- raines and ice diffluences appear. More recently, García de Celis & Martínez Fernández (2002) indicate the pres- ence of glacial deposits in Del Puerto river valley, near 
its confluence with the Rozas River, or the fluvioglacial origin of the Vega del Panazal. They also point out the difficulties for a genetic interpretation due to absence of moraines. Another reference is the identification of a frontal moraine in the north face of Peña Castillo by Alonso Herrero et al. (2004). 
ACTA CARSOLOGICA 46/2–3 – 2017 167 
To achieve the objectives of this study, an extensive field work was carried out in Vega de Gorgaberos, Vega del Panazal and the karst platform of the Sierra de los Grajos. This allowed us to recognize the main karst landforms, the glacial deposits and other fluvioglacial and torrential sediments. 
The geomorphological map was designed by using different cartographic sources: the aerial photographs provided by the Spanish Geographic National Institute (IGN, http://www.ign.es) and the Agrarian Technologi- cal Institute of the Castilla y León (ITACyL, http://www. itacyl.es/); the orthophotographs from the National Plan of Aerial Orthophotography supplied by Spanish Geo- graphic National Institute; and the digital geologic maps available from the Geological and Mining Institute of Spain (IGME, http://www.igme.es/). 
The scales of the analogical aerial photography are 1:33,000 for the American flight of 1956−57, and 1:18,000 for the Inter-ministerial or IRyDA (Institute for Agricultural Reform and Development) flight of 1977−83. The resolution of the digital images is 25 or 50 cm, depending on the year. The American flight is a valuable cartographic source due to the intensive land use at that time. During this period, the study area had a low forest cover, which allows a better identification of glacial and karst landforms than at present. Since then trees and shrubs have extended a lot making difficult the photo interpretation with the recent orthophotos. The Inter-ministerial flight has been used for its high quality and detailed scale, and the high resolution of digital im- ages has been very useful for a detailed mapping of each landform (shape, size, distance). 
A preliminary geomorphological map was made with the cartographic and geological information, and also the photointerpretation of the analogical and digi- tal photograms. The software used was the Geographic Information System (GIS) ArcGIS 10.4. The data were verified in the field and some small-sized elements (e.g. erratic boulders, till, polished surfaces) very important in reconstructing the extent and thickness of the paleo- glacier in this area were accurately located. Finally, a geo- morphological map was performed at the 1:10,000 scale by incorporating all the geomorphological evidences ob- 
ACTA CARSOLOGICA 46/2–3 – 2017 168 
served in the field. For the cartographic base of this map the orthophotograph from 2008 whit a resolution of 25 cm was used. 
Based on geomorphological data we reconstructed past glacial limits during the three main glacial stages and we designed the 50 m contours of the glacier’s sur- face. A DEM was developed from the contour lines using the GIS software. We then calculated the glacier surface in 50 m intervals. To estimate the paleo-ELA we used the AABR method (Furbish & Andrews 1984; Benn & Gem- mell 1997). We applied the Balance Ratio values used by Rea (2009) for mid-latitude maritime glaciers based on contemporary glacier measurements that have a mean of 1.9±0.81. Finally, we used the Excel (R) spreadsheet from Osmaston (2005) to estimate the palaeo-ELA. We modified the spreadsheet to use 50 m intervals. 
For the sedimentological analysis, three sampling points have been chosen in the Vega del Panazal, where several sections have been identified (Fig. 2). The first sampling point is located in the southwestern edge of the study area, in a meander of Del Puerto River where a section of more than 10 m appears. Six sediment sam- ples were collected here for the particle size analysis. The second sampling point is located at the confluence of the Del Puerto River with one of the stream coming from La Serrona Range, and where two samples were collected. Half a kilometre to the northeast, the third sampling point is located. It is on the right bank of the Del Puer- to River, near a spring and two sediment samples were picked up. Ten samples in total were taken to be analysed in the laboratory. 
The method used to determine the distribution of particle grain size was the mechanical or sieve analysis. Two hundred grams of each sample were placed in a sieve shaker and shaken for 15 minutes. The results of each sieve were weighed and then plotted in a semi-log- arithmic curve indicating the cumulative distribution in percent of clay and silt (mud), sand and gravel particles. The results are also represented in a trigon showing the percentage of fine, medium and coarse material of each sample. The particle size scale and the classification of sediments are based on Wentworth scheme (1922) and then modified by Blott and Pye (2012). 
R. B. GONZáLEZ-GUTIéRREZ, J. SANTOS-GONZáLEZ, A. GÓMEZ-VILLAR, E. ALONSO-HERRERO, A. GARCÍA-DE CELIS, MARTÍN CANO & J. M. REDONDO-VEGA 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
KARSTIC AND GLACIAL LANDFORMS DURING THE GLACIAL MAXIMUM Karst and glacial landforms are dominant in the study area (Fig. 2). The preglacial relief was controlled by the dissolution of limestone, so glaciers developed over karstic landforms. The main area of the Sierra de los Gra- jos (Peña Castillo) consists of a high flat surface at ap- proximately 1750 m a.s.l. with features of paleo-surface erosion and underground drainage. This high paleo- surface shows sinkholes and subvertical chasms (more 
than a hundred of these skin points in an area of only 50 hectares) that developed there where two or more lines of weakness (mainly faults) cross in the geological structure (Fig. 3A). 
The Vega de Gorgaberos, located to the north of the main massif of the Sierra de los Grajos, is an approxi- mately 1.5 km x 1 km closed karst depression mainly filled with sediments. This depression has a relatively flat bottom and includes some minor dolines and a ponor. Due to its characteristics and in spite of its small 
GLACIOKARST LANDFORMS IN THE SIERRA DE LOS GRAJOS, BABIA AND LUNA NATURAL PARK (CANTABRIAN ... 
RESULTS 
fig. 2: geomorphological map the Sierra de los grajos. 
ACTA CARSOLOGICA 46/2–3 – 2017 169 
fig. 3: Main glaciokarstic features in the Sierra de los grajos. (Photos: J. Santos-gonzález and J. M. Redondo-Vega). 
ACTA CARSOLOGICA 46/2–3 – 2017 170 
R. B. GONZáLEZ-GUTIéRREZ, J. SANTOS-GONZáLEZ, A. GÓMEZ-VILLAR, E. ALONSO-HERRERO, A. GARCÍA-DE CELIS, MARTÍN CANO & J. M. REDONDO-VEGA 

GLACIAL LANDFORMS DURING THE RETREAT PHASES, PROGLACIAL SEDIMENTS AND POSTGLACIAL KARSTIC DyNAMICS In a second glacial stage, ice thickness decreased and Negrón 1675±11 
the distinct tongues were disconnected from each oth- Gorgaberos 1681±14 
er. ELA ascended to 1675 to 1717 m (Tab. 1) depending Carbajal 1708±8 
on the orientation and characteristics of each glacier. In La Cubilla 1717±6 
the Vega de Gorgaberos polje, this phase is marked by a Gorgaberos 1756±6 
set of moraine arcs (Fig. 3B) indicating several periods Phase III 
Carbajal 1761±5 
of glacier stabilization during its retreat. The ice passage Peña Castillo 1758±7 
through the Los Navares Pass had disappeared, and the ice tongue flowing from the boundary with Asturias was stabilized at the foot of Negrón peak. moved to the south, following the Del Puerto River Val- 
From the eastern-north face of Peña Castillo, a ley. 

fig. 5: Sedimentological analysis of the Vega del Panazal plain showing the sample sites, six samples (E, C, f, D, A, B) in the meander site, and four (A, B, D, E) in the confluence and spring sites. 
ACTA CARSOLOGICA 46/2–3 – 2017 172 
R. B. GONZáLEZ-GUTIéRREZ, J. SANTOS-GONZáLEZ, A. GÓMEZ-VILLAR, E. ALONSO-HERRERO, A. GARCÍA-DE CELIS, MARTÍN CANO & J. M. REDONDO-VEGA 
GLACIOKARST LANDFORMS IN THE SIERRA DE LOS GRAJOS, BABIA AND LUNA NATURAL PARK (CANTABRIAN ... 
In the north-face of the highest areas of the Sierra de los Grajos, at the foot of the subvertical walls, small moraines indicated a last glacial stage, with the ELA situ- ated at ≈1760 m (Tab. 1) and very small glaciers restrict- ed to topographic favourable areas (Fig. 4). 
Sediments (gravel, sand and fines) from glacier melting formed an extensive proglacial plain (1.5 km2) filling the Vega del Panazal depression. In this site more than 12 m thick sediment accumulated at the western margin of the sandur. There are no remnants of glacial origin in the Vega del Panazal (Fig. 3F) despite the rela- tive high altitude and flat morphology bounded by steep slopes that are similar to other U-shaped glacial valleys in the Cantabrian Mountains. Moraines and some large erratics are only present in the upper part of the Vega del Panazal at an elevation of 1370 m a.s.l., corresponding with the glacier front. That location is approximately 500 m downstream from the confluence of Del Puerto and Las Rozas Rivers. 
Morphologically, the Vega del Panazal represents a depression created by differential erosion in Paleozoic shale. The Vega del Panazal is also a terrace level with a very gentle slope of only 1.5% to the WSW and cor- responds to the filling of the depression during the local 
Last Glacial Maximum. The terrace has greater continu- ity and extension on the left side than on the right, which is narrower and irregular due to the presence of aban- doned terraces for agricultural use. The river has eroded another level beneath that fill level, approximately 10 m below the main upper surface of the depression. This de- rived level is particularly observed in the western part of the Vega del Panazal. 
The sediment that fill the bottom of the Vega del Panazal (the thickness of the sediments is more than 10 m in the meander where 6 of the samples were collected) contains several stratifications of gravel and sand that al- ternate with silt and clay (massive, or very clear lamina- tions) with different shades of colour. These characteris- tics and their grain size make it possible to attribute it a fluvioglacial origin. The samples indicate that there were sufficient water for mobilizing abundant sand and gravel interspersed with small, low-energy episodes with con- tributions of fine sediment. In general, the grain sizes of the detrital sediments of the Vega del Panazal are pre- dominantly small (sand, gravel, Fig. 5), except for in the existing channel of the Del Puerto River, and the grain size of the sediments decreases from west to east. 
DISCUSSION 
The extensive outcrops of Paleozoic limestone in the Can- tabrian Mountains are characterized by intense karstifi- cation (González-Gutiérrez et al. 2017). The dissolution of calcareous rocks had been a relevant process over long periods of time, as occurs in Las Médulas World Heritage Site (located 85 km to the southwest), where karstic landforms are fossilized by Miocene sediments (Redondo Vega et al. 2015). Paradoxically, karstification has allowed the preservation of extensive paleo-surfaces because the underground drainage has largely protected the surfaces from the fluvial erosion. These surfaces often indicate a long morphogenesis and are the remnants of ancient morphostructures. They are the consequence of the progressive adjustment of the river network to the up- lifted areas that were generated from the ancient eroded Paleozoic massif during the Alpine tectonics (González- Gutiérrez et al. 2017). 
The long morphogenetic evolution of the Cantabri- an Mountains, characterized by differential erosion pro- cesses, has favoured the development of cohesive rock outcrops alternating with valleys incised into incohesive rocks (González-Gutiérrez et al. 2017). In our study area, due to differential erosion there are areas with gentle 
slopes at different altitudes (e.g. Vega del Panazal and Vega de Gorgaberos). 
Some pre-glacial landforms were highly favour- able to ice accumulation during the Pleistocene, much more than one would expect from their modest altitude, 1857 m a.s.l., especially when this massif is compared to the higher nearby mountain massifs (e.g., Peña Ubiña, with an altitude of 2411 m a.s.l.). Therefore, a key fac- tor to understanding the glaciation on the southern side of the Cantabrian Mountains (Jalut et al. 2010; Santos- González et al. 2013b) is the presence of high and ex- tensive paleo-surfaces that act as glacial accumulation zones, even in areas without cirques, as in the case of the Sierra de los Grajos. This phenomenon explains why Paleozoic limestone in the study area indicates obvious signs of karstification and glaciation (Fig. 3). 
According to glacial ice reconstruction, ELA was situated at 1636±15 m during the maximum glacial ad- vance. This altitude agrees with paleo-ELA reconstruc- tions in the Cantabrian Mountains (Santos-González et al. 2013a; Serrano et al. 2013; Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 2015), where great differences occur depending on regional temperature and precipitation variations. 

sential to preserve glacial accumulation landforms. The poor subaerial water circulation results in less active paraglacial processes, allowing for a better preservation of glacial landforms than in other Cantabrian valleys; 
iii) the degradation of glacial landforms due to karstic processes, as evidenced by the development of sinkholes (suffusion depressions) in moraines; 
iv) the rapid degradation and disappearance of the detailed erosive subglacial forms (polished surfaces, grooves) when they remained under subaerial condi- tions subject to postglacial dissolution; 
v) the generation of an extensive proglacial plain (1.5 km2) filling a preglacial depression in the outermost margin of the main glacier. 
Definitively, the process of superimposing glacial dynamics on the karst terrain has generated a mixed morphology in which the dissolution of limestone and the drainage of runoff waters into the karst occur be- tween the moraines and the deposits of subglacial till, resulting in the development of glaciokarstic landforms. These landforms include: areas with karstic and glacial landforms, moraines with sinkholes, moraines with ponor, siliceous erratic boulders over limestone, mo- raines with any postglacial fluvial erosion, sinkholes and chasms occasionally with glacial sediments and an out- wash-plain in a karstic environment. 
More effort concerning the relationships between glacial and karstic landforms is needed to understand in greater detail the glaciokarstic landforms. The Sierra de los Grajos is a small but extraordinary example of these forms, although there are also other massifs with glaciokarstic landforms in the Cantabrian Mountains, so more studies about this kind of forms should be devel- oped in the near future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is partially supported by the projects MED- LANT (Depositional and geochemical dynamics of MEDiterranean Watershed-LAke Systems during the ANThropocene: disentangling human and climate forc- ings) (CGL2016-76215-R) and ESPAS (Scenarios of water and sediment yield from land cover and land- 
use changes: effects of active and passive management) (CGL2015-65569-R MINECO-FEDER). 
The comments and suggestions of two anonymous reviewers have improved the first version of the manu- script. 
