----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       

                                                 CYRIL MAYAUD  

                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       

   GROUNDWATER MODELLING  

        IN KARST TERRAINS USING  

 SINGLE-CONTINUUM MODELS  

                                                                       
                                                                       

BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN STATE-OF-THE-ART  

                 TOOLS AND PRACTICAL APPLICATION  

                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                           A dissertation submitted to the  
                                                                       
                                             Faculty of Natural Science  
                                                    University of Graz  
                                                              Austria  
                                                                       
                                      for the Degree of Doctor of Science  
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                          February 2014  

  

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                   In memory of Christoph Rehrl,  
                                              To my parents,  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                                č je v črne zemlje krili,  
     “manj strašna no 
      ko so pod svetlim soncam sužni dnovi!"  
    France Prešeren, Slovenian poet - 1836  
Krst pri Savici (the Baptism on the Savica)  
  

  

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     

                                                      PREAMBLE  

                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
Groundwater  modelling  is  of  primary  importance  to  assess  aquifer  hydrological  behaviour,  
flow direction, transport travel times as well as estimation of water resources in karst areas.  
As groundwater modelling standard approaches do not account for the peculiarities of karst  
aquifers, there is a need to improve the existing tools used for karst aquifer modelling. Hybrid  
models, which are frequently employed in basic research, represent karst conduits by a pipe  
network  (allowing  laminar  and  turbulent  flow)  embedded  in  a  matrix  where  the  flow  is  
laminar. Even if these models present the advantage to reproduce correctly the duality of flow  
in karst aquifers, they have the significant disadvantage to be hard to implement in practical  
applications, as many of the required input parameters are rarely available. An alternative to  
this  kind  of  modelling  is  the  so  called  single-continuum  approach,  which  is  derived  from  
porous  aquifer  groundwater  modelling  and  presents  the  advantages  to  require  less  input  
parameters  and  to  be  easier  to  implement.  Nevertheless  this  approach  does  not  explicitly  
consider the duality of flow reproduced by hybrid models. This lack was filled recently by the  
development of two compatible MODFLOW packages, allowing the implementation of non- 
linear and turbulent flow within single-continuum models. The present work has the purpose  
to  investigate  to  which  extent  the  single-continuum  approach  (with  and  without  non-linear  
flow) can be applied to field examples, in order to reproduce hydrological processes occurring  
in karst aquifers. The present research is based on both generic and field sites (using real data  
and related problems).  

  

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         

                                       OUTLINE OF THE THESIS  

                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                         This thesis is divided into five chapters and three appendices.  
  
  
In  Chapter  1  a  general  introduction  of  karst  sciences  and  groundwater  modelling  in  karst  
terrains  is  presented.  This  chapter  is  important  to  understand  the  actual  problematic  related  
with groundwater modelling in karst  aquifers  and the reason why single-continuum models  
were chosen for this thesis.  
  
Chapter 2 presents a study of a change of hydrological behaviour in an Austrian binary karst  
system. This study shows that the change of drainage behaviour occurring at one karst spring  
is caused by a change within the karst aquifer itself and is not driven by a change of weather  
or land use conditions. This chapter has already been published as:  
  
      •    Mayaud, C., Wagner, T., Benischke, R., and Birk, S., 2013. Understanding changes  
            in  the  hydrological  behaviour  within  a  karst  aquifer  (Lurbach  system,  Austria).  
            Carbonate Evaporite. doi: 10.1007/s13146-013-0172-3.  
  
Chapter 3 investigates an overflow behaviour reported in an Austrian binary karst catchment  
using  statistical  methods  and  groundwater  modelling.  The  combination  of  both  approaches  
helps  to  determine  the  overflow  location  within  the  karst  aquifer.  This  chapter  is  currently  
accepted for publication as:  
  
      •    Mayaud, C., Wagner, T., Benischke, R., and Birk, S., 2014. Single event time series  
            analysis in  a binary  karst catchment evaluated using a  groundwater model (Lurbach  
            system,  Austria).  doi:  10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.02.024.  Accepted  for  publication  by  
            Journal of Hydrology.  
  
In  Chapter  4  a  new  numerical  package  simulating  non-linear  flow  with  the  Forchheimer  
equation is introduced. This package was programmed for MODFLOW-2005 and showed a  
good  agreement  with  three  different  analytical  solutions  of  the  Forchheimer  equation  for  
confined and unconfined aquifers. This chapter is currently under review in a peer-reviewed  
journal:  
  

  

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

     •    Mayaud,  C.,  Walker,  P.,  Hergarten,  S.,  and  Birk,  S.,  Non-Linear  Flow  Process  
           (NLFP):  a  new  package  to  compute  non-linear  flow  in  MODFLOW.  Submitted  as  
           Methods Note to Groundwater.  
  
Chapter 5 presents the overall conclusions and outlooks of this work.  
  
Appendix A is a contribution where a change of hydrological behaviour within the Lurbach  
system  is  investigated  with  a  lumped-parameter  model.  This  appendix  has  to  be  read  in  
parallel with Chapter 2 and has already been published as:  
  
     •    Wagner,   T.,   Mayaud,   C.,   Benischke,   R.,   and   Birk,   S.,   2013.   Ein   besseres  
           Verständnis   des   Lurbach-Karstsystems   durch   ein   konzeptionelles   Niederschlags- 
           Abfluss-Modell. Grundwasser. doi: 10.1007/s00767-013-0234-4.  
  
Appendix  B  contains  five  different  abstracts  presented  during  the  course  of  this  PhD  at  
several national and international conferences where I contributed as a first-author.  
  
Appendix C contains a list of five different abstracts presented during the course of this PhD  
at several national and international conferences where I contributed as a co-author.  

  

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      

                                                        SUMMARY  

                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
Karst aquifers represent about 25 % of the total world groundwater reserves and are in many  
areas the first resource of drinking water. As they are very vulnerable to contamination there  
is a need to improve the global understanding of their flow behaviour and to better quantify  
their reserves. In general, groundwater models are widely used to characterize porous aquifers  
and  to  make  predictions  related  to  groundwater  flow  and  transport  phenomena.  However,  
these  tools  are  much  less  employed  in  karst  areas.  One  approach  used  for  karst  aquifer  
modelling  is  the  single-continuum  model,  which  represents  the  conduit  system  by  high  
contrasts in the hydraulic conductivity of a porous medium. The aim of this PhD thesis is to  
assess how far this approach is adequate for karst aquifer modelling. To do this, two examples  
applying  a  single-continuum  model  to  a  real  karst  system  are  presented.  Both  case  studies  
combine  the  single-continuum  approach  with  other  characterization  methods  (such  as  time  
series  analysis,  master  recession  curves  or  tracer  test  data)  and  improve  significantly  the  
characterization of the aquifer system. Nevertheless, both field examples show the limitations  
of  the  currently  available  packages  reproducing  turbulent  conduit  flow  through  single- 
continuum  models.  A  new  package  considering  non-linear  flow  using  the  Forchheimer  
equation   was   developed   and   proved   to   compute   non-linear   flow   accurately   for   three  
benchmark models and a more realistic field example derived from one of the aforementioned  
case studies. In summary, the use of single-continuum models for karst aquifer modelling is  
relevant  and  should  be  further  considered  as  a  valuable  alternative  to  other  modelling  
approaches.  
  

  

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   

                                         ZUSAMMENFASSUNG  

                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
Karstgrundwasserleiter stellen etwa 25 % der globalen Grundwasservorräte und sind in vielen  
Gebieten        die     vorrangige        Trinkwasserversorgung.               Da     sie    sehr      anfällig      gegenüber  
Schadstoffeinträgen  sind,  ist  es  erforderlich,  das  Verständnis  des  Fließverhaltens  in  diesen  
Grundwasserleitern            zu    verbessern       und     die    jeweiligen       Grundwasservorräte             besser      zu  
quantifizieren.           Generell          werden          Grundwassermodelle                  oft      verwendet,            um  
Porengrundwasserleiter  zu  charakterisieren  und  Vorhersagen  in  Bezug  auf  Strömungs-  und  
Transportvorgänge  zu  machen.  Diese  Modellwerkzeuge  werden  jedoch  weit  weniger  in  
Karstgebieten eingesetzt. Ein Ansatz für die Modellierung von Karstgrundwasserleitern sind  
Ein-Kontinuum-Modelle,  in  denen  das  Karsthohlraumsystem  durch  starke  Kontraste  in  der  
hydraulischen  Leitfähigkeit  eines  porösen  Mediums  repräsentiert  wird.  Das  Ziel  dieser  
Dissertation ist es, zu beurteilen, inwieweit dieser Ansatz für die Modellierung geeignet ist.  
Zu diesem Zweck werden zwei Beispiele vorgestellt, in denen ein Ein-Kontinuum-Modell auf  
ein reales Karstsystem angewendet wird. Beide Fallstudien kombinieren den Ein-Kontinuum- 
Ansatz  mit  anderen  Methoden  (wie  etwa  Zeitreihenanalyse,  Trockenwetterfalllinie  oder  
Markierungsversuche)  und  verbessern  erheblich  die  Charakterisierung  des  Aquifersystems.  
Beide      Feldbeispiele        zeigen      jedoch      auch     die    Limitierungen          der    derzeit     verfügbaren  
Programmpakete  zur  Berücksichtigung  turbulenter  Strömung  in  Ein-Kontinuum-Modellen  
auf. Ein neues Programmepaket zur Berücksichtigung nicht-linearer Strömung mit Hilfe der  
Forchheimergleichung  wurde  entwickelt  und  die  korrekte  Berechnung  der  nicht-linearen  
Strömung anhand dreier Benchmark-Modelle sowie einem realistischen Feldbeispiel aus einer  
der oben erwähnten Fallstudien gezeigt. Zusammenfassend kann festgestellt werden, dass die  
Verwendung  von  Ein-Kontinuum-Modellen  für  Karstgrundwasserleiter  relevant  ist  und  als  
angemessene Alternative zu anderen Modellansätzen gesehen werden sollte.  

  

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

  

Contents  
  
Chapter 1: Introduction to karst sciences and groundwater modelling in karst  
aquifers                                                                                                               11  
           
         1. Introduction to karst sciences                                                                             12  
                  1.1 Historical and geographical context                                                             12  
                  1.2 General definition and hydrology of a karst landscape                                            12  
                  1.3 Interactions between karst and humans: a multi-aspects problem    14  
                           1.3.1 Short historical context of karst-humans relationships                                14  
                           1.3.2 Water supply                                                                          15  
                           1.3.3 Protection of karst water resources and cave biodiversity   16  
                           1.3.4 Protection of people and facilities against hazards                                   17  
         2. Groundwater modelling in karst aquifers                                                                    19  
                  2.1 Purposes of groundwater modelling                                                                19  
                  2.2 Modelling approaches: a short state of the art                                                   19  
                  2.3 Purpose of this thesis                                                                           23  
  
Chapter 2: Understanding changes in the hydrological behaviour within a karst  
aquifer (Lurbach system, Austria)                                                                                      24  
           
         1. Introduction                                                                                              26  
         2. Field site                                                                                                 26  
         3. Data analysis                                                                                              29  
         4. Modelling                                                                                                  32  
                  4.1 Laminar flow                                                                                     33  
                  4.2 Turbulent flow                                                                                   36  
         5. Discussion                                                                                                 37  
         6. Conclusions                                                                                                37  
           
Chapter  3:  Single  event  time  series  analysis  in  a  binary  karst  catchment  
evaluated using a groundwater model (Lurbach system, Austria)                                                          39  
           
         1. Introduction                                                                                              41  
         2. Approach                                                                                                   43  
                  2.1 Methods                                                                                          43  
                           2.1.1 Autocorrelation                                                                       43  
                           2.1.2 Cross-correlation                                                                     43  
                  2.2 Field site                                                                                       44  

                                                            8  
  

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

  

                   2.3 Synthetic karst catchment                                                                           46  
         3. Results                                                                                                        48  
                   3.1 Field site                                                                                          48  
                   3.2 Synthetic karst catchment                                                                           51  
                            3.2.1 Homogeneous cases                                                                        51  
                            3.2.2 Heterogeneous cases                                                                      55  
         4. Conclusion                                                                                                     57  
  
Chapter 4: Non-Linear Flow Process (NLFP): a new package to compute non- 
linear flow in MODFLOW                                                                                                     58  
           
          1. Introduction                                                                                                 60  
         2. Background and theory                                                                                          60  
         3. Benchmark tests                                                                                                63  
                   3.1 First test: specified flow in a confined aquifer                                                    64  
                   3.2 Second test: fixed gradient in a confined aquifer                                                   65  
                   3.3 Third test: specified discharge in an unconfined aquifer                                            65  
         4. Application example                                                                                            67  
         5. Conclusion                                                                                                     68  
           
Chapter 5: Overall conclusions                                                                                             70  
  
Appendices                                                                                                                 73  
  
A-      Ein       besseres         Verständnis            des       Lurbach-Karstsystems                    durch        ein  
konzeptionelles Niederschlags-Abfluss-Modell                                                                               74  
           
          1. Einleitung                                                                                                   76  
         2. Das Lurbach-System                                                                                             77  
         3. Niederschlags-Abfluss-Modellierung                                                                             78  
         4. Ergebnisse                                                                                                     81  
         5. Diskussion                                                                                                     84  
         6. Schlussfolgerungen                                                                                             87  
           
B- Conference abstracts related to this thesis (presented as first author)                                                 92  
  
          1.  A  dual  approach  to  compute  groundwater  flow  in  karst  aquifers  using  
         distributive models: example of the Lurbach system (Austria)                                                      93  
  

                                                              9  
  

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

  

          2. Changes in the hydrological behaviour of a karst aquifer (Lurbach system,  
          Austria)                                                                                                             95  
  
          3. Recharge time scales and discretization length scales for single-continuum  
          models with turbulent flow in karst catchments                                                                       96  
            
          4.  New  insights  into  the  functioning  of  the  Lurbach  system  (Central  Styrian  
          Karst, Austria)                                                                                                      98  
  
          5.  Single  event  time  series  analysis  in  a  karst  catchment  evaluated  using  a  
          groundwater model                                                                                                      100  
            
C- Conference abstracts titles related to this thesis (presented as co-author)                                                   101  
            
          1. The Lurbach system (Central Styrian Karst - Semriach, Austria) - a complex  
          (but) instructive  karst  aquifer to  evaluate  predictive  modelling  capabilities  of  
          rainfall - runoff approaches                                                                                           101  
  
          2.  Changing  intercatchment  flow  in  a  binary  karst  system  -  The  Lurbach  
          system, Austria                                                                                                        101  
  
          3.  Understanding  intercatchment  flow  in  a  karst  aquifer  -  using  the  Lurbach  
          system example (Eastern Alps - Austria)                                                                                101  
  
          4.    Evaluating          the      changing         discharge         behaviour          of     a    karst      spring  
          (Hammerbach, Austria)                                                                                                  101  
  
          5. Thresholds in karst catchments: the example of the Lurbach karst  
          system                                                                                                                 101  
  
References                                                                                                                       102  
  
Acknowledgements                                                                                                                 112  
  
Short CV                                                                                                                         115  

                                                                 10  
  

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

              

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    

                                                         CHAPTER I  

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    

INTRODUCTION TO KARST SCIENCES  
AND GROUNDWATER MODELLING IN  
                                           KARST AQUIFERS  

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    

                                                                                 11  
  

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

            

1. Introduction to karst sciences  
            
           1.1 Historical and geographical context  
            
Karst   is   the   German   translation   of   kras,   a   Slovenian   word   referring   originally   to   a  
geographical area covering a large part of current southern Slovenia and surrounding the city  
of Trieste (Italy). This area was already known and investigated during the Austro-Hungarian  
Empire due to its uncommon landscape including a very sparse surface hydrological network,  
many large caves, a high density of sinkholes and several intermittent lakes. One of the first  
detailed  scientific  descriptions  of  this  region   was  carried  out  by  the  famous  Serbian  
geographer  Jovan  Cvijić  (Das  Karstphänomenen,  1893)  who  also  defined  almost  all  the  
terminology currently used in karst sciences. This area is named the  “Classical Karst” (a part  
of it can be seen on Fig. 1) and extends from the springs of the Ljubljanica River in the North  
to  the  flanks  of  the  Mount  Snežnik in  the  East,  the  Mediterranean  shore  and  the  limestone  
plateau above Trieste for the southern boundary, and the Slovenian-Italian border with the city  
of  Gorizia  in  the  West.  Many  famous  show  caves  such  as  the  Postojna  cave,  the  caves  of  
Škocjan or the Križna cave are located within this area.  
  

                                                                                                                                       
Fig. 1 A part of the Classical Karst: the catchment of the Unica River (modified after Martel, 1894), being a part  
of the catchment of the Ljubljanica River.  
  
           1.2 General definition and hydrology of a karst landscape  
            
Today the word karst is a worldwide known term used to define a type of landscape made of  
rocks  composed  mostly  of  limestone  (CaCO )  or  dolomite  (MgCO ),  but  also  of  gypsum  
                                                                  3                                3 

(CaSO4)  such  as  the  giant  Gypsum  caves  of  Western  Ukraine  (Klimchouk,  1996)  or  halite  
(NaCl) like the Russian hyperkarst of the Perm salt mine (Salomon, 2006). Those landscapes  
                                                                 12  
  

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

             

share the particularity to present a high concentration of voids of different size and a tortuous  
geometry,  as  they  are  normally  generated  by  the  action  of  acid  rainwater  dissolving  and  
enlarging them during the infiltration process.  
  
This first geomorphologic and geographic definition can lead to a second more hydrogeologic  
definition which tends to consider karst landscapes as potential aquifers (Fig. 2), where the  
water can be stored or released depending on the hydrological conditions within the conduit  
network and its surrounding matrix.  
  

                                                                                                                                            
Fig.  2  Schematic  view  of  a  karst  landscape  including  both  saturated  and  unsaturated  zones  (modified  from  
Filipponi, 2009).  
  
Nevertheless,  karst  aquifers  have  to  be  distinguished  from  porous  aquifers  due  to  several  
particularities:  
  
           (i)  due  to  the  numerous  voids  with  sizes  varying  several  orders  of  magnitude  and  a  
           tortuous  geometry,  their  porosity  can  be  described  as  a  triple  porosity  comprising  
           matrix,  fracture  and  conduit  porosity  (Worthington,  2007).  This  is  opposed  to  the  
           conventional  porous  aquifers  where  the  porosity  mostly  covers  only  one  order  of  
           magnitude.  
  
           (ii)  the  development  of  these  voids   and  their  occurrence  in  the  saturated  and  
           unsaturated zone creates a double infiltration capacity with two time scales (Marsaud,  
           1996): slow and diffuse infiltration of the rainwater in the fissures on top of the aquifer  

                                                                    13  
  

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

            

          (autogenic  recharge);  very  rapid  and  localized  infiltration  of  the  water  through  the  
          sinkholes,  shafts  and  swallow  holes  (point  source  recharge).  Oppositely,  the  porous  
          aquifers have mostly a single diffuse infiltration capacity.  
  
          (iii) a double storage capacity (Atkinson and Smart, 1981): in the saturated zone the  
          karst matrix offers an almost unlimited storage capacity and a long residence time of  
          water,  opposed  to  the  limited  storage  capacity  of  the  conduit  network  and  its  fast  
          release  of  water  (due  to  its  high  hydraulic  conductivity).  On  the  contrary,  porous  
          aquifers have only one type of storage and a rather slow release.  
  
          (iv) two different types of flow regimes; whereas the flow is laminar in the matrix, it  
          can be either laminar or turbulent (depending on the value of the Reynolds number) in  
          the  conduits.  Again,  this  is  different  from  the  porous  aquifers  where  flow  remains  
          essentially laminar (Atkinson, 1977).  
  
All this particularities are due to the physical nature of karst aquifers and can also be found in  
medias  which  are  not  made  of  limestone  or  dolomite  and  are  not  shaped  by  the  action  of  
rainwater acidity. The word Pseudokarst is then  used to describe them (Ford  and Williams,  
2007). For example, mountain glaciers (frequently described by the term glaciokarst) present  
similar hydrological processes and follow the same physical laws as karst aquifers made of  
limestone  (a  third  order  porosity,  a  double  storage  capacity  and  a  laminar/turbulent  flow  
behaviour); but their network genesis evolves at a different (much shorter) time scale, mostly  
driven by the effect of water temperature. Aquifers of volcanic origin (vulcanokarst) belong  
also  to  pseudokarst  because  their  vuggy  porosity  and  their  solidified  lava  tube  network  are  
sensibly similar to the organization of karstified limestone aquifers. In the following parts, the  
word karst will refers only to aquifers made of limestone or dolomite and their hydrology.  
  
          1.3 Interactions between karst and humans: a multi-aspects problem  
  
                    1.3.1 Short historical context of karst-humans relationships  
  
Karst and people interact with each other almost since the early days of humanity (Shen et al.,  
2013):  during  the  prehistory,  innumerable  caves  entrances  developed  in  karst  medias  were  
used as shelters by the first hunters-gatherers and protected them against bad and cold weather  
or foreign aggressions. These caves participated also to their spiritual development and were  
sometimes used as object of devotion (Leroi-Gourhan and Michelson, 1986; Mithen, 1996).  
Many caves inhabited or visited by humans during Stone Age show numerous painting of the  
local fauna, and can provide a good indication of the past climate and the animal’s diversity  
present on the surrounding of the cave at this time. As example, several of the most famous  
European painting caves such as Lascaux and Chauvet (France) or Altamira (Spain) can be  
cited (Bastian and Alabouvette, 2009; Bon et al., 2011).  
  
Later, people profited from the natural advantages offered by the caves and their surrounding  
environment and used them as defense place to protect them against foreign aggressions. The  

                                                              14  
  

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

            

most famous examples can be found in Slovenia with  the castles of Predjama (Fig. 3a) and  
Osp,  or  in  Montenegro  with  the  monastery  of  Ostrog.  Even  in  the  present  times  caves  and  
underground  settlement  are  still  used  has  habitation  by  a  non  negligible  percentage  of  
population (in 1995 about 40 million people were reported to live in underground habitations  
in China, mostly build in loess; The UNESCO  Courier, 1995). Troglodyte habitations can also  
be  found  overall  around  the  world  with  famous  examples  in  France  (Fig.  3b),  Turkey  
(Cappadocia), Italy, Vietnam, India or Morocco.  
  

                                                                                                                                      
Fig. 3 (a) Picture of the castle of Predjama (literally “before the cave” in Slovenian), Slovenia. A small stream is  
vanishing in the Predjama cave system at the foot of the cliff. (b) Troglodyte house near the Grotte du Sorcier,  
south of France. Picture b was taken by the Wikipedia user Jebulon and is reproduced with permission.  
  
During  the  past,  karst  areas  were  also  exploited  because  of  their  natural  wealth  in  diverse  
minerals and ores such as phosphates or bauxite. Very famous examples can be found in the  
regions  of  Quercy  (south  of  France)  and  central  Styria  (Austria)  where  the  phosphates  
deposits   were   exploited   to   produce   fertilizers   for   agriculture,   and   were   an   important  
contribution  to  the  local  economy  (Aguilar  et  al.,  2007;  Marchet,  1928).  In  the  same  way,  
numerous karst poljes and dolines were also used as pastry fields for the first ones and crop  
fields for the second ones in several European regions (for example since the Roman Empire  
in the Slovenian karst). All these strong interactions explain the close proximity of humans to  
karst areas and lead to the important problematic of water supply which will be treated in the  
following part.  
  
                     1.3.2 Water supply  
  
As pointed out by Williams and Fong (2011) about 13% of the emerged areas on earth are  
constituted  of  limestone,  dolomite  or  gypsum  and  these  areas  represent  about  25%  of  the  
available  resources  in  groundwater. As  example,  a  large  part  of  the Alps  is  constituted  of  
limestone and dolomite and almost all the coast around the Mediterranean Sea is karstified  
(Fig. 4).  
  
As more than 768 million people around the world lacked on an improved water resource in  
2011, (UNICEF, 2013), the huge reserves present in these aquifers are of extreme importance.  
In many countries, karst waters represent one of the major reservoirs of groundwater and even  

                                                                 15  
  

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

            

sometimes the first. Countries like Slovenia or Austria take about 50% of their groundwater  
resources  from  karst  aquifers  (COST  Action  64,  1995;  Kralik,  2001).  Moreover,  many  
important European cities like Vienna (with the Hochschwab massif; Plan and Decker, 2006),  
Split  (with  the  Jadro  spring;  Bonacci,  1987),  Dubrovnik  (Ombla  spring;  Bonacci,  1995),  
Montpellier (Lez spring; Fleury et al., 2007), or Angoulême (Touvre springs; Larocque et al.,  
1998) are supplied totally or partly by karst waters.  
  

                                                                                                                                       
Fig.  4  Map  representing  all  carbonate  rock  outcrops  in  Europe  (Williams  and  Fong,  2011).  Carbonate  rock  
outcrops cover a surface of 21.8% of total Europe (excluding Russia and Iceland).  
  
The importance of karst waters for water supply implies the need of an adapted management  
and protection policy of the available resources, which will be introduced in the next parts.  
  
                     1.3.3 Protection of karst water resources and cave biodiversity  
  
As  karst  aquifers  are  groundwater  systems  able  to  respond  very  quickly  to  a  hydrological  
event, (the waters flowing through their conduits can have a very short travel time, reaching  
sometimes  the  velocity  of  several  hundred  meters  per  hour)  they  are  very  sensitive  to  
chemical  or  bacterial  contamination.  Oppositely,  due  to  the  tortuous  configuration  of  the  
conduit network, pollution may stay trapped in the  aquifer for long period of time (LNAPL  
and DNAPLs are falling within this category; Vesper et al., 2001; Ghasemizadeh et al., 2012).  
This can be really problematic because the water of karst aquifers is a resource of primary  
importance for the people living around them. To minimize this risk and understand to which  
extent  a  karst  aquifer  is  vulnerable  to  pollution  hazards,  several  methods  such  as  RISKE,  

                                                                 16  
  

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

            

EPIK, or PaPRIKa (Dörfliger and Plagnes, 2009; Dörfliger and  Zwahlen, 1998; Kavouri et  
al.,  2011;  Pételet-Giraud  et  al.,  2000)  were  developed  during  the  two  last  decades.  These  
methods have the purpose to protect and prevent karsts aquifers from important contamination  
(for example from an oil leak of a tank). To do this, they use several evaluation criteria (like  
the size of the catchment, its geology, the importance of the human development on it and the  
location of the aquifer recharge areas) which help to define several protection perimeters for  
the aquifer. These perimeters evaluate the contamination risk in the investigated area and are  
of  extreme  importance  for  the  local  authorities,  in  order  to  make  the  appropriate  decisions  
leading to a careful development near karst aquifer recharge areas.  
  

                                                                                                                                    
Fig. 5 Left: Intrinsic vulnerability map of the Ouysse karst system (France) evaluated with the PaPRIKa method  
(Kavouri et al., 2011). Right: picture of an Olm in its natural environment. Picture taken by the Wikipedia user  
Ranko Tomić and is reproduced with permission.  

  
As karst aquifers need to be protected to preserve  the quality of their waters from chemical  
and  bacterial  contamination,  they  also  need  to  be  protected  because  of  the  very  rich  
biodiversity  they  host.  Many  troglodyte  species  have  a  biotope  very  limited  geographically  
and  are  highly  dependent  of  the  water  quality  within  the  cave.  One  of  the  most  famous  
example  is  the  so  called  human  fish  or  Olm  (človeška  ribica  in  Slovenian  and  Proteus  
anguinus in Latin) a cave salamander very sensitive to water quality, which is also the biggest  
vertebrae ever found in cave environment. As its living area is spatially very limited (located  
only in the northern and central parts of the Dinaric Karst) this animal can be very vulnerable  
to a potential degradation of the water quality (Pezdirc et al., 2011).  
  
                     1.3.4 Protection of people and facilities against hazards  
  
Another problem related to the interactions of karst and people arises from the hydrological  
behaviour of karst aquifers during flood hazards. Due to the large but limited-in-space storage  
capacity  in  their  conduits,  they  can  be  subject  to  catastrophic  flash  flood  events  and  cause  
important destructions of facilities and a high human death toll. This was the case in the city  

                                                                 17  
  

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

             

of Nimes (France) in 1988 where the storage capacity of the karst aquifer was insufficient to  
buffer  the  intense  precipitations  and  resulted  in  the  inundation  of  a  large  part  of  the  city,  
killing 9 people and causing more than 600 million Euros of damages (Maréchal et al., 2008).  
A similar flood event happened in Slovenia in September 2010 and flooded a great part of the  
country. This was one of the strongest floods reported in the whole history of Slovenia, with  
rain  gauges  recording  a  precipitation  return  period  greater  than  100  years  in  many  places  
(Renko and Iršič-Žibert, 2011). An adapted monitoring system to forecast such hazards and  
give an alert to people in the right time is then needed (Llasat et al., 2010; Bailly-Comte et al.,  
2012).  
  

                                                                                                                                         
Fig. 6 Example of a seasonal “normal” flood on the catchment of the Ljubljanica River (Slovenia): the Cerknica  
polje in June 2012 (a) and April 2013 (b).  
  
Besides extreme flood events, karst systems are still prone to periodic floods which are not so  
disastrous for people or facilities, but still prevent an optimal land use. This is the case for the  
so-called polje, fields which are flooded periodically one or two times per year and create an  
intermittent  lake.  Good  examples  can  be  found  in  the  catchment  of  the  Ljubljanica  River  
(Slovenia),  where  the  Cerknica  and  Planina  polje  are  regularly  flooded  and  transformed  
temporary   in   lakes   (see   Fig.   6).   This   prevents   intensive   agriculture   and   settlement  
development on their surface.  
  

                                                                  18  
  

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

            

Oppositely to flood forecasting, management of karst waters is a very important issue in areas  
where  (seasonal)  hydrological  stresses  can  occur,  such  as  in  most  of  the  shoreline  of  the  
Mediterranean  Sea.  Then,  a  good  estimation  of  the  groundwater  reserves  of  the  aquifer  is  
fundamental to have an idea of the maximum discharge which can be pumped during drought  
periods, without a complete depletion of the available resources (e.g. Polomčić et al., 2013).  
As  presented  in  this  first  part,  the  interactions  between  karst  aquifers  and  humans  are  a  
complex  multi-aspects  problem,  where  the  characterization  and  the  understanding  of  the  
aquifer behaviour are two of the most important points. To do this, several techniques mostly  
based on comparison between available input and output (e.g. hydrograph and chemograph  
analysis) can be used (Bakalowicz, 2005; Kresic and Stevanovic, 2010; Pinault et al., 2001).  
Unfortunately,  as  only  few  percents  of  a  karst  aquifer  is  generally  mapped  (or  recovered),  
there is a lack of methods able to go beyond the gap of the black box approach. Groundwater  
modelling is such a method and is particularly powerful to improve the general understanding  
of the aquifer processes, to make forecasting and to lead toward a careful management of the  
groundwater  resources.  In  the  next  part  a  short  review  of  the  groundwater  modelling  
techniques in karst aquifers is presented.  
  
2. Groundwater modelling in karst aquifers  
  
          2.1 Purposes of groundwater modelling  
  
To start from a first definition, a model is a simplified representation of the reality and can be  
made for different purposes (Anderson and Woessner, 1992):  
  
          (i) in a predictive way: the model is used to predict the future and has to be calibrated  
          (Wagner et al., 2012; Panagopoulos, 2012).  
  
          (ii) in an interpretative way: the model is used as framework to study and understand  
          the system dynamics and for aquifer characterization. It does not necessarily need to  
          be calibrated (Ravbar et al., 2011; Mayaud et al., 2013; Wagner et al., 2013). Chapters  
          2, 3 and Appendix A are following this approach.  
  
          (iii) in a generic way: the model is used to analyze the flow in hypothetical systems  
          and does not need to be calibrated (Hubinger and Birk, 2011; Reimann et al., 2011).  
          Chapters 3 and 4 fall beyond this category.  
  
In karst context, all these three different purposes are frequently encountered. To reach them,  
different  types  of  groundwater  models  can  be  applied.  The  following  part  presents  them  
concisely.  
  
          2.2 Modelling approaches: a short state of the art  
  
After  Rehrl  and  Birk  (2010)  groundwater  models  in  karst  terrains  can  be  divided  in  two  
different main categories:  

                                                               19  
  

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

            

          (i)  the  non-physically  based  models:  these  kind  of  models  are  also  called  global  
          models  or  black-box  models.  As  they  are  non-physically  based,  they  present  the  
          advantage  to  require  only  few  parameters  to  be  calibrated  (see  example  in  Fig.7).  
          Lumped-parameter  models  enter  also  in  this  category  and  can  provide  really  good  
          results to reproduce spring discharge. These models are recommended to make long  
          term  prediction  or  flood  forecasting.  For  an  example  in  the  field  of  karst  sciences,  
          models like GR4J, GR2M (Le Moine et al., 2008; Moussu et al., 2011; Wagner et al.,  
          2013) or Vensim© (Fleury  et  al., 2007) can be cited. Models using neural networks  
          (Kong-Siou  et  al.,  2011)  are  also  in  this  category  because  they  are  non-physically  
          based. A  disadvantage  of  this  modelling  approach  is  that  not  all  physical  processes  
          occurring  within  the  karst  aquifer  (for  example  the  duality  between  laminar  and  
          turbulent flow and the location of the conduits) are taken into account due to the few  
          input  parameters  required  by  the  models.  Nevertheless,  this  approach  can  provide  
          relevant   results   for   aquifer   characterization   under   certain   circumstances.  As   an  
          example, the use of a lumped-parameter model in a binary karst aquifer is presented in  
          the Appendix A of this thesis (Wagner et al., 2013). In this paper, the authors use the  
          GR2M model and are able to recognize that a change in the hydrological behaviour of  
          a  well  investigated  karst  system  was  due  to  a  change  happening  within  the  karst  
          aquifer  itself  rather  than  a  change  happening  outside  of  it.  The  role  of  sediment  
          dynamics in the cave is pointed out to explain the change of hydrological behaviour of  
          the karst system, rejecting then a change of meteorological conditions or of land use.  
  

                                                                                                        
Fig.  7  Schematic  representation  of  a  lumped-parameter  model  (taken  after  Le  Moine  et  al.,  2008):  the  GR4J  
model (modèle hydrologique du Génie Rural à 4 paramètres au pas de temps Journalier).  

            
                                                               20  
  

----------------------- Page 21-----------------------

            

          (ii)  oppositely,  the  physically  based  models  try  to  approach  the  reality  taking  into  
          account  the  most  important  physical  and  geometrical  characteristics  of  the  system.  
          They first need the definition of a grid and the attribution of parameters values (e.g.  
          hydraulic  conductivity,  specific  storage)  for  each  single  element  constituting  it. The  
          shape of the grid can be composed either of rectangular elements (finite differences),  
          of  elements  of  different  shape  (in  this  case  the  term  finite  elements  is  used)  or  of  
          volumes of different form (finite volumes). Then, the groundwater equation is applied  
          and solved numerically at each node of the whole grid and the groundwater flow field  
          is  computed.  Software  like  MODFLOW  (Harbaugh,  2005)  FEFLOW  (DHI-WASY  
          GmbH, 2011) or MIKE SHE (Denmark Hydrology Institute, 2007) can be cited. These  
          models are also called distributives models and are most frequently used for aquifer  
          characterization (the interpretative and generic way fall in this category). Their great  
          advantage  is  that  they  are  able  to  integrate  a  particular  feature  present  in  the  real  
          system (like a karst conduit). Unfortunately, this can be also a disadvantage because a  
          lot of information and field parameters which are frequently unknown or unavailable  
          are needed as input. This complex implementation can lead to a higher computational  
          effort than the lumped-parameter model approach.  
  
A   classification   of   the   different   types   of   distributed   models   frequently   used   in   karst  
groundwater modelling was done by Teutsch and Sauter (1991) and by Sauter et al. (2006),  
and is described in the following (Fig. 8).  
  

                                                                                                                                   
Fig. 8 The five different approaches used for distributive modelling in karst areas (taken from Reimann, 2012  
according to Teutsch and Sauter, 1991).  

  
The single and multiple fracture sets belong to the fracture models, and consist to represent a  
1-D single or multiple fracture set within a low permeable matrix (Berkowitz, 2002). Flow  
and  transport  processes  are  only  happening  through  the  factures,  following  laminar  or  
turbulent  flow  regimes.  Due  to  the  high  number  of  parameters  they  require  for  their  
implementation, the practical applicability of those approaches is limited.  
  

                                                               21  
  

----------------------- Page 22-----------------------

            

The  hybrid  model  approach  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  used  in  basic  research  for  karst  
aquifer modelling. It combines a laminar matrix with a discretized conduit network where the  
flow  in  the  conduits  can  be  laminar  or  turbulent  depending  on  the  value  of  the  Reynolds  
number. The flow exchange between the matrix and the conduit network is implemented by a  
lumped-parameter, which uses the head difference in the matrix and the conduit system. As  
example the works of Liedl et al. (2003) or Thrailkill (1974) can be cited. Until know, hybrid  
models  were  mostly  used  to  apply  the  “generic”  approach  presented  above  and  only  a  few  
studies applied them to real karst systems (Gallegos et al., 2013; Hill et al., 2010; Saller et al.,  
2013).  
  
The double continuum approach combines two continuums together representing the matrix  
and the conduit system. This approach is able to consider laminar matrix flow and turbulent  
conduit flow. The two systems are connected via a linear exchange term (Sauter, 1992).  
  
Finally,  the  single-continuum  (or  equivalent  porous  medium)  approach  is  directly  derived  
from conventional groundwater modelling in porous medias. This is the simplest of the five  
approaches,   as   it   considers   the   whole   karst   system   as   a   continuum   and   defines   the  
hydrological heterogeneities (such as the karst matrix and the conduits) by creating contrast in  
hydraulic conductivity between them (Fig. 9a). Due to its really simple assumptions and easy  
implementation, this is the most frequently used approach for karst aquifer modelling of real  
systems. This type of model can be used either for prediction and groundwater management if  
the  karst  aquifer  has  boreholes  or  just  simply  as  interpretative  to  understand  the  processes  
happening  within  the  aquifer. As  application  examples,  the  papers  of  Budge  et  al.  (2009),  
Mayaud et al. (2013, 2014 in press); Panagopoulos (2012), Polomčić et al. (2013), Ravbar et  
al. (2011), Scanlon et al. (2003) and Worthington (2009) can be cited.   
  

                                                                                                                                      
Fig.9  (a)  Hydraulic  conductivity  contrasts  between  the  matrix  and  the  karst  conduit  in  the  Mammoth  cave  
aquifer.  (b)  Computed  water  table  and  flow  direction  of  the  same  area.  This  model  was  implemented  with  
MODFLOW 96 in steady-state under laminar flow conditions (figure modified after Worthington, 2009).  

  

                                                                 22  
  

----------------------- Page 23-----------------------

            

Nevertheless,  the  single-continuum  approach  presents  limitations  compared  to  the  other  
approaches.  For  example,  the  definition  of  the  heterogeneities  characterizing  a  given  karst  
aquifer can be misled due to a lack of available field data (e.g. boreholes or conduit location).  
Moreover, those models were until recently only able to compute the groundwater flow field  
under  laminar  flow  conditions,  which  was  a  strong  limitation  of  their  use  (Worthington,  
2009). Yet three MODFLOW packages allowing the computation of non-linear or turbulent  
flow  with  single-continuum  models  were  recently  developed  (Mayaud  et  al.,  under  review;  
Reimann et al., 2012; Shoemaker et al., 2008). One of these packages (Reimann et al., 2012)  
showed for a basic karst setting than single-continuum models considering turbulent flow are  
able to reproduce the same behaviour than hybrid models. This result is a strong argument in  
favor  of  the  use  of  single-continuum  models  for  karst  aquifer  modelling.  Finally,  the  last  
developed  package  (Mayaud  et  al.,  under  review)  considers  the  implementation  of  the  
Forchheimer equation in MODFLOW and is presented in Chapter 4 of this work.  
  
          2.3 Purpose of this thesis  
  
As   the   single-continuum   approach   is   the   most   employed   in   research   and   by   private  
companies, one important question concerns the relevance of its use instead of the use of a  
hybrid model or a fracture model, which both reproduce the flow processes occurring in karst  
aquifers more accurately. This PhD thesis has the purpose to investigate how far the single- 
continuum approach can be used for karst aquifer modelling, and to which extent it is able to  
reproduce the natural processes observed in real systems.  
  
Therefore,  the  applicability  of  single-continuum  models  to  reproduce  the  observed  flow  
processes  in  real  karst  catchments  will  be  investigated  with  practical  field  examples  in  
Chapters 2 and 3.  
  
Finally, Chapter 4 will introduce a new MODFLOW package allowing the simulation of non- 
linear flow within single-continuum models. First, the theory beyond the programming of the  
Forchheimer  equation  in  MODFLOW  is  introduced,  and  then  three  benchmark  models  
demonstrating the validity of the concept are presented. To check the ability of the package to  
compute  non-linear  flow  in  real  karst  systems,  a  more  realistic  example  was  directly  taken  
from Chapter 2 will be shown.  

                                                              23  
  

----------------------- Page 24-----------------------

  

                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              

                                                   CHAPTER II  

                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              

 UNDERSTANDING CHANGES IN THE  

               HYDROLOGICAL BEHAVIOUR  

                     WITHIN A KARST AQUIFER  

           (LURBACH SYSTEM, AUSTRIA)  

                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
Published in Carbonates and Evaporites as: Mayaud et al., 2013. Understanding changes  
  in the hydrological behaviour within a karst aquifer (Lurbach system, Austria). Carbonate  
                                        Evaporite. doi: 10.1007/s13146-013-0172-3  
                                                  

                                                                           24  
  

----------------------- Page 25-----------------------

  

Abstract  
  
A thorough data analysis combined with groundwater modelling was conducted in an Austrian  
binary karst aquifer to better understand changes in the hydrological behaviour observed at a  
karst spring. During a period of four  years after a major flood event the spring hydrograph  
appears  to  be  more  damped  with  lower  peak  flow  and  higher  baseflow  than  in  the  years  
before.  The  analysis  of  the  hydrograph  recession  suggests  that  the  observed  hydrological  
change  is   caused  by  changes  within  the  karst  system  rather  than  by   varying  hydro- 
meteorological conditions. The functioning of the aquifer and potential causes of the observed  
changes are further examined using the groundwater flow model MODFLOW. The simulation  
results suggest that a modification of hydraulic  conductivity and storage within the conduit  
network, e.g. due to the plugging of the drainage conduits with sediments, may be the cause  
of  the  different  behaviour.  MODFLOW  was  able  to  reproduce  the  observed  dynamics  of  
spring  flow,  although  it  does  not  account  for  turbulent  flow  within  karst  conduits.  Using  a  
simplified  model  scenario  it  is  demonstrated  that  the  damping  of  the  hydrograph  is  much  
stronger  if  turbulent  conduit  flow  is  taken  into  account.  Thus,  a  turbulent  flow  model  is  
needed to assess potential changes in the storage properties quantitatively.  
  
Keywords:  Binary  karst  aquifer  -  MODFLOW  -  Single-continuum  model  -  Groundwater  
modelling - Laminar/turbulent flow - Hydrological behaviour  
  
                                            

                                                                 25  
  

----------------------- Page 26-----------------------

  

1. Introduction  
  
Karst waters represent an important part of the water supply for the world’s population (20- 
25%; Ford and Williams, 2007) but  are known for their high vulnerability  to  chemical and  
bacterial  contamination  (e.g.  Heinz  et  al.,  2009)  due  to  the  pressure  of  urbanization  and  
intensive  agricultural  use.  To  assess  how  changes  within  karst  areas  might  influence  the  
behaviour  of  karst  springs  a  sound  understanding  of  processes  which  govern  flow  through  
karst aquifers is needed. This work examines the hydrological behaviour of the Hammerbach  
karst spring in Austria, which appears to have changed after a storm event in August 2005.  
The  purpose  here  is  to  improve  our  general  understanding  of  flow  processes  within  karst  
aquifers and especially to identify potential causes of the observed change within this spring  
catchment. To  this  end,  hydrograph  data  from  the  karst  spring  are  analysed  and  interpreted  
based   on   the   existing   knowledge   from   earlier   investigations   to   develop   a   simplified  
conceptual aquifer model. The functioning of the aquifer and potential causes of the different  
changes in the hydrological behaviour are further examined using a process-based numerical  
groundwater flow model.  
  

2. Field site  
  
                                                                            2 
The investigation area is a binary karst system of 23 km  named Lurbach system and located  
in the Central Styrian Karst (Fig. 1a), about 20 km north of Graz (Styria, Austria). The upper  
                                               2 
part  of  the  catchment  is  a  15  km   wide  area  of  low  permeable  rocks  (comprising  mainly  
Quaternary sediments and Paleozoic schists), and is drained by the Lurbach stream in an East- 
West direction towards the Tanneben massif, a highly karstified limestone block with a sub- 
catchment  size  of  8  km2 . After  the  Lurbach  stream  reaches  the  limestone  unit,  it  infiltrates  

along the streambed and finally disappears into a major sinkhole located some tens of meters  
behind  the  entrance  of  a  big  cave,  the  Lurgrotte  (located  at  633  m  a.s.l.).  Then,  the  water  
flows  through  the  fissures  and  conduits  of  the  limestone  massif   and  resurges  at  the  
Schmelzbach outlet and the Hammerbach spring, which are both located at the western border  
of the catchment, at the foot of a 300 m high cliff called Peggauer Wand. The highest point  
within the catchment is the Fragnerberg in the North (1109 m a.s.l.; Fig. 1b) and the lowest is  
at the level of the Mur River (~400 m a.s.l.) at its western edge where the Hammerbach spring  
originates. The town of Semriach (709 m a.s.l.) is the main settlement in the area.  
  
The Lurbach system is equipped with a measurement network well adapted to understand the  
karst processes. The discharge is measured at the Hammerbach spring and Schmelzbach outlet  
as well as the Lurbach prior to its disappearance into the ground: one gauge is located at the  
contact between the schists and the limestone and another one just in front of the Lurgrotte  
cave (Fig. 1c). However, not all of the measurement devices are operative at all times, mainly  
due to maintenance after flood events or general financial restrictions. As the Hammerbach  
discharge  data  are  available  on  a  continuous  basis,  it  will  be  the  focus  of  the  modelling  
attempts presented below.  
  

                                                              26  
  

----------------------- Page 27-----------------------

  

                                                                                                                                                   
Fig. 1 Field site location.  (a) Map showing the location of the Lurbach system in relation to the distribution of  
karst  rocks  in  Austria  (modified  after  Schubert,  2003);  (b)  View  of  the  upper  Lurbach  catchment  and  the  
karstified area (the blue and pink polygons, respectively) taken from the summit of the Schöckl mountain (1445  
m a.s.l.). Photo: M.Schneider & C.Aistleitner (used with permission);  (c) Simplified geological map (modified  
after  Geologische  Bundesanstalt,  2005;  Blatt  164-Graz)  of  the  Lurbach  catchment  including  the  different  
subsurface flow paths (black, red and yellow arrows) inferred from results of tracer tests (the unsure flow paths  
were  determined  during  a  single  tracer  experiment  with  injection  on  top  of  the  unsaturated  zone  and  small  
recovery  rates;  Behrens  et  al.,  1992),  the  measurement  network  and  three  minor  sinkholes  supplying  the  
Schmelzbach spring (E = Eisgrube, N = Neudorferschwinde and KB = Katzenbachschwinde, respectively). The  
low permeable part (blue polygon) corresponds to the topographic catchment whereas the highly karstified part  
(pink  polygon)  was  delineated  taking  into  account  results  of  tracers  experiments.  The  boundary  between  the  
allogenic and the autogenic unit is based on the geological map.  
  
Six rain gauges are located in the vicinity of the catchment and provide rainfall data (only the  
Ertlhube and Semriach rain gauges are visible in Fig. 1c). Temperature data are collected at a  
meteorological station located close to the  Lurbach system, on the western side of the Mur  
valley (at an altitude of 610 m a.s.l.). Unfortunately, no water table data are available within  

                                                                       27  
  

----------------------- Page 28-----------------------

  

the limestone massif. Moreover, the conduit system draining towards the Hammerbach is not  
yet explored, as all attempts to access it failed up to the present. However, the Lurgrotte cave  
itself  is  a  well  explored  partly  water-active  multi-level  cave  (e.g. Wagner  et  al.,  2011)  and  
shows  relevant  indications  for  the  vadose/phreatic  conditions  inside  parts  of  the  Tanneben  
massif (Fig. 1c). Besides this, there are numerous other caves known in this region (more than  
200 in the Tanneben massif). Yet their extents are rather small and they are generally plugged  
with sediments or collapse material preventing further exploration inside of the karst massif.  
  
The Lurbach system is under a climate regime with low winter precipitation and is subject to  
heavy thunderstorm events during the summer (Harum  and Stadler, 1992). The mean annual  
precipitation measured between 1965 and 2011 is 880 mm. The maximum precipitation value  
recorded in one day was 93.5 mm during the summer of 1975.  
  
The   subsurface   drainage   pattern   of   the   Lurbach   system   changes   depending   on   the  
hydrological conditions (Harum and Stadler, 1992):  
  
          (i) at low water conditions, the Lurbach discharge becomes very small and sometimes  
          intermittent  (the  minimum  discharge  measured  at  the  Lurbach  station  is  ~5-10  l/s)  
          along the streambed between the upstream gauge of the Lurbach and the cave entrance  
          (some sinkholes become visible along the stream bank). Then, the Hammerbach and  
          Schmelzbach  systems  are  totally  separated,  significantly  fed  by  infiltration  of  the  
          autogenic  waters  of  the  Tanneben  massif  and  by  a  small  cave-spring  called  Laurins  
          spring (see in Fig. 1c) for the Schmelzbach.  
            
          (ii) at normal water conditions, the Lurbach disappears into the Lurgrotte and resurges  
          mainly at the Hammerbach spring, whereas the Schmelzbach is only supplied by the  
          autogenic recharge through the Tanneben massif, by the Laurins spring, and by three  
          small sinkholes (E, N and KB; Fig. 1b&c) located in the NE boundary of the karstified  
          area.  
            
          (iii) at medium to high water conditions, an overflow from the Hammerbach system to  
          the Schmelzbach system is observed. Harum and Stadler (1992) showed that when the  
          Hammerbach spring discharge increases to more than ~200 l/s, a part of the Lurbach  
          water flows towards the Schmelzbach system.  
            
          (iv)  at  flood  conditions  the  Lurbach  is  subject  to  catastrophic  flood  events  (the  
          maximum  discharge  measured  at  the  Lurbach  station  exceeded  10  m3/s)  and  the  

          Lurgrotte  cave  system  itself  acts  as  the  main  drainage  system  (Fig.  1c).  Then  the  
                                                                              3 
          Hammerbach system cannot drain more than ~2 m /s, whereas the Schmelzbach outlet  
          receives the most part of the Lurbach water and can reach peak discharges up to 10  
          m3/s  and  more.  These  flash  floods  caused  sometimes  the  outage  of  measurement  

          devices at the Schmelzbach outlet and within the active accessible cave stream. Then,  
          redistribution of sediments and plugging of sinkholes and cave passages are regularly  
          reported (Harum and Stadler 1992, p. 39).                                                         

                                                              28  
  

----------------------- Page 29-----------------------

  

3. Data analysis  
  
The  Hammerbach  spring  hydrograph  between  1998  and  2010  (Fig.  2a)  exhibits  a  changed  
behaviour after a major flood event in August 2005. From then onward, the spring response  
appears to be more damped and the peak discharge did not exceed 400 l/s over a period of  
about  4  years.  Moreover,  the  baseflow  appears  to  have  increased.  In  contrast,  precipitation  
appeared  to  be  rather  unchanged.  Unfortunately,  there  is  not  enough  discharge  data  of  the  
Schmelzbach spring to identify potential changes in its discharge behaviour. Since June 2009,  
several floods due to intense storm events indicate that the Hammerbach has recovered to its  
previous flashy behaviour.  
  
When plotting cumulative frequency curves of 3-year periods of the Hammerbach discharge  
from 1965 to 2010 (Fig. 2b) the curve from 2006 to 2008 (the bold solid black line) reveals a  
rather damped discharge behaviour with a lower maximum and a higher minimum compared  
to the other curves. If the year 2009 is included in the curve from the previous 3 years, the  
resulting bold dashed black curve is more similar to the curves prior to 2005. This observation  
confirms  that  the  hydrological  behaviour  of  the  Hammerbach  spring  from  2006  to  2008  
differs from that of the years before and after that time period.  
  

                                                                29  
  

----------------------- Page 30-----------------------

  

                                                                                                                                                    
Fig.  2  Hammerbach  spring  data.  (a)  Hammerbach  daily  discharge  (red  line),  precipitation  (blue  bars)  and  air  
temperature  (orange  line)  data  from  1998  to  2010.  Black  line:  discharge  of  400  l/s,  blue  circle:  changed  
behaviour from August 2005 to June 2009. Precipitation data are the computed average of the six stations located  
in the region; the temperature data are taken from  a station located on the western side of the Mur valley;  (b)  
Cumulative  frequency  curves  of  the  Hammerbach  discharge  from  1965  to  2010.  The  bold  solid  black  line  
represents the changed behaviour between 2006 and end 2008, whereas the bold dashed black curve represents  
the period from 2006 to 2009 including the return to the previous drainage behaviour of the Hammerbach spring.  

  
The  Hammerbach  master  recession  curves  shown  in  Fig.  3  confirm  the  hypothesis  of  a  
different   hydrological   behaviour   between  August   2005   and   June   2009.  The   recession  
behaviour of the period 1965-2005 is clearly different from that of the period 2005-2008. The  
return to the pre-2005 behaviour is illustrated by the violet curve from 2005 to 2009, which is  

                                                                       30  
  

----------------------- Page 31-----------------------

  

closer to the  recession curves from 1965 to 2005. The same result was  found when master  
recession  curves  of  3-year  periods  between  1965  and  2005  were  compared  to  that  of  the  
period 2005-2008. This is shown in the inset of Fig. 3, where a similar trend is observable  
when looking at the exponent and the coefficient of a power law fit of the master recession  
curves of 3-year periods before 2005, whereas the period between 2006 and 2009 (surrounded  
by the red circle) is clearly different. As master  recessions curves provide information about  
the  aquifer  structure  (Kresic  and  Bonacci,  2010,  p.  134),  these  results  suggest  that  the  
observed hydrological change is caused by changes within the binary karst catchment rather  
than  by  varying  meteorological  conditions.  Since  we  are  also  not  aware  of  any  significant  
changes in land use, deforestation and/or housing, which may potentially have influenced the  
flow regime of the Lurbach stream in the upper part of the catchment, it is an obvious idea to  
assume  that  changes  occurred  within  the  karst  aquifer  of  the  Tanneben  massif. Although  a  
sediment barrage in the Lurbach stream is dredged from time to time where some sinkholes  
are  reported,  it  appears  unlikely  that  this  may  have  caused  a  change  in  the  hydrological  
behaviour over a period of 4 years.  
  

                                                                                                                                   
Fig. 3 Master recession curves of the Hammerbach between  1965 and 2010. The changed recession behaviour  
within the period from 2005 to 2009 is evident. Inset: coefficient and exponent of a power law fit of the master  
recession curves for time periods of three years. The change after 2005 is highlighted by the jump of the constant  
and exponent. Master recession curves were computed with the method according to Posavec et al. (2006).  

  
A possible explanation of the observed hydrological change is a change in the karst drainage  
system due to the flood event of August 2005. Potentially an aggradation of sediments in the  
Hammerbach conduit network caused a decrease of the hydraulic conductivity and/or changes  
in the storage properties. This is a plausible process, as sediment redistributions are common  
in  karst  aquifers  (e.g.  Farrant  and  Smart,  2011)  and  are  noticed  regularly  in  the  accessible  
parts  of  the  cave  system  after  stronger  rainfall  events  (Kübeck  et  al.,  2013).  The  apparent  
return  to  the  former  behaviour  may  be  explained  by  the  re-excavation  of  the  sediments  
previously plugging conduit sections during the major storm events of summer 2009. Results  

                                                               31  
  

----------------------- Page 32-----------------------

  

from a tracer experiment in December 2008 (Oswald, 2009) further indicate that the above- 
mentioned overflow from the Hammerbach system to the Schmelzbach may occur at a lower  
Hammerbach discharge than earlier reported by  Harum and Stadler  (1992).  In addition, the  
transit  times  for  this  particular  tracer  experiment  were  almost  60  hours  (Oswald,  2009),  
whereas tracer experiments conducted prior to August 2005 show transit times of less than 40  
hours at comparable discharge rates (Behrens et al., 1992). This too might be explained by the  
plugging of infiltration sinkholes and flow paths by sediments or tree lumps, caused by the  
major flood event of August 2005.   
  

4. Modelling  
  
Karst  aquifers  are  known  for  their  large  but  organized  heterogeneities,  which  can  be  
conceptualized as a dual flow system consisting of  a highly conductive network of solution  
conduits that is embedded in the less conductive fissured carbonate rock (e.g. Kiraly, 1998).  
These   dual   flow   characteristics   are   responsible   for   intrinsic   difficulties   in   modelling  
groundwater  flow  in  karst  terrains.  An  overview  of  modelling  approaches  that  have  been  
proposed to overcome these difficulties is provided by Rehrl and Birk (2010). One approach  
frequently  employed  for  generic  investigations  into  flow  and  transport  processes  in  karst  
aquifers  are  hybrid  models,  which  couple  a  pipe  flow  model  representing  the  network  of  
solution conduits to a continuum model representing the fissured rock  (Teutsch and Sauter,  
1991). Applying hybrid  models to real karst aquifers, however, is highly challenging, since  
adequate information about the geometric and hydraulic properties of the conduit system are  
rarely available. Therefore, single-continuum groundwater flow models such as MODFLOW  
(Harbaugh et al., 2000) are frequently employed for these purposes (e.g. Ravbar et al., 2011;  
Worthington, 2009). The flow calculation in this type of model typically is based on Darcy’s  
law,  thus  assuming  only  laminar  flow  conditions.  Reimann  et  al.  (2011)  demonstrated  that  
spring hydrographs simulated with MODFLOW may differ significantly from those obtained  
with a hybrid model that accounts for turbulent flow in solution conduits. Yet results obtained  
with  an  extension  to  MODFLOW  that  accounts  for  turbulent  flow  were  found  to  be  in  
agreement  with  those  from  the  hybrid  model.  In  this  work  MODFLOW  is  employed  
considering  first  only  laminar  flow.  Subsequently,  it  is  attempted  to  apply  a  recently  
developed turbulent-flow package for MODFLOW (Shoemaker et al., 2008).   
  
  
  

                                                              32  
  

----------------------- Page 33-----------------------

  

                                                                                                                                             
Fig. 4 Model setup. Comparison of the horizontal hydraulic conductivities and the geometry between the model  
without constrictions (a) and the model with constrictions (b). The plugged conduits are represented in yellow in  
(b).  With  these  two  model  setups  it  is  attempted  to  reproduce  the  pre-event  4a  and  post-event  4b  drainage  
behaviour  of  the  Lurbach  system.  The  specific  storage  of  the  matrix  was  set  to  10-5  m-1  for  the  two  models  
whereas it was given 0 in the conduit for the unplugged case and 0.5 m-1 to the constrictions of the plugged case.  
The vertical conductivity  was set to 10-4 m/s  for the  whole  model range, except  where the  Lurbach allogenic  

input is added, where a high value of 10 m/s was defined in order to simulate the sinkholes.  

  

           4.1 Laminar flow  
  
The design of the numerical model is based on the conceptual understanding of the Lurbach  
system  described  above.  The  model  is  a  simplified  Lurbach  system  representing  only  the  
autogenic  sub-catchment  and  consists  of  four  layers  that  differ  in  thickness  and  horizontal  
hydraulic conductivity (Fig. 4a) to capture the complexity of the multi-level cave system. The  
catchment is made up of a low conductivity matrix (light grey and dark grey in Fig.4) whereas  
the highly conductive flow paths introduced in the  layer 2 to 4 represent the Lurgrotte cave  
and  the  assumed  Hammerbach  conduit  system.  The  structure  of  the  conduit  system  was  
designed to account for the behaviour of the Lurbach system described in Harum and Stadler  
(1992):  during  low  water  conditions  the  lower  layer  (layer  4)  drains  most  of  the  allogenic  

                                                                    33  
  

----------------------- Page 34-----------------------

  

recharge and both Hammerbach and Schmelzbach systems are separated. When the allogenic  
input  rises  above  the  drainage  capacity  of  the  layer  4,  the  layer  3  begins  to  drain  and  the  
overflow  towards  the  Schmelzbach  aquifer  is  activated.  The  layer  2  becomes  prominent  
during strong storm events and allows water to flow through the upper levels of the Lurgrotte  
cave system (see Kübeck et al., 2013). The uppermost layer represents the more than 300 m  
thick karst matrix of the Tanneben massif which might serve as further storage component if  
extreme  floods  are  considered  (high  historical  floods  reported  in  Benischke  et  al.  (1994)  
indicate that part of the Semriach basin was flooded in 1812 and 1827).   
Three  steady-state  model  scenarios  were  designed  using  autogenic  recharge  based  on  the  
formula  of  Turc  (e.g.  Gray,  1970),  the  minimum,  mean  and  maximum  annual  precipitation  
depths,  respectively,  and  a  mean  annual  air  temperature  (7.4°C)  reported  in  Harum  and  
Stadler (1992). Correspondingly, the lowest, mean and highest  Lurbach discharges  reported  
by  Harum  and  Stadler  (1992)  were  used  as  concentrated  allogenic  recharge.  The  allogenic  
recharge  was  given  as  localised  input  where  the  Hammerbach  and  Schmelzbach  conduits  
begin (at the border between the Eichberg zone and  the matrix zone in Fig 4) and along the  
Lurbach  riverbed  with  emphasis  on  the  conduits  draining  the  Hammerbach  system.  The  
autogenic recharge was given as a constant flux rate (in m/s) within the entire model domain.  
The three steady-state models were calibrated to the lowest, mean and highest discharges at  
the  Hammerbach  spring  and  Schmelzbach  outlet  by  adjusting  the  hydraulic  conductivity  of  
the  low-permeability  matrix  and  the  highly  conductive  flow  paths.  These  simulations  gave  
reasonable results (Mayaud, 2010) and confidence into the model setup, especially concerning  
the aforementioned intercatchment  flow and its dependence on the hydrological  conditions.  
The  resulting  model  was  subsequently  employed  for  transient  simulations  to  reproduce  the  
Hammerbach spring hydrograph of the flood event of August 2005 (Fig. 2a). This event was  
chosen  because  of  its  nearly  undisturbed  long-term  recession,  because  the  discharge  peak  
reached almost the Hammerbach filling capacity, and because it is likely the last strong event  
prior to the change in the system behaviour. Unfortunately no Lurbach data is available for  
this  period. Thus,  only  the  autogenic  recharge  was  computed  using  daily  precipitation  data  
minus  50%  evaporation  rate,  whereas  the  concentrated  allogenic  recharge  component  was  
adjusted in the model calibration. For the transient simulations the specific yield of the matrix  
was set to 0.01 in the whole unconfined aquifer whereas the specific storage was defined as 0  
in the conduits and 10-5 m-1 in the matrix.  

  
Fig.  5  shows  the  simulated  (dashed  red  line)  compared  to  the  measured  (solid  blue  line)  
discharge  of  the  Hammerbach.  The  simulation  matches  the  observed  discharge  behaviour  
reasonably well and makes the assumptions of the model setup a plausible option (admittedly  
not the only one). To examine potential effects of sediment aggradations that may have caused  
the plugging of conduits within the Hammerbach system the hydraulic conductivity of some  
conduit cells was lowered (see Fig. 4b). The resulting flow constrictions cause an increase of  
the water table and of the hydraulic gradient within the conduits, thus forcing more water to  
flow towards the Schmelzbach network. As a consequence the Hammerbach peak discharge is  
lower  in  these  scenarios  compared  to  the  scenario  without  constriction  (Fig.  5).  This  is  
qualitatively similar to the behaviour of the Hammerbach spring hydrograph after the flood  
event of August 2005 (Fig. 2a).  It is evident that  the constricted conduit sections prevent a  

                                                           34  
  

----------------------- Page 35-----------------------

  

part of the Lurbach water from flowing immediately towards the Hammerbach spring. Thus,  
the water flows more frequently towards the Schmelzbach drainage network and explains the  
damped discharge behaviour presented in the previous paragraphs. This is in accordance with  
a tracer experiment in 2008 where overflow to the Schmelzbach system was already observed  
at  ~135  l/s  (Oswald,  2009)  compared  to  the  previously  reported  threshold  of  ~200  l/s  
(Behrens et al., 1992).   
  

                                                                                                                                         
Fig.  5  Measured  and  simulated  Hammerbach  discharge  for  the  flood  event  of August  2005  without  and  with  
constrictions and sediment storage in the conduit network (see the location of constrictions in Fig. 4b). The violet  
curve  represents  the  discharge  when  constrictions  with  hydraulic  conductivity  of  10-1  m/s  are  assigned,  the  
yellow  curve  when  constrictions  with  hydraulic  conductivity  of  10-2  m/s  are  assigned.  The  green  and  orange  
curves represent the response when a high specific storage value of 0.5 m-1 (compared to the value of 0 given for  

the previous cases) is given to the constrictions.  

  
However, the observed increase in the baseflow is not reproduced by the simple assumption  
of constrictions with lower hydraulic conductivity. A potential explanation to this increase is  
that the aggradation of the sediments may not only have changed the hydraulic conductivity  
but  also  the  storage  properties  of  the  Hammerbach  aquifer.  To  examine  if  changes  of  the  
storage properties related to the sediments in the constrictions may have caused the increase  
of  the  baseflow  observed  after  the  major  flood  event  in  2005,  a  simple  hypothesis  was  
considered by assigning high values of storativity to the conduit constriction (storativity was  
set to zero before). Results are presented in Fig. 5 (dotted green and orange lines) and show  
that  the  baseflow  of  the  Hammerbach  is  increased  if  the  storativity  in  the  constriction  is  

                                                                  35  
  

----------------------- Page 36-----------------------

  

increased. Then, the peak flow is more damped compared to the scenarios without change in  
the  storativity.  Thus  changes  in  the  storativity  might  account  for  the  second  observed  
characteristic of the Hammerbach behaviour between August 2005 and June 2009.  
  
          4.2 Turbulent flow  
  
As  flow  in  such  a  mature  karst  aquifer  is  likely  to  be  locally  (i.e.,  in  the  karst  conduits)  
turbulent, it was an obvious objective to integrate turbulent flow into the modelling approach.  
The  program  used  for  this  purpose  was  the  Conduit  Flow  Process  (CFP)  for  MODFLOW  
developed by Shoemaker et al. (2008). Only a simplified one-layer model was realized with  
CFP due to convergence problems; more complex multi-level models are subject of ongoing  
modelling attempts. The geometry of the model aquifer had to remain simple and comprised  
only a square catchment with one conduit representing the Hammerbach system (see Fig. 6a).  
The spring  response to  an artificial event was computed taking into account turbulent flow  
and compared with a standard MODFLOW approach (laminar flow only). The results (Fig.  
6b) show an agreement with the previous results of Fig. 5 with an increase of the baseflow  
correlated to an increase of the storativity in the constrictions. It is important to note that the  
damping is much stronger in the model scenarios that account for turbulent conduit flow than  
in those ignoring turbulent flow, which is in accordance with the findings by Reimann et al.  
(2011). These authors showed that the hydraulic gradient in the conduits is higher if turbulent  
flow is taken into account. As a result, the conduit hydraulic heads are higher in the model  
accounting for turbulent flow than in a purely laminar flow model. Thus, flow from the matrix  
to the conduit is more strongly reduced in the turbulent flow model, which causes an increase  
of  storage  in  the  fissured  matrix  that  is  not  considered  in  the  laminar  model.  Therefore,  
turbulent flow needs to be considered to be able to quantitatively assess storage effects in such  
a karst system.  
  

                                                                                                                                   
Fig.  6  Comparison  of  laminar  and  turbulent  flow  conditions  of  the  simplified  model  setup.  (a)  Model  setup  
including the geometrical assumptions and the boundary conditions. (b) Changes in spring discharge considering  
and neglecting turbulent flow conditions within the conduit. Moreover, the influence of constrictions within the  
conduit  is  considered  by  changing  conductivity  and  specific  storage  of  the  constriction.  The  red,  yellow  and  
green dashed curves are the responses neglecting turbulent flow whereas the dotted purple, light-blue  and dark- 
green curves represent the spring responses taking turbulent flow into consideration.  

                                                               36  
  

----------------------- Page 37-----------------------

  

5. Discussion  
  
A change of hydrological behaviour was observed at the Hammerbach spring during a period  
of  nearly  4  years. This  change  resulted  in  a  damped  behaviour  of  the  peak  flow  combined  
with an increase in the baseflow. The analysis of discharge data using cumulative frequency  
and  master  recession  curves  combined  with  previously  reported  tracer  experiment  results  
suggest that the change is caused by processes within the karst system rather than by climatic  
and/or anthropogenic factors. Based on field investigations it is suggested that sediments may  
constrict and/or plug karstic conduits and lead to the damped discharge behaviour observed at  
the  spring.  A  simplified  distributive  groundwater  model  was  built  based  on  the  current  
conceptual  understanding  of  the  system  in  order  to  investigate  if  conduit  constrictions  and  
sediment  plugging  in  karstic  conduits  may  cause  changes  in  the  spring  response  similar  to  
those identified from the field observations. The simulation results are in accordance with the  
aforementioned  hypotheses:  the  modification  of  the  hydraulic  conductivity  and  the  specific  
storage in the karstic conduit led to a more damped discharge at the spring.   
  
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  design  and  calibration  of  the  groundwater  model  is  
highly non-unique because of the scarcity of data.  Thus, the model should be viewed as an  
interpretative  (Anderson  and  Woessner,  1992,  p.4)  model  that  is  aimed  at  improving  the  
conceptual  understanding  of  the  hydrogeological  system  at  the  field  site  but  not  as  a  
predictive  model.  For  the  latter  purpose,  a  parsimonious  lumped-parameter  rainfall-runoff  
model  appears  to  be  more  appropriate.  When  applying  such  a  model  to  simulate  the  
Hammerbach spring Wagner et al. (2013) found that it was unable to reproduce the observed  
change  in  the  discharge  behaviour  with  parameter  sets  identified  from  other  time  periods.  
Within  the  4  years  period  that  is  characterized  by  the  damped  discharge  behaviour  a  
reasonable model fit was obtained only by an increased overflow towards the neighbouring  
sub-catchment  of  the  Schmelzbach  aquifer  and  an  increased  storage  capacity  in  the  aquifer  
itself.  This  is  in  agreement  with  the  findings  from  the  data  analysis  and  groundwater  
modelling  presented  here,  which  suggest  that  changes  of  hydraulic  properties  rather  than  
climatic factors are responsible for the observed hydrological change.  
  
6. Conclusions  
  
Data analysis reveals a change in the hydrological  behaviour of the  Lurbach system after a  
storm event in August 2005 until June 2009. The spring response appears to be more damped  
and the baseflow higher than before, which is probably related to the aggradation of sediments  
in conduit sections during the storm event in 2005. Using the distributive groundwater flow  
model  MODFLOW  the  changed  behaviour  of  the  Hammerbach  spring  was  qualitatively  
reproduced   by   incorporating   sections   of   low   conductivity   and   high   storage   in   highly  
conductive flow paths representing the conduit network (to mimic plugged conduit sections).  
Thus,  the  single-continuum  model  MODFLOW  was  found  to  be  able  to  reproduce  the  
transient  behaviour  observed  at  the  spring.  This  model,  however,  does  not  account  for  
turbulent flow in karst conduits. A MODFLOW package that considers turbulent flow in the  
continuum  model  (CFP)  was  employed  to  assess  potential  effects  of  turbulence  on  the  

                                                             37  
  

----------------------- Page 38-----------------------

  

transient  flow  behaviour.  Results  from  a  highly  simplified  model  scenario  demonstrate  that  
the  storage  in  the  fissured  matrix  is  underestimated  if  turbulent  flow  is  ignored.  The  
implementation  of  turbulent  flow  in  a  more  realistic  model  setting  is  the  subject  of  future  
work.   
  

Acknowledgements  
  
This project was supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF): L 576-N21 and the Austrian  
Academy of Sciences (ÖAW) Project: Global models of spring catchments. The authors thank  
K. Lompe, G. Winkler, T. Reimann, S. Oswald and the owners of the Lurgrotte Peggau and  
Semriach for the fruitful discussions. The Hydrographische Dienst Steiermark is thanked for  
providing the meteorological data. Comments on the manuscript by two anonymous reviewers  
are gratefully acknowledged.  
  

                                                                  38  
  

----------------------- Page 39-----------------------

                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          

                                              CHAPTER III  

                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          

                SINGLE EVENT TIME SERIES  

          ANALYSIS IN A BINARY KARST  

  CATCHMENT EVALUATED USING A  

GROUNDWATER MODEL (LURBACH  
                                 SYSTEM, AUSTRIA)  

                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
Accepted for publication by Journal of Hydrology as: Mayaud et al., 2014. Single event  
    time series analysis in a binary karst catchment evaluated using a groundwater model  
                       (Lurbach system, Austria). doi: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.02.024  
                                                                                                                          

                                                                       39  
  

----------------------- Page 40-----------------------

Abstract  
  
The Lurbach karst system (Styria, Austria) is drained by two major springs and replenished by  
both autogenic recharge from the karst massif itself and a sinking stream that originates in low  
permeable schists (allogenic recharge). Detailed data from two events recorded during a tracer  
experiment in 2008 demonstrate that an overflow from one of the sub-catchments to the other  
is  activated  if  the  discharge  of  the  main  spring  exceeds  a  certain  threshold.  Time  series  
analysis  (autocorrelation  &  cross-correlation)  was  applied  to  examine  to  what  extent  the  
various  available  methods  support  the  identification  of  the  transient  inter-catchment  flow  
observed in this binary karst system. As inter-catchment flow is found to be intermittent, the  
evaluation was focused on single events. In order to support the interpretation of the results  
from   the   time   series   analysis   a   simplified   groundwater   flow   model   was   built   using  
MODFLOW. The groundwater model is based on the current conceptual understanding of the  
karst  system  and  represents  a  synthetic  karst  aquifer  for  which  the  same  methods  were  
applied.  Using  the  wetting  capability  package  of  MODFLOW,  the  model  simulated  an  
overflow similar to what has been observed during the tracer experiment. Various intensities  
of allogenic recharge were employed to generate synthetic discharge data for the time series  
analysis.  In addition, geometric and hydraulic properties of the karst system were varied in  
several  model  scenarios.  This  approach  helps  to  identify  effects  of  allogenic  recharge  and  
aquifer properties in the results from the time series analysis. Comparing the results from the  
time series analysis of the observed data with those of the synthetic data a good agreement  
was  found.  For  instance,  the  cross-correlograms  show  similar  patterns  with  respect  to  time  
lags  and  maximum  cross-correlation  coefficients  if  appropriate  hydraulic  parameters  are  
assigned to the groundwater model. The comparable behaviour of the real and the synthetic  
system  allow  to  deduce  that  similar  aquifer  properties  are  relevant  in  both  systems.  In  
particular,   the   heterogeneity   of   aquifer   parameters   appears   to   be   a   controlling   factor.  
Moreover, the location of the overflow connecting the sub-catchments of the two springs is  
found  to  be  of  primary  importance,  regarding  the  occurrence  of  inter-catchment  flow. This  
further supports our current understanding of an overflow zone located in the upper part of the  
Lurbach karst aquifer. Thus, time series analysis of single events can potentially be used to  
characterize transient inter-catchment flow behaviour of karst systems.  
  
Keywords: Binary karst aquifer - Single event - Overflow behaviour - Time series analysis -  
MODFLOW - Single-continuum model  
                                         

                                                            40  
  

----------------------- Page 41-----------------------

1. Introduction  
  
Karst aquifers are of primary importance for supplying drinking water to nearly 25% of the  
world’s  population  (Ford  and  Williams,  2007),  but  their  significant  reserves  are  highly  
vulnerable to contamination and to industrial or intensive agricultural land use. Because karst  
is a highly heterogeneous environment comprising aperture diameters varying over more than  
five orders of magnitude (from fracture openings less than 1 mm in the limestone matrix to  
conduits  of  more  than  10  m  width  in  large  caves)  there  is  a  need  to  develop  and  improve  
existing  tools  helping  to  better  understand  the  processes  governing  the  hydrodynamic  
behaviour of karst systems. As not more than a few  percent of a karst aquifer are generally  
mapped (or explored), it can be defined as grey/black-box system, where the input is routed  
through  to  the  output  without  a  direct  observation  of  the  water  transfer.  Thus,  indirect  
methods of characterization have been developed to  obtain a maximum of information from  
the karst systems. They are mostly focused on the comparison between the available input and  
output  data  and  include  hydrograph  and  chemograph  analyses  using  discharge,  specific  
electric conductivity, water temperature, chemical parameters, isotopes and tracer experiments  
(e.g., Bakalowicz, 2005; Geyer et al., 2013; Kresic and Stevanovic, 2010; Pinault et al., 2001;  
Rehrl and Birk, 2010).  
  
Time series analysis are signal processing methods belonging to this category, and are mostly  
used  to  improve  the  understanding  of  the  hydrological  behaviour  of  karst  systems.  Mangin  
(1984)  was  the  first  to  apply  them  to  the  field  of  karst  hydrology.  He  compared  the  
autocorrelation and power spectral density functions of the discharge of three Pyrenean karst  
aquifers under the same climatic conditions and deduced that their different responses were  
due  to  different  degrees  of  karstification  and  storage  capacities.  Larocque  et  al.  (1998)  
extended the analysis to a broader dataset (piezometric level, water discharge at the inlet and  
outlet,  precipitation,  specific  electrical  conductivity  and  water  temperature)  combined  with  
new methods such as cross-correlation, cross-spectral density,  coherence function,  gain and  
phase   functions,   and   proved   their   usefulness   for   the   purpose   of   water   management.  
Panagopoulos and Lambrakis (2006) applied time series analysis to two Greek karst aquifers  
well-known  for  their  different  karstification  and  found  that  the  different  results  were  in  
agreement  with  the  differences  in  karstification.  More  recently  Bailly-Comte  et  al.  (2008)  
applied these methods to a small Mediterranean karst system and highlighted the interactions  
between  the  karst  aquifer  and  an  overflow  river.  Kovačič  (2010)  applied  autocorrelation,  
cross-correlation, power spectral density and coherence function to the complex Unica river  
catchment  and  improved  the  understanding  of  its  hydrodynamic  behaviour,  allowing  the  
differentiation of flow paths using two datasets of different time scale. Time series analysis  
were also successfully used by Amraoui et al. (2003), Bailly-Comte et al. (2011), Bouchaou et  
al. (2002), Jemcov and Petrič, (2010), Genthon et al. (2005) and Massei et al. (2006) using a  
broader  dataset  (rainfall,  specific  electric  conductivity,  turbidity,  water  temperature)  and  
different methods (e.g. spectral and wavelet analyses).  
  
Until now, time series analysis were mostly applied to time-periods covering a period of one  
year  or  more  (Eisenlohr  et  al.,  1997;  Kovačič,  2010;  Larocque  et  al.,  1998;  Mangin,  1984;  

                                                           41  
  

----------------------- Page 42-----------------------

Panagopoulos  and  Lambrakis,  2006).  Only  a  few  studies  (e.g.  Bailly-Comte  et  al.,  2008;  
Budge and Sharp, 2009; Covington et al., 2009; Covington et al., 2012; Valdes et al., 2006)  
applied the methods at a very short -or single event time scale to provide information about  
the hydrodynamic behaviour of a karst system for short periods. Indeed, as opposed to long- 
term time series analysis, which is recommended to provide information about the “average”  
aquifer  behaviour/properties  (Kovačič,  2010;  Panagopoulos  and  Lambrakis,  2006),  single  
event analysis has the potential to show how the system reacts at the scale of a single event  
only (Bailly Comte et al., 2008; Covington et al., 2009; Covington et al., 2012; Valdes et al.,  
2006). This is of primary importance, because karst aquifers are highly  dynamic non-linear  
systems  whose  behaviour  may  evolve  or  vary  temporarily  depending  on  the  hydrological  
conditions within the system (Mayaud et al., 2013; Wagner et al., 2013).  
  
As  demonstrated  by  the  examples  cited  above,  time  series  analysis  has  been  frequently  
applied to karst catchments. Although the results from these applications were found to be in  
qualitative agreement with field observations, it has only rarely been attempted to verify the  
interpretation      more     quantitatively      by    applying      the   methods      to   synthetic      catchments  
represented  by  a  numerical  model,  where  aquifer  properties  and  hydrological  stresses  are  
known  in  detail. This  approach  was  followed  by  Eisenlohr  et  al.  (1997)  who  evaluated  the  
results from times series analysis using a numerical groundwater flow model. These authors  
concluded that the results were not only dependent  on the system geometry but also on the  
frequency and type (allogenic vs. autogenic) of the recharge events and on their intensity. In  
addition,  an  inappropriate  length  of  the  analysed  time  series  may  cause  errors  in  the  
interpretation.  Jeannin  and  Sauter  (1998)  concluded  that  these  methods  were  inappropriate  
without knowledge of the investigated area to characterize the underground geometry of karst  
aquifers. Nevertheless, Larocque et al. (2000) applied successfully autocorrelation and cross- 
correlation      analysis     to    numerical      data    of    a   groundwater        model      representing       the  
Larochefoucault  karst  aquifer  (France).  Later,  Budge  and  Sharp  (2009)  applied  short  term  
cross-correlation analysis to a simplified synthetic MODFLOW catchment in order to develop  
a conceptual understanding of the Barton springs-Edwards aquifer. Their results showed that  
the cross-correlation was dependent on the input data but also on the geometrical properties of  
the aquifer.  
  
The purpose of this paper is to improve the interpretation of time series analysis at the scale of  
single  events  in  karst  catchments  that  are  characterized  by  the  existence  of  a  localized  
recharge component from a sinking stream and by temporarily varying drainage pattern due to  
the overflow from one spring catchment to another. This involves the need to investigate how  
physical  characteristics  of  the  karst  system  are  reflected  in  the  results  from  the  time  series  
analysis. To this end, two methods, autocorrelation and cross-correlation, are applied to a well  
investigated field site, the Lurbach karst system (Austria), where an overflow from one sub- 
catchment to another one is reported by numerous tracer experiments, and to a synthetic karst  
catchment represented by a numerical groundwater flow model, which accounts for the most  
relevant features of the field site in a simplified manner.   
  
  

                                                            42  
  

----------------------- Page 43-----------------------

2. Approach  
  
The following subsection (2.1) provides a brief introduction into the two time series analysis  
methods that are examined in this paper. These methods are evaluated in parallel using both a  
field site and a synthetic karst catchment represented by a numerical groundwater flow model,  
which are both described in the subsequent subsections 2.2 and 2.3, respectively. If the time  
series  analysis  of  the  synthetic  and  the  field  case  yield  comparable  results,  similar  aquifer  
properties and geometries of the overflow section present in the model can be deduced for the  
Lurbach system.  
  
          2.1 Methods  
  
                   2.1.1 Autocorrelation  
  
The autocorrelation function examines how a value depends on the preceding values over a  
period of time. This function is represented with a correlogram. The slope of the correlogram  
is determined by the response of the system to an event. If the event has only a short-term  
influence  on  the  response  of  the  karst  system,  the  slope  of  the  correlogram  will  decrease  
steeply and quickly. In contrast, if the system is influenced by an event for a long time, the  
slope  of  the  correlogram  will  decrease  slowly.  Generally  the  length  of  the  influence  of  an  
event is given by the “memory effect” which is according to Mangin (1984) the lag number  
when r(k) reaches the value of 0.2. The formula for autocorrelation is (Larocque et al., 1998;  
Mangin, 1984):  
  
                                                                 
                                                                                                                    (1)  
                                                       =              
                                                                0 
                                                      
                                                   1 
with                                                                                                              (2)  
                                          =  
  −̅                     −̅   
                                                                        
                                                   	 
                                                       

  
where k is the time lag and varies from 0 to m. According to Mangin (1984) m has to be taken  
as 1/3 of the length of the whole dataset to avoid stability problems.  
  
Applied  at  a  single  event  or  short  time  scale,  autocorrelation  has  the  potential  to  allow  an  
estimation of the inertia of the system (Valdes et  al., 2006). Then, the memory effect shows  
how the karst conduits react to the event, and cannot be compared to memory effects resulting  
from analysis of a long time series.  
  
                   2.1.2 Cross-correlation  
  
Cross-correlation is used to determine the relationship between two variables x and y. In the  
case of karst hydrology they are mostly input-output relationships as for discharge-discharge,  
rainfall-discharge  or  water  level-discharge.  The  cross-correlation  is  represented  by  a  cross- 
correlogram, which has a positive and a negative part. A peak in the positive part means that  

                                                            43  
  

----------------------- Page 44-----------------------

the input signal has an influence on the output signal. If the cross-correlogram is symmetrical  
then the two signals respond at the same time. The maximum amplitude and the lag value of  
the  cross-correlogram  provide  information  about  the  delay  which  indicates  the  time  of  the  
pressure pulse transfer into the aquifer. If the input signal is a random process, then the cross- 
correlation  function  has  the  form  of  the  impulse  response  of  the  system.  According  to  
Larocque et al. (1998) the formula for cross-correlation is:  
  
                                                                 
                                                                   
                                                         
                                                      =                 
                                                                                                                    (3)  
                                                                   
                                                                    
                                                       
                                                    1 
with                                                                                                              (4)  
                                          =  
  −̅                       −  
                                                                        
                                                    	 
                                                        

  
where σ  and σ  are the standard deviations of the two time series.  
          x         y 

  
Applied at a single event scale, the cross-correlation shows how the energy is transferred and  
modified from the input to the output during a flood (Bailly Comte et al., 2008; Covington et  
al., 2009) and represents the impulse response of the system.  
  
          2.2 Field site  
  
The area under investigation is a binary karst catchment of 23 km² named Lurbach system,  
located about 15 km north of Graz (Styria, Austria) and belongs to the Central Styrian Karst  
                                                                                                          2 
(Fig.  1).  The  upper  part  of  the  catchment  comprises  an  area  of  about  15  km   essentially  
composed  of  Paleozoic  schists,  and  is  drained  by  the  Lurbach  stream  in  an  E-W  direction  
                                                        2 
towards  the  lower  part,  which  is  an  8  km   highly  karstified  unit. After  passing  the  contact  
schist-limestone,  the  stream  infiltrates  along  the  streambed  at  a  length  of  some  hundred  
meters and finally disappears into a major sinkhole located right after the entrance of a big  
cave, the Lurgrotte (entrance at 633 m a.s.l.). Then, the water flows through the conduits and  
fissures of the limestone massif and resurges at the Schmelzbach outlet and the Hammerbach  
spring, both located in the valley of the Mur River on the western side of the catchment. The  
altitude  of  the  whole  area  ranges  between  1.109  m  a.s.l.  on  the  top  of  the  Fragnerberg  
mountain (Fig. 1) and approximately 400 m a.s.l. at the bottom of the Mur valley close to the  
location of the Hammerbach spring.  
  
The   Lurbach   system   is   subject   to   a   climate   regime   with   low   winter   precipitation  
(approximately 50 days of snow cover per year) and frequent heavy thunderstorms during the  
summer  (Harum  and  Stadler,  1992).  The  mean  annual  precipitation  recorded  from  1965  to  
2010 at the station of Semriach (Fig. 1) is 880 mm. The maximum precipitation value was  
recorded at the same station during the summer 1975 with 93.5 mm rain in one day.  
  
As  it  is  regularly  reported  for  karst  aquifers,  the  behaviour  of  the  Lurbach  system  varies  
strongly according to its different hydrological conditions (Harum and Stadler, 1992):  
  

                                                            44  
  

----------------------- Page 45-----------------------

          (i) at low and medium water conditions, the allogenic Lurbach waters (mean annual  
          discharge of 141 l/s) supply only the Hammerbach spring (mean annual discharge of  
           193 l/s). The Schmelzbach outlet drains only  autogenic recharge  from the limestone  
          massif  and  has  a  mean  annual  discharge  of  79  l/s.  Thus,  both  Hammerbach  and  
           Schmelzbach sub-systems are then totally separated.  
            
          (ii) when the Hammerbach discharge increases above a threshold discharge (about 200  
          l/s according to Behrens et al., 1992) an overflow  from the Hammerbach sub-system  
          to the Schmelzbach sub-system occurs.  
            
          (iii) at high water conditions the Lurbach stream can reach a maximum discharge of  
          more than 10 m3/s and the whole system is subject to catastrophic flood events. Then,  

          the Lurbach flows directly through the Lurgrotte cave, toward the Schmelzbach, which  
          becomes the main outlet of the karst aquifer and can reach peak discharges up to 10  
             3 
          m /s, whereas the Hammerbach spring shows a limited discharge capacity and cannot  
          drain more than 2 m3/s.  

  

                                                                                                                                      
Fig.  1  Simplified  geological  map  (modified  after  Geologische  Bundesanstalt,  2005;  sheet  164-Graz)  of  the  
Lurbach  system  including  approximate  flow  directions  and  the  monitoring  network.  The  low  permeable  part  
(allogenic  catchment)  corresponds  to  the  topographic  catchment  whereas  the  highly  karstified  part  (autogenic  
catchment) was delineated taking into account results of numerous tracer experiments (Behrens et al.,  1992). The  
boundary between the allogenic and the autogenic units is based on the geological map. The boundary between  
the  Hammerbach  and  the  Schmelzbach  sub-catchments  is  variable  depending  on  the  hydrological  conditions  
within  the  autogenic  catchment.  Insets:  location  of  the  Lurbach  system  in  the  Central  Styrian  Karst  and  the  
distribution of karst rocks in Austria (modified after Schubert, 2003).  

                                                                45  
  

----------------------- Page 46-----------------------

The Lurbach karst aquifer has undergone a complex speleological development: on the one  
hand the Lurgrotte (see Fig. 1) is a well-explored about 3 km long multi-level cave (Wagner et  
al., 2011). On the other hand, the Hammerbach conduit network is totally unexplored as all  
attempts to access it failed up to the present. The overflow between the Hammerbach and the  
Schmelzbach  sub-systems  is  documented  only  by  indirect  observation  of  numerous  tracer  
experiments  (Behrens  et  al.,  1992;  Kübeck  et  al.,  2013).  Moreover,  as  no  boreholes  are  
available  in  the  study  area,  there  is  a  lack  of  information  concerning  the  extent  and  local  
position of a phreatic zone within the karst massif. The only available information regarding  
phreatic conditions in the karst aquifer were derived from speleological  observations in the  
cave Lurgrotte itself and by geomorphological observations of several dry caves located in the  
Tanneben massif (with more than 200 known smaller inactive caves).  
  
The last field campaign in the Lurbach system was conducted from the 28th November 2008  
to the 30th December 2008). At the beginning of this time period, a tracer experiment had been  

carried  out  (Oswald,  2009).  One  kilogram  of  uranine  (Uranin  AP;  AppliChem  GmbH,  
Germany)  was  continuously  injected  into  the  Lurbach  stream  at  the  contact  between  schist  
and limestone (marked as Lurbach station in Fig. 1) from the 28th November 2008 at 14:11 to  
the 29th November 2008 00:35. The water levels were recorded at the stations Lurbach cave,  

Hammerbach  spring  and  Schmelzbach  outlet  with  a  frequency  of  30  seconds,  whereas  the  
Lurbach  station  was  recorded  at  a  frequency  of  5  minutes.  Then,  they  were  converted  to  
discharge rates using control measurements. Precipitation and air temperature were recorded  
at a 5-minute interval at the Ertlhube meteorological station (located at 763 m a.s.l.) on top of  
the Tanneben  karst  massif  (Fig.  1).  During  the  observation  period,  two  hydrological  events  
occurred. The results from this tracer experiment provide insight into the overflow behaviour  
from the Hammerbach sub-catchment to the Schmelzbach sub-catchment, which will be taken  
into account when interpreting the results from the time series analysis.  
  
          2.3 Synthetic karst catchment  
  
In  order  to  evaluate  the  interpretation  of  results  from  single  event  time  series  analysis,  the  
groundwater  flow  model  MODFLOW-2005  (Harbaugh,  2005)  is  used  to  implement  a  
simplified hypothetical karst setting similar to the Lurbach system. Since the model is applied  
to a karst setting, it is an obvious idea to employ the Conduit Flow Process (CFP; Shoemaker  
et al. 2008) for MODFLOW-2005 to account for turbulent flow conditions. However, neither  
CFP  mode  1  (hybrid  approach)  nor  CFP  mode  2  (continuum  approach)  were  found  to  be  
capable of simulating the rewetting and falling dry of cells representing the transient overflow  
from the Hammerbach to the Schmelzbach sub-system in the given model setting. Yet, it is  
important to note that in this work the model is intended to provide general insight into the  
dependency  of  the  results  from  the  time  series  analysis  on  the  physical  characteristics  of  a  
generic  type  of  karst  catchment.  Thus,  similar  to  the  MODFLOW  models  presented  by  
Ravbar  et  al.  (2011)  and  Mayaud  et  al.  (2013),  the  purpose  is  to  represent  the  natural  
processes  in  a  simplified  manner  rather  than  to  provide  a  quantitative  representation  of  the  
actual  field  site.  For  this  purpose,  using  MODFLOW-2005  without  CFP  appears  to  be  
adequate, as it allows a robust, approximate representation of the overflow dynamics.  

                                                           46  
  

----------------------- Page 47-----------------------

The general approach here is to apply single event  auto- and cross-correlation to a synthetic  
catchment and to examine how far the results are similar to or different from those obtained  
for the Lurbach system. As the model parameters are all known, the differences found in the  
auto- and cross-correlation of the various scenarios can be clearly attributed to a controlling  
parameter. Thus, this approach helps to interpret the results from the real system. In addition  
to a general evaluation of the applied time series analysis methods, this will also improve the  
current understanding of the Lurbach system.   
  

                                                                                                                                        
Fig. 2 Model setup. (a) Geometry of the MODFLOW model. The allogenic input is implemented using the Well  
package of MODFLOW in one cell representing the Lurbach sinkhole. The two different assumptions regarding  
the connection between the  Hammerbach sub-catchment  and the  Schmelzbach sub-catchment are respectively  
indicated. If an overflow location close to the sinkhole is considered (case 2), the solid arrows indicate the flow  
toward  the  Hammerbach  when  the  overflow  is  inactive,  the  dotted  arrow  the  autogenic  flow  toward  the  
Schmelzbach. (b) Schematic illustration of the functioning of the overflow in the MODFLOW model. When the  
water table is below the level of the threshold both Hammerbach and Schmelzbach sub-systems are separated  
(left).  Then,  the  Schmelzbach  is  only  supplied  by  autogenic  waters  from  the  limestone  massif,  whereas  the  
Hammerbach drains all water coming from the sinking Lurbach stream. When the water table rises above the  
threshold,  the  overflow  is  activated  and  the  two  sub-systems  are  connected  (right).  Then,  both  Schmelzbach  
outlet and Hammerbach spring drain allogenic water  from the Lurbach sinkhole and share a large part of their  
respective catchments together.  

  
The model setting is composed of a single unconfined layer with a dimension of 8 km2 (4 km  

* 2 km), which provides a simplified, hypothetical representation of the autogenic part of the  
Lurbach  system  (Fig.  2a).  The  mesh  size  is  set  constant  to  10  m  *  10  m.  The  Lurbach  

                                                                 47  
  

----------------------- Page 48-----------------------

allogenic   input   is   introduced   at   a   single   point   (Fig.   2a)   using   the  Well   package   of  
MODFLOW, whereas autogenic recharge is given as a constant flux over the whole area. The  
model was built using the single-continuum approach (Sauter et al., 2006; Teutsch and Sauter,  
1991)   with   two   parallel   cell   lines   of   high   hydraulic   conductivity   (representing   the  
Schmelzbach and Hammerbach conduits) embedded in a low permeable matrix (see Fig. 2a).  
The conduit length was set to 3 km for each of the two conduits and is supposed to be close to  
the real length of the Schmelzbach and Hammerbach network sections (Behrens et al., 1992).  
The two outlets of the conduits were defined as constant head cells (to simulate the karstic  
springs) with a two meters difference of relative altitude (the Hammerbach spring being lower  
than the Schmelzbach outlet) and a linear distance of 550 m to each other. Similarly, the two  
conduits are connected to each other by a conduit of 550 m length with an overflow located  
after the first junction (Fig. 2b).   
  
Two  different  assumptions  with  regard  to  the  geographical  location  of  the  overflow  are  
presented here (Fig. 2a). First, the overflow is located near the Schmelzbach outlet, whereas  
in the second case it is located close to the Lurbach sinkhole. These two extreme locations  
were chosen in order to obtain the maximum difference in the hydrological behaviour of the  
springs. The overflow was simulated by elevating a hundred meter stretch of the bottom of the  
Schmelzbach   conduit   located   just   after   the   connection   between   the   Hammerbach   and  
Schmelzbach sub-systems (Fig. 2b). Within this part of the Schmelzbach conduit, the bottom  
of the cells was elevated by 9 m relative to the other model cells, such that flow through the  
conduit occurs only if a threshold water level is exceeded. The initial water table was defined  
below the overflow level to allow a separation of the two sub-systems at the beginning of the  
simulation. Then, the Wetting-Capability package of MODFLOW was used to allow rewetting  
of these cells and thus an activation of the overflow depending on the position of the water  
table (Fig. 2b). This implies that after a first stress period computed in steady-state the model  
simulation was transient with 384 stress periods of the same length (30 minutes), making a  
total  simulation  of  192  hours.  For  both  locations  of  the  overflow  between  the  two  sub- 
systems, the values of constant head at the two outlets were adjusted such that the hydraulic  
gradient  between  the  overflow  and  the  Schmelzbach  outlet  remained  approximately  equal.  
First,  the  Schmelzbach  and  the  Hammerbach  catchment  were  assumed  to  consist  of  a  
homogeneous  matrix  and  conduit  system  with  one  value  of  conductivity  (1  m/s)  in  the  
conduits, one value in the matrix (10-5 m/s) and a constant specific yield for both matrix and  

conduit (0.01). Then, differences in the hydraulic conductivity and specific yield of the karstic  
conduits connecting to the two springs inferred from field observations were introduced, to  
account for heterogeneities of the two sub-systems.  
  
3. Results  
  
          3.1 Field site  
  
During the one-month period shown in Fig. 3a, two precipitation events of different intensities  
occurred. The first was short and showed the stronger amplitude (maximum intensity of 5.75  
mm per hour at the Ertlhube rain gauge) but the lower cumulative rainfall of 12.9 mm from  

                                                           48  
  

----------------------- Page 49-----------------------

the 30th November 2008 to the 2nd December 2008; the second had lower intensity (rainfall  

maximum  of  2.6  mm  per  hour)  but  extended  over  a  larger  time  span,  resulting  in  a  higher  
                                                                     th                                   th 
cumulative  rainfall  of  42.7  mm  from  the  10    December  2008  to  13                                   December  2008.  
Interestingly, no precipitation in form of snow was observed within this period. During these  
two events the air temperature recorded at the same station stayed mostly between 0 °C and 5  
°C, although negatives temperatures were also reported for short periods.  
  

                                                                                                                                        
Fig. 3 Field data.  (a) Discharge recorded at the stations Lurbach cave, Hammerbach spring and Schmelzbach  
outlet; semi log-scale plot of uranine concentrations at Hammerbach spring and Schmelzbach outlet in December  
2008  for  the  whole  period  and  the  two  events  separated.  Vertical  bars:  hourly  precipitation  recorded  at  the  
Ertlhube rain gauge.  (b) Autocorrelation functions and memory effects of the discharge at Lurbach cave (LB),  
Hammerbach spring (HB) and Schmelzbach outlet (SB) for the whole period and the two events separately; the  
lags are given in hours. (c) Cross-correlation functions (amplitude and lags) between Lurbach cave-Hammerbach  
spring  (LB-HB)  and  Lurbach  cave-Schmelzbach  outlet  (LB-SB)  for  the  whole  period  and  the  two  events  
separately; the lags are given in hours.  

  
The  two  precipitation  events  led  to  two  hydrological  events  showing  different  spring  
responses (the first with a low baseflow, the second with a higher baseflow) recorded at the  
discharge gauging stations. The raw data of the gauging stations Lurbach cave, Hammerbach  
spring, Schmelzbach outlet and the precipitation data were transformed in hourly data in order  
to have an hourly scale for the time series analysis. A gap of approximately 30 hours in the  
discharge   dataset   from   the   gauging   stations   Lurbach   cave,   Hammerbach   spring   and  
                                                                 49  
  

----------------------- Page 50-----------------------

Schmelzbach outlet was filled with white noise based on the discharge recorded at Lurbach  
station which was complete.  
  
The discharge and uranine concentrations show that a large part of the tracer was recorded at  
the Hammerbach spring a few hours before the first event was recorded at the station Lurbach  
cave (Fig. 3). Within this time period, no uranine was detected at the Schmelzbach outlet. This  
indicates that the Lurbach water was drained only toward the Hammerbach spring before the  
hydrological event. After the beginning of the first event, the tracer was still mainly recovered  
at  the  Hammerbach  spring,  and  the  breakthrough  curve  showed  an  undisturbed  tailing.  
However, some small quantities of uranine were also recorded at the Schmelzbach outlet. This  
suggests  that  the  overflow  towards  the  Schmelzbach  sub-system  was  activated  due  to  the  
increasing  water  table  during  the  event.  An  interesting  observation  is  that  the  overflow  
seemed  to  happen  at  lower  discharge  than  the  value  of  200  l/s  reported  in  Behrens  et  al.  
(1992), which agrees with the findings of Mayaud et al. (2013) and Wagner et al. (2013) that  
the Hammerbach spring exhibits a changed hydrological behaviour since a major flood event  
happened  in  2005.  The  shapes  of  the  hydrographs  further  support  the  assumption  of  an  
activation of the overflow from the Hammerbach to the Schmelzbach sub-system because the  
hydrograph  of  the  Schmelzbach  appears  to  be  similar  to  the  hydrograph  of  the  Lurbach,  
whereas the Hammerbach spring shows a damped response to this event and seems to drain  
mostly water from the aquifer storage.  
  
Despite   the   lower   maximum   intensity   of   precipitation   during   the   second   event,   the  
Hammerbach responds stronger to the resulting recharge pulse possibly due to the higher total  
amount  of  precipitation,  which  leads  to  an  increase  of  the  water  table  and  the  hydraulic  
gradient  within  the  aquifer.  The  shape  of  the  Schmelzbach  hydrograph  still  appears  to  be  
almost identical to that of the Lurbach hydrograph. Uranine is still found in larger quantities  
at the Hammerbach spring but the concentration recorded at the Schmelzbach outlet responds  
faster than the Hammerbach to the recharge event. This suggests higher flow velocities and  
thus probably higher hydraulic conductivity of the Lurbach-Schmelzbach flow path and is in  
agreement with the assumption that the Schmelzbach still drained most of the Lurbach water  
during  the  second  event  when  the  overflow  was  already  activated.  The  higher  quantity  of  
tracer  recovered  at  the  Hammerbach  during  the  second  event  might  be  explained  by  a  
remobilization of uranine that was still stored within the Hammerbach sub-catchment down- 
gradient from the overflow.  
  
Auto-  and  cross-correlations  were  computed  for  the  three  gauging  stations  Lurbach  cave,  
Hammerbach spring and Schmelzbach outlet using the time series of the whole period (from  
the 28th November 2008 to the 30th  December 2008 on the left hand side on Fig. 3), and for  

the two events separately  (see Fig. 3 on the middle and right hand side). The two different  
events  were  defined  taking  into  account  the  precipitation  distribution  and  the  baseflow  
discharge  rather  than  the  occurrence  of  discharge  peaks. This  allows  the clear  definition  of  
two different periods: a first one with low baseflow (from the 28th November 2008 to the 11th  
December 2008) followed by a second one with a higher baseflow (from the 11th December  
2008 to the 30th December 2008, respectively). As can be seen by comparing the results of  

                                                           50  
  

----------------------- Page 51-----------------------

auto-  and  cross-correlation  of  event  1  and  event  2,  the  system  behaviour  varied  strongly  
during  the  period.  During  the  first  hydrological  event,  the  Hammerbach  autocorrelation  
indicates  a  damped  behaviour  with  a  longer  memory  effect  compared  to  the  Lurbach  and  
Schmelzbach autocorrelations. In contrast, the autocorrelation of the Schmelzbach is similar  
to  that  of  the  Lurbach.  Correspondingly,  the  cross-correlation  Lurbach  cave-Schmelzbach  
outlet is higher in amplitude and shows a shorter lag time than the cross-correlation Lurbach  
cave-Hammerbach. This supports the idea that most of the Lurbach event-water was drained  
towards the Schmelzbach system after the overflow had been activated during the first event.  
The  damped  discharge  of  the  Hammerbach  is  potentially  explained  by  a  larger  storage  
capacity within this sub-catchment (Behrens et al., 1992).   
  
When looking at the second event, the results from the time series analysis show a different  
trend: the Hammerbach autocorrelation function is very similar to those of the Lurbach and  
Schmelzbach. More specifically, the memory effect apparent in the autocorrelation of Lurbach  
and Schmelzbach (17.9 and 17.2 hours in either case) is still similar to that of the first event  
(10.8 hours and 14.1 hours, respectively), whereas in the case of the Hammerbach it is clearly  
reduced from 57.1 hours in the first event to 20.9 hours in the second. This suggests that the  
aquifer storage of the Hammerbach sub-catchment is not able to attenuate the flood pulse of  
the  second  event  to  the  same  extent  as  in  event  1,  possibly  because  additional  conduit  
pathways are activated at higher water levels (Kübeck et al., 2013). This further indicates that  
at this time, the Lurbach water pulse is transmitted toward the Hammerbach and Schmelzbach  
spring  at  a  similar  time-scale  and  that  the  two  sub-catchments  have  more  similar  drainage  
behaviour compared to event 1. This is also supported by the finding that the cross-correlation  
between  Lurbach-Hammerbach  and  Lurbach-Schmelzbach  at  this  time  shows  the  same  
pattern (rxy values of 0.79 and 0.86 with lags from 1 to 2 hours respectively, opposed to rxy  
values of 0.27 and 0.96 with lags of 14 and 5 hours during the first event), which shows that  
the  two  sub-systems  behave  similar.  Obviously,  the  different  and  varying  behaviour  of  the  
Hammerbach  and  Schmelzbach  sub-catchments  for  these  two  particular  events  cannot  be  
inferred from the autocorrelation and cross-correlation of the complete discharge dataset. In  
particular,  the  different  behaviour  of  Hammerbach  and  Schmelzbach  during  event  1  is  not  
apparent if the events are not separated in the analysis (Fig. 3b and 3c, first column), as both  
springs then show similar memory effects (156 hours for the Hammerbach, 164 hours for the  
Schmelzbach)  and  similar  cross-correlations  with  the  Lurbach  (0.83  amplitude  and  2  hours  
delay  for  the  Hammerbach  opposed  to  0.95  in  amplitude  and  4  hours  delay  for  the  
Schmelzbach).  Thus,  single  event  analysis  proves  useful  in  this  particular  example,  as  it  
allows distinguishing the change of the global behaviour of the Hammerbach sub-catchment  
during the two events.  
  
          3.2 Synthetic karst catchment  
  
                   3.2.1 Homogeneous cases  
  
Fig. 4 shows the modelling results of the synthetic karst catchment for the overflow located  
close to the Schmelzbach outlet (case 1 in Fig. 2a) and the overflow located near the Lurbach  

                                                           51  
  

----------------------- Page 52-----------------------

sinkhole  (case  2  in  Fig.  2a).  The  aquifer  is  unconfined  and  conduits  and  matrix  are  
homogeneous,  i.e.  with  the  previously  mentioned  constant  values  of  hydraulic  conductivity  
and  specific  yield.  In  order  to  reproduce  a  hydrological  situation  similar  to  that  occurring  
during  the  tracer  experiment,  two  artificial  allogenic  recharge  events  were  defined.  The  
intensity  of  the  allogenic  input  (Lurbach  discharge)  was  increased  from  a  first  to  a  second  
event roughly by a factor of two (Fig. 4) in order to see the influence of event intensity on the  
overflow  and  discharge  characteristics.  Autogenic  recharge  remained  constant  during  the  
whole simulation.  
  

                                                                                                                                  
Fig.   4   Results   from   the   groundwater   flow   model:   Simulated   discharge   response   of   Hammerbach   and  
Schmelzbach due to two recharge events of different intensity.  (a) Overflow located close to the Schmelzbach  
outlet (case 1 in Fig. 2a); (b) overflow located near the Lurbach sinkhole (case 2 in Fig. 2a). The inset shows that  
some  minor  matrix  flow  happens  from  the  Hammerbach  sub-catchment  to  the  Schmelzbach  sub-catchment  
during the first event. Hydraulic conductivity, specific yield, and porosity are identical in the two model setups  
and homogeneous within matrix and conduit system.  

  
The  comparison  of  the  resulting  responses  of  the  synthetic  Schmelzbach  and  Hammerbach  
hydrographs reveals an activation of the overflow similar to the observation at the field site: in  
the  case  of  the  overflow  near  the  outlet  (Fig.  4a)  the  Schmelzbach  hydrograph  stays  at  a  
constant  value  over  a  period  of  approximately  12.5  hours  during  the  first  event  when  the  
Hammerbach  has  already  started  to  respond  to  the  Lurbach  flood  pulse  by  an  increase  in  
discharge. In the case of the overflow near the sinkhole (Fig. 4b), the Schmelzbach does not  
respond to the first Lurbach flood pulse, and responds later than the Hammerbach during the  
second  event  (after  108.5  hours).  Evidently,  the  intensity  of  the  first  event  is  too  weak  to  
activate the overflow in the case where it is located near the sinkhole (Fig. 4b). Yet, it should  
be noted that a slight increase in Schmelzbach discharge (see inset in Fig 4.b) is caused by the  
pressure propagation within the low-permeability matrix flow. It is further noteworthy that the  
peak discharge of the Schmelzbach slightly exceeds  that of the Hammerbach for the second  
event when the overflow is located near the sinkhole (Fig. 4b), while it stays below in the case  
with  the  overflow  near  the  Schmelzbach  outlet  (Fig.  4a).  Likewise  the  baseflow  of  the  
Schmelzbach remains higher with the overflow near the sinkhole than with the overflow near  
the outlet. These observations are explained by the size of the autogenic sub-catchment of the  
Schmelzbach, which increases with increasing distance of the overflow from the outlet. Thus,  

                                                               52  
  

----------------------- Page 53-----------------------

the location of the overflow in the groundwater model is found to be of primary importance.   
  

                                                                                                                                   
Fig.  5  Autocorrelation  functions  of  the  simulated  Lurbach  (LB),  Hammerbach  (HB)  and  Schmelzbach  (SB)  
discharges presented in Fig. 4 for the two separated events;  (a) overflow near the outlet,  (b) overflow near the  
sinkhole. Here the lags are given in half hours. Memory effects are given in hours.  

  
The  autocorrelation  of  the  hydrographs  of  the  two  models  is  presented  in  Fig.  5.  With  the  
overflow   located   near   the   outlet   (Fig.   5a)   the   values   of   the   memory   effect   for   the  
Hammerbach and Schmelzbach are identical for both events and the values obtained for the  
first and the second event are similar (approximately 10.8 hours during the first event; nearly  
13  hours  during  the  second  event).  Contrary,  the  model  with  the  overflow  located  near  the  
sinkhole (Fig. 5b) shows different memory effects for Hammerbach and Schmelzbach and the  
memory effect is found to be different for the two  events. The result from the first event can  
be explained by the inactivity of the overflow: almost all Lurbach allogenic water is drained  
towards  the  Hammerbach  spring,  whereas  the  Schmelzbach  outlet  is  supplied  only  by  a  
constant flux of autogenic water and a small amount of Lurbach water transferred through the  
matrix  (see  Inset  in  Fig.  4b). As  a  consequence,  the  memory  effect  for  the  Schmelzbach  is  
higher  than  that  for  the  Hammerbach.  During  the  second  event  both  Hammerbach  and  
Schmelzbach  are  supplied  by  allogenic  water  from  the  Lurbach  but  still  have  different  
memory  effects (11.1 hours during the first event and 20.5 hours during  the second for the  
Hammerbach;  17.2  hours  during  the  first  event  and  10.6  hours  during  the  second  for  the  
Schmelzbach). As opposed to the first event the Schmelzbach responds faster (lower memory  
effect) than the Hammerbach. This is due to the sudden activation of the overflow forcing a  
                                                               53  
  

----------------------- Page 54-----------------------

high  proportion  of  Lurbach  water  to  flow  towards  the  Schmelzbach  system.  Similarly,  the  
memory  effect  of  the  real  Schmelzbach  was  found  to  be  lower  than  that  of  the  real  
Hammerbach when the overflow was activated in the first event observed at the field site (see  
event 1 in Fig. 3b). The above findings thus demonstrate that the memory effect is influenced  
by  the  overflow. Yet,  it  should  be  noted  that  differences  in  the  memory  effects  of  different  
events can also be caused by different input signals, which suggests that the interpretation of  
the memory effect in a setting with strongly varying input signals is not straightforward and  
should be supported by additional evidence from other methods.  
  

                                                                                                                                   
Fig. 6 Cross-correlation functions of the simulated Lurbach-Hammerbach (LB-HB) and Lurbach-Schmelzbach  
(LB-SB) discharges presented in Fig. 4 for the two  separated events; (a) overflow near the outlet,  (b) overflow  
near the sinkhole. Here the lags are given in half hours. Cross-correlation results are given in hours.  

  
Single event cross-correlation results obtained with the two model set-ups are shown in Fig. 6.  
Corresponding   to   the   results   from   the   autocorrelation,   the   Lurbach-Hammerbach   and  
Lurbach-Schmelzbach cross-correlation functions are similar in both events (more than 0.90  
in amplitude for all cases) if the overflow is located near the outlet (Fig. 6a). In contrast, the  
model  with  the  overflow  near  the  sinkhole  (Fig.  6b)  shows  a  lower  cross-correlation  
amplitude  for  the  Lurbach-Schmelzbach  during  the  first  event  when  the  overflow  is  not  
activated and a higher amplitude reaching almost the Lurbach-Hammerbach cross-correlation  
during  the  second  event.  Yet  even  during  the  second  event  the  amplitude  of  the  Lurbach- 
Hammerbach   cross-correlation   is   higher   than   that   of   the   Lurbach-Schmelzbach   cross- 
correlation.  In  addition,  the  maximum  of  the  lag  time  of  the  Lurbach-Schmelzbach  cross- 

                                                               54  
  

----------------------- Page 55-----------------------

correlation  is  larger  than  that  of  the  Lurbach-Hammerbach  cross-correlation  (14.5  hours  
opposed to 3 hours during the first event and 2.5 hours to 1 hour during the second event).  
These findings are explained by the activation of the overflow during the second event, which  
causes a delayed response of the Schmelzbach relative to the Hammerbach. This is in striking  
contrast  to  the  observation  at  the  field  site,  where  the  real  Lurbach-Schmelzbach  cross- 
correlation exhibits a higher amplitude and lower lag time than the real Lurbach-Hammerbach  
cross-correlation   when   the   overflow   is   activated   (see   event   1   in   Fig.   3c).  Thus,   the  
autocorrelation  of  the  observed  hydrograph  and  that  obtained  with  the  model  where  the  
overflow is close to the sinkhole show some similarity (memory effect of Schmelzbach lower  
than that of Hammerbach when the overflow is activated), but the cross-correlation from the  
first  event  at  the  field  site  clearly  suggests  a  more  attenuated  and  damped  response  of  the  
Hammerbach than that obtained with the model. In the above considered model scenarios the  
matrix and the conduit system were assumed to be homogeneous. As karst aquifers are highly  
heterogeneous  an  important  question  is  how  heterogeneities  may  influence  the  numerical  
spring response and the resulting shape of the auto- and cross-correlation functions. This is  
considered in the following sub-section.  
  
                   3.2.2 Heterogeneous cases  
  
As the Schmelzbach system is assumed to be higher karstified than the Hammerbach system  
(Behrens   et  al.,  1992),  heterogeneities  were  introduced  in  the   groundwater  model  by  
increasing  the  conduit  hydraulic  conductivity  from  1  m/s  to  1.2  m/s  from  the  overflow  
location  to  the  Schmelzbach  outlet.  Moreover,  as  the  Hammerbach  is  reported  to  have  the  
higher aquifer storage (Behrens et al., 1992), the  value of specific yield of the conduit cells  
within this sub-catchment was consequently increased from 0.01 to 0.5.  
  
Fig. 7 presents a comparison of hydrographs, auto-  and cross-correlation functions between  
the heterogeneous case (dashed lines) and the homogeneous one (solid lines) for the overflow  
located near the outlet (Fig. 7a) and the overflow  located near the sinkhole (Fig. 7b). Auto-  
and   cross-correlation   are   shown   only   for   the   second   event.   For   both   geometries   the  
Hammerbach  hydrograph  is  evidently  more  damped  in  the  heterogeneous  than  in  the  
homogeneous  case.  In  addition,  the  Hammerbach  response  in  the  heterogeneous  model  
appears to be delayed compared to the homogeneous case if the overflow is located near the  
sinkhole  (but  not  when  the  overflow  is  near  the  outlet).  Another  important  result  in  the  
heterogeneous  model  with  the  overflow  near  the  sinkhole  is  the  activation  of  the  overflow  
during the first event (after 14 hours) whereas it remained inactive for the homogeneous case.  
This  result  is  consistent with  the  lower  value  of  12.5  hours  found  for  the  overflow  located  
near the outlet.  
  

                                                            55  
  

----------------------- Page 56-----------------------

                                                                                                                                   
Fig. 7 Comparison of discharge, auto- and cross-correlation from the homogeneous model (solid lines) and the  
heterogeneous one (dashed lines); (a) overflow near the outlet, (b) overflow near the sinkhole. While matrix and  
conduit  parameters  of  the  Schmelzbach  and  Hammerbach  sub-catchments  are  identical  in  the  homogeneous  
model, the hydraulic conductivity of the Schmelzbach conduit and the specific yield in the Hammerbach conduit  
were increased in the heterogeneous  model. Auto- and cross-correlation are shown  for the second event  only.  
Here  the  lags  are  given  in  half  hours.  Hourly  auto-  and  cross-correlation  results  are  indicated  for  the  
homogeneous and the heterogeneous model, respectively.   

  
The autocorrelation for the model with the overflow located near the outlet shows almost no  
influence  of  the  heterogeneities  and  yields  similar  memory  effects  for  Hammerbach  and  
Schmelzbach  than  those  of  the  homogeneous  case.  Contrary,  the  model  with  an  overflow  
located  near  the  sinkhole  shows  different  memory  effects  for  the  Hammerbach  and  the  
Schmelzbach and the values differ from those of the homogenous case (18.5 and 13 hours as  
opposed to 20.5 and 10.6 hours for the homogeneous case).   
  
The  results  of  the  cross-correlation  analysis  correspond  to  those  of  the  autocorrelation:  the  
heterogeneous model with the overflow located near the outlet has cross-correlograms similar  
(Lurbach-Schmelzbach) or slightly damped and delayed (Lurbach-Hammerbach) compared to  
the homogeneous case. Evidently, the heterogeneity has little influence on the spring response  
if the overflow is close to the outlet. In this case the greater part of the aquifer is upstream of  
the overflow and thus shared by the two springs, while there is only a small part downstream  
of the overflow with two separate heterogeneous sub-catchments. In contrast, the model with  
the  overflow  located  near  the  sinkhole  is  strongly  influenced  by  the  heterogeneities:  the  
Lurbach-Hammerbach                cross-correlation          is   clearly      damped,        whereas        the     Lurbach- 
Schmelzbach cross-correlation is only slightly changed. Thus, the Schmelzbach is the main  
outlet  of  the  system  and  has  a  more  flashy  behaviour  than  the  Hammerbach,  which  
corresponds well with the field observations and further supports a location of the overflow in  
the upper part of the aquifer.   
  
                                                               56  
  

----------------------- Page 57-----------------------

Results from the aforementioned tracer experiment (Fig. 3a) also suggest an overflow location  
close to the sinkhole: since most of the tracer was recovered at the Hammerbach spring and  
even  in  the  time  period  when  the  overflow  was  active  only  a  small  amount  of  tracer  was  
detected  in  the  Schmelzbach,  the  overwhelming  majority  of  tracer  must  have  passed  the  
overflow location at the time when the overflow became active. In agreement with the results  
of the single event time series analysis these findings support an overflow location within the  
upper part of the Lurbach aquifer.  
  
4. Conclusion  
  
Single event time series analysis was combined with a groundwater model to examine how  
the inter-catchment flow in a karst aquifer varies during a period of one month and how this is  
reflected  in  the  results  from  the  time  series  analysis.  Auto-  and  cross-correlation  of  the  
observed data differ for the two events considered here, thus showing the necessity to make a  
single  event  analysis  rather  than  an  analysis  of  the  whole  dataset.  The  numerical  model  
implemented  with  MODFLOW  was  able  to  reproduce  the  general  overflow  behaviour  
observed in the Lurbach system. Results of auto- and cross-correlation of the numerical model  
showed  that  aquifer  heterogeneities  and  the  overflow  location  were  of  primary  importance.  
The model with an overflow located near the outlet was found to be relatively insensitive to a  
variation  of  hydraulic  parameters.  Contrary,  the  model  with  an  overflow  located  near  the  
sinkhole showed a high sensitivity to heterogeneities and was selected as the most probable  
option to better reproduce the observed behaviour of the  Lurbach system. Results from the  
model with the overflow near the sinkhole and heterogeneous aquifer parameters were found  
to be in good agreement with the field observations. Thus, in agreement with evidence from  
tracer tests an overflow location in the upper part of the aquifer rather than in the lower part is  
suggested.  In  summary,  single  event  time  series  analysis  was  found  to  be  useful  for  
characterizing  transient  inter-catchment  flow  and  aquifer  properties  (overflow  location,  
aquifer  heterogeneity)  controlling  the  spring  responses  to  recharge  in  this  karst  catchment.  
Yet, it is important to note that results from time series analysis need to be complemented by  
other  aquifer  characterization  techniques  to  interpret  them  in  terms  of  flow  processes  and  
aquifer properties. In this work, tracer testing and groundwater modelling proved useful for  
this purpose.  
  
Acknowledgements  
  
This project was supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF): L 576-N21 and the Austrian  
Academy  of  Sciences  (ÖAW)  Project:  Global  models  of  spring  catchments.  The  authors  
would like to thank Gerfried Winkler and Stefan Oswald for the fruitful discussions and the  
owners      of   the    Lurgrotte      Peggau      and    Semriach       for   the   access     to   the    cave.    The  
Hydrographische   Dienst   Steiermark   is   thanked   for   providing   the   meteorological   data.  
Comments on the manuscript by three anonymous reviewers are gratefully acknowledged.  

                                                            57  
  

----------------------- Page 58-----------------------

                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             

                                                CHAPTER IV  

                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             

           NON-LINEAR FLOW PROCESS  
              (NLFP): A NEW PACKAGE TO  
       COMPUTE NON-LINEAR FLOW IN  
                                               MODFLOW  

                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
Submitted to Groundwater as Methods Note: Mayaud et al., (under review) Non-Linear  
       Flow Process (NLFP): a new package to compute non-linear flow in MODFLOW.  

                                                

                                                                         58  
  

----------------------- Page 59-----------------------

Abstract  
  
A new MODFLOW package (Non-Linear Flow Process; NLFP) simulating non-linear flow  
following the Forchheimer equation was developed and implemented in MODLFOW-2005.  
The package is based on an iterative modification of the conductance calculated and used by  
MODFLOW to obtain an effective Forchheimer conductance. The method was successfully  
tested using different layer types, boundaries conditions, and solvers as well as the wetting  
capability of MODFLOW. The correct implementation is demonstrated using three different  
benchmark  scenarios  for  which  analytical  solutions  are  available.  A  scenario  considering  
transient  flow  in  a  more  realistic  setting  and  a  larger  model  grid  demonstrates  that  NLFP  
performances well under more complex conditions, although it converges moderately slower  
than  the  standard  MODFLOW  depending  on  the  non-linearity  of  flow.  Thus,  this  new  tool  
opens a field of opportunities to groundwater flow  simulation with MODFLOW, especially  
for  core  sample  simulation  or  vuggy  karstified  aquifers  as  well  as  for  non-linear  flow  in  
vicinity of pumping wells.  
  
Keywords: Forcheimer equation - non-linear flow - MODFLOW - Karst - benchmark  
  
  
                                            

                                                                59  
  

----------------------- Page 60-----------------------

1. Introduction  
  
Groundwater flow in porous aquifers is mostly considered to be laminar and thus described by  
Darcy’s  law  (Darcy,  1856),  i.e.,  by  a  linear  relationship  between  specific  discharge  and  
hydraulic gradient. However, in some cases where the observed flow behaviour is non-linear,  
Darcy’s  law  is  found  to  be  inadequate  (Kuniansky  et  al.,  2008;  Scanlon  et  al.,  2003).  As  
widely used groundwater modelling software packages such as MODFLOW-2005 (Harbaugh,  
2005) are generally based on Darcy’s law, there is  a lack of tools accounting for such non- 
linear  flow  behaviour  through  porous  media  or  karst  aquifers.  The  Conduit  Flow  Process  
(CFP) released by the USGS (Shoemaker et al., 2008) was the first MODFLOW package that  
allowed the use of a non-linear (turbulent) flow equation in MODFLOW. This package offers  
two different modes that can also be combined: the first mode is based on a hybrid approach  
coupling  to  MODFLOW  a  discrete  pipe  network  where  flow  can  be  laminar  or  turbulent  
(Liedl et al., 2003); the second mode is intended for porous or vuggy karstified aquifers and  
allows turbulent flow simulations in preferential flow layers, where a non-linear flow law is  
used if the specific discharge exceeds a given threshold (Kuniansky et al., 2008). Reimann et  
al. (2011, 2012) modified and extended CFP mode 2 to enable the use of different non-linear  
flow laws.  
  
The aforementioned packages are based on an approach where a switch from the linear Darcy  
law to the non-linear equation occurs when the Reynolds number (calculated from the specific  
discharge and a user-specified diameter of the flow pathways) exceeds a threshold defined by  
the user. But in contrast to the flow in a single conduit, the wide spectrum of conduit sizes  
present  in  real  aquifers  should  leads  to  a  more  smooth  transition  from  laminar  to  turbulent  
flow.  A  parameter  study  based  on  laboratory  experiments  using  core  samples  of  a  vuggy  
Floridian aquifer suggests that an approach where Darcy’s law is entirely replaced by the non- 
linear Forchheimer equation might be more appropriate than a sharp transition from laminar  
to turbulent flow (Chin et al., 2009). The purpose  of this methods note is to present such an  
approach and its implementation into a new package that allows the simulation of non-linear  
Forchheimer flow in MODFLOW. This package is not only intended for karst aquifers but  
can also be employed in porous aquifers where non-linear flow occurs close to pumping wells  
(e.g.  Forchheimer, 1901; Halford, 2000; Wen  et  al., 2011). The background theory and the  
limitations of the package are presented in the first part of the paper. Then, three benchmarks  
tests showing the validity of NLFP are described in the second part. Finally, one additional  
example comparing NLFP to CFP mode 2 in a more realistic context is shown in the third  
part.  
  
2. Background and theory  
  
The  Forchheimer  equation  (Chin  et  al.,  2009;  Forchheimer,  1901)  extends  the  linear  Darcy  
law by a quadratic term:  
           

                                                                                                                   (1)  
                                                    =  +   

                                                           60  
  

----------------------- Page 61-----------------------

  
                                                                                         -1           -1               -1  2 
where   is the hydraulic gradient [-],  is the specific discharge [LT                    ],  [TL     ] and  [TL      ]   
are the Forchheimer parameters. It reproduces Darcy's law in the limit of small discharges    
where  is the inverse of the hydraulic conductivity   [LT-1]:  
                                                                      		 

  
                                                                1 
                                                         =                                                           (2)  
                                                          		 
                                                                 
  
In return, it turns into a quadratic flow law in the limit of large discharge. In general, Equation  
(1) can be transformed to Darcy’s law with a discharge-dependent hydraulic conductivity   
     -1 
[LT    ]:  
  
                                                         =                                                         (3)  
                                                                 

  
where  
                                                         1            	 
                                              =               =              
                                                
                                                      +                                                           (4)  
                                                                   1+ 
                                                                            
  
is the effective Forchheimer hydraulic conductivity [LT-1].  

  
As  MODFLOW  uses  conductance  instead  of  hydraulic  conductivity  to  compute  flow,  
                                                                                                                  2  -1 
equation (4) has to be written in terms of conductance too. The linear conductance [L T                                ] is  
calculated by MODFLOW using the distance ∆ [L] and the area of the flow cross-section A  
   2 
[L ] between two nodes:   
  
                                                                
                                                       = 	                                                           (5)  
                                                        	      ∆ 

  
                                                          2  -1 
In analogy, the Forchheimer conductance [L T                   ] can be defined as:  
  
                                                               	 
                                                     =                
                                                                                                                    (6)  
                                                            1+ 
                                                                     
  
Since  the  Forchheimer  conductance  is  dependent  on  the  specific  discharge  it  must  be  
calculated iteratively by a fixed point scheme. Analogous to the treatment of unconfined flow  
in MODFLOW, the conductance is updated in each iteration step based on reconstructing the  
specific  discharge  from  the  Forchheimer  conductance  and  the  hydraulic  gradient  of  the  
previous iteration step:   
  
                                                              	 
                                              =                            
                                                   1+         	 ∆ℎ                                              (7)  
                                                            	          ∆  

                                                            61  
  

----------------------- Page 62-----------------------

                                                                                  2  -1 
Here           and    denote the Forchheimer conductances [L T                             ] at the new and the previous  
                        
                                
iteration step, and ∆ℎ   [-] the head difference between two nodes from the previous iteration  
step, respectively.  
  
Thus,  Equation  (7)  is  used  to  modify  the  conductance  in  MODFLOW  at  each  iteration.  A  
sketch  of  the  NLFP  algorithm  and  its  implementation  in  MODFLOW-2005  is  shown  in  
Figure 1. The computation of   occurs only after the read and prepare procedure,  where  
                                               

the input data are read and boundary conditions, layer type and no-flow cells are identified.  
As  a being the inverse of the hydraulic conductivity    is already available, NLFP requires  
                                                                                		 

only the ratio b/a as input parameter from the user; typical values of b/a for various materials  
are provided, e.g., by Chin et al. (2009), Sidiropoulou et al. (2007) or  Zheng et al.  (2006).  
Setting  b/a  zero  corresponds  to  using  the  standard  Darcy  equation.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  
contrast to the Conduit Flow Process,  where the parameters controlling the non-linear  flow  
are  constant  within  each  layer,  different  values  of  b/a  can  be  specified  for  each  cell  with  
NLFP. In addition to this aquifer parameter, a criterion for convergence of the Forchheimer  
conductance can be specified by the user,  as it was found that under certain conditions the  
hydraulic  heads  in  MODFLOW  converged  while  the  Forchheimer  conductance  would  still  
change if the iteration was continued.   
  
  
  
  
  
  

                                                                  62  
  

----------------------- Page 63-----------------------

                                                                                                                                         
Fig.   1   Extract   of   MODFLOW   2005   flow   chart   (Harbaugh,   2005)   and   modified   flow   chart   showing  
implementation of NLFP.  

  
At  present,  the  NLFP  package  can  be  used  only  with  the  Block  Centered  Flow  package  
(BCF). An adaptation to the Layer Flow Package (LPF) will be subject of future work. NLFP  
was successfully tested  with the three solvers DE45, SIP, and PCG2; the latter showed the  
fastest convergence for the test runs.  
NLFP supports the use of deactivated cells (when IBOUND is set to 0) within the model. The  
package  is  also  compatible  with  each  of  the  four  existing  MODFLOW  layer  types  (strictly  
confined,  strictly  unconfined,  unconfined  with  constant/variable  transmissivity).  The  use  of  
wetting capability option is also possible. The NLFP package was written in a single file and  
compiled with the last available version of CFP (which can be found on the USGS website).  
The source code can be downloaded at:  http://www.uni-graz.at/steffen.birk/research.html. A  
separate compilation with the last version of MODFLOW-2005 is also possible but was not  
tested until now.   
  
3. Benchmark tests  
  
In order to verify the correct implementation and functioning of the Forchheimer equation in  
the NLFP source code, three benchmark scenarios are considered.  
  
  
  

                                                                  63  
  

----------------------- Page 64-----------------------

           3.1 First test: specified flow in a confined aquifer  
  
The first model is composed of 1 row and 11 columns. The size of the cells is constant 10 m  
by 10 m; the thickness of the single confined layer is also 10 m. The hydraulic conductivity is  
                   ⁄                -1                              -1 
set to  =1  =1 m.s                   and  /= 0.25 s.m             . On the left boundary, a constant head is set  
           	 

to  11  m,  while  on  the  right  boundary  a  constant  discharge  is  specified  using  the  WELL  
                                                                                      -6    3            3    3 
package  of  MODFLOW.  The  discharge  is  varied  from  10                               m /s  to  10   m /s  in  subsequent  
steady-state simulations. This scenario allows a straightforward comparison of the hydraulic  
gradient  calculated  by  NLFP  with  that  obtained  directly  from  the  Forchheimer  equation  
(Equation 1). As can be seen from Figure 2 NLFP agrees well with the Forchheimer equation  
over  a  wide  range  of  hydraulic  gradients.  For  low  hydraulic  gradients  the  Forchheimer  
equation approaches the linear Darcy law, whereas at high hydraulic gradients the non-linear  
term of the Forchheimer equation dominates and thus the graph approaches a power law with  
an  exponent  of  2.  The  latter  corresponds  to  well-known  turbulent  flow  laws  such  as  the  
Darcy-Weisbach equation.  
  

                                                                                                                                         
Fig. 2 Discharge versus hydraulic gradient of the two confined benchmark models. Simulation results of the first  
test case are represented with triangles, those of the second test case with stars. The power law was represented  
with an exponent of 2.  

  
  
  
  
                                                                  64  
  

----------------------- Page 65-----------------------

          3.2 Second test: fixed gradient in a confined aquifer  
  
The  second  test  example  comprises  a  single  row  of  1 1  confined  cells  with  a  constant  head  
defined at both the left and the right boundary. The size of the cells is 1 m width by 10 m  
length; the thickness of the single confined layer  is also 1 m. The hydraulic parameters are  
identical  to  the  previous  scenario.  A  sequence  of  steady-state  simulations  is  conducted  
varying  the  hydraulic  gradient  by  several  orders  of  magnitude.  Figure  2  shows  the  results  
computed by NLFP compared with those obtained from the Forchheimer equation (Equation  
1) solved for the discharge (Moutsopoulos et al., 2005):  
            

                                                                   
                                                      − +  +4 
                                                              √ 
                                                 =                                                                     (9)  
                                                               2 
            
Similar  to  the  first  benchmark  model,  NLFP  is  found  to  agree  well  with  the  Forchheimer  
equation  under  conditions  ranging  from  linear  flow  following  the  Darcy  equation  to  non- 
linear  flow  where  the  second  term  of  the  Forchheimer  equation  dominates.  These  findings  
show that NLFP behaves correctly regarding to the Forchheimer equation for confined flow.  
  
          3.3 Third test: specified discharge in an unconfined aquifer  
  
To   check   if   NLFP   computes   non-linear   flow   for   unconfined   conditions   correctly,   a  
corresponding analytical solution is derived. To simplify the problem, only one-dimensional  
steady-state flow is considered. The boundary conditions correspond to those of the first test  
case, i.e. a constant head h(0) = h0 at one boundary and a specified discharge at the other.  
Conservation of mass requires:  
  
                                                  ℎ =   = !"#$%	                                                     (10)  
  
with  the  hydraulic  head  h  [L]  referring  to  the  aquifer  base  as  a  datum  level  and     the  
discharge per width [L2T-1].  

Combining Equations (1) and (10) we obtain:  
  
                                                                        
                                                   &ℎ       
                                                       =        +                                                     (11)  
                                                   &'       ℎ       ℎ 
  
The integration of Equation (11) using the polynomial division leads to:   
  
                                                                              
                                                       ℎ                     
                                ' +!"#$% = (               −      +                    *ℎ                             (12)  
                                                                      )          
                                                                    ℎ +   
  
Adjusting the constant of integration to satisfy the constant-head boundary condition finally  
gives the analytical solution:  

                                                             65  
  

----------------------- Page 66-----------------------

                                                                           ℎ +  
                                     ℎ −ℎ          (ℎ −ℎ )     
                                              	              	                        
                               ' = 2  −                       + ) #                                          (13)  
                                                                              ℎ + 
                                                                               	 
                                                                                       
  
where ' [L] is the distance from the constant-head boundary ℎ  at which the hydraulic head h  
                                                                                 	 

is obtained. Note that although this equation cannot explicitly be solved for h, it can be used  
for a graphical evaluation of the numerically calculated hydraulic head distribution.  
The  analytical  solution  provided  by  Equation  (13)  and  the  respective  numerical  results  are  
shown in Figure 3 for three different values of b/a and a specified discharge of 10 m3/s. As  

can be seen NLFP with b/a = 0 (represented by squares in Figure 3) is able to reproduce the  
water table obtained with the Darcy  equation  (bold  curve in Figure 3).  The NLFP package  
                                                                                                                       -1 
also  shows  good  agreement  with  the  analytical  solution  for  a  value  of  b/a  =  0.25  s.m                     .  
Finally,   the   analytical   solution   of   the   Forchheimer   equation   with   b/a   =   20.25   s.m-1  

(represented by circles) is shown. As can be seen, the MODFLOW model does not match the  
analytical  solution  anymore  under  these  conditions.  The  reason  for  the  deviation  from  the  
analytical solution, however, is an inappropriate discretization of the model. If the cell size is  
reduced from 10 m to 1 m the numerical model (represented by triangles) agrees well with the  
analytical solution. This proves that the numerical implementation is correct and demonstrates  
that  an  appropriate  model  discretization  is  important  when  non-linear  Forchheimer  flow  is  
calculated under unconfined conditions.  
  

                                                                                                                           
Fig. 3 Comparison of the analytical solution of the Forchheimer equation in an unconfined aquifer to the result  
of the numerical NLFP model.  
                                                           66  
  

----------------------- Page 67-----------------------

In  summary,  the  three  benchmark  tests  show  that  the  NLFP  package  is  able  to  simulate  
Forchheimer  flow  under  both  confined  and  unconfined  conditions.  However,  the  scenarios  
considered above are highly simplified. The performance of NLFP in a more complex case  
thus is considered in the next part.  
  

4. Application example  
  
The computational performance of the  NLFP package was examined using a more realistic  
scenario taken from Mayaud et al. (2013). The selected catchment is 3 km long and 1.5 km  
wide. The model domain is discretized in 44700 cells of constant size (10 m by 10 m) and  
represents a simplified confined karst system that is drained by a single conduit (length 2300  
m). The simulation comprises 83 stress periods representing a recharge event of in total 150  
hours.  A  first  steady-state  stress  period  is  used  to  define  the  initial  conditions  for  the  
subsequent transient simulation. The model scenario was implemented to investigate how far  
a conduit constriction (represented by reducing the hydraulic conductivity of individual model  
cells within a sequence of highly conductive cells) can influence the discharge behaviour of a  
karst spring (for more details see Mayaud et al., 2013). The value of b/a was varied from 0 to  
500.25  s.m-1  in  subsequent  model  runs.  The  model  always  converged  and  the  computation  

time varied from 61 s for linear flow simulated with the standard MODFLOW-2005 to 91 s  
for NLFP with  b/a = 500.25 s.m-1. The resulting spring hydrographs are shown in Figure 4  

together with those obtained using the standard (laminar) MODFLOW and MODFLOW-CFP  
mode  2  (Shoemaker  et  al.  2008).  NLFP  showed  an  increasingly  damped  response  of  the  
simulated  spring  discharge,  which  is  similar  to the  behaviour  of  CFP  mode  2  described  by  
Mayaud et al. (2013).  
  

                                                            67  
  

----------------------- Page 68-----------------------

                                                                                                                                         
Fig. 4 Numerical discharge due to an artificial recharge  event of a hypothetical karst catchment computed by  
MODFLOW 2005, CFP Mode 2 and NLFP (/	 = 500.25 s.m-1). See Mayaud et al. (2013) for more details on  

the model scenario and the results obtained with MODFLOW 2005 and CFP Mode 2.  

  
5. Conclusion  
  
A  new  MODFLOW  package  (Non-Linear  Flow  Process;  NLFP)  computing  non-linear  
Forchheimer  flow  was  developed  and  implemented  in  MODFLOW-2005.  The  approach  is  
based on an iterative modification of the conductance provided by MODFLOW. The package  
requires  only  one  additional  aquifer  parameter  and  an  additional  convergence  criterion  to  
check the convergence of the Forchheimer conductance. NLFP was tested in three benchmark  
scenarios  and  found  to  compare  favorably  with  the  corresponding  analytical  solutions  both  
under  confined  and  unconfined  conditions.  The  package  was  also  successfully  applied  to  a  
more  realistic  setting  with  a  larger  grid.  Depending  on  the  choice  of  the  Forchheimer  
parameter  b/a  which  determines  the  non-linearity  of  the  equation,  NLFP  was  found  to  
converge only moderately slower than the standard MODFLOW in the scenarios considered.  
Thus, this new tool opens a new field of modelling  opportunities related to non-linear flow,  
e.g., in (vuggy) karstified aquifers or in the vicinity of pumping wells.  
  
  
  

                                                                  68  
  

----------------------- Page 69-----------------------

Acknowledgments  
  
This  project  was  supported  by  the  Austrian  Science  Fund  (FWF):  L  576-N21.  The  authors  
would like to thank W.B. Shoemaker, G. Winkler and T. Wagner for the fruitful discussions.  
  

                                                                       69  
  

----------------------- Page 70-----------------------

                                                            
                                                            
                                                            

                              CHAPTER V  

                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            

OVERALL CONCLUSIONS  

                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                             

                                                        70  
  

----------------------- Page 71-----------------------

As each chapter of this thesis has its own conclusion, the following section summarizes the  
essential results of this work.  
  
The purpose of this PhD thesis was to investigate to which extent single-continuum models  
are able to reproduce flow processes observed in karst aquifers. To this end, several examples  
show how single-continuum models can be employed for karst aquifer modelling in order to  
improve  our  understanding  of  the  aquifer  functioning,  contributing  thus  to  the  aquifer  
characterization. Results of this thesis further demonstrate that the model application has to be  
integrated in a broader investigation approach that includes other methods such as recession  
analysis  (Chapter  2),  time  series  analysis  (Chapter  3),  or  conceptual  lumped-parameter  
modelling  (Appendix A;  Wagner  et  al.,  2013).  The  experiences  from  these  applications  of  
existing single-continuum models further suggested the need for an improved implementation  
of  a  non-linear  flow  package,  which  is  provided  by  the  newly  developed  NLFP  package  
(based on the Forchheimer law) presented in Chapter 4.  
  
In detail, the previous chapters lead to the following conclusions:  
  
          (i) Chapter 1 presents the current problematic related to karst aquifers (water quality,  
          extreme events forecasting as well as aquifer characterization). This part introduces the  
          current employed approaches for karst aquifer modelling and explains why a general  
          need for a better understanding of modelling of karst aquifers is essential.  
  
          (ii) Chapter 2 provides an example that single-continuum models are able to reproduce  
          the general flow behaviour observed at a karst spring and that they can be employed to  
          improve our understanding of the functioning of karst aquifers. In this particular case,  
          the  model  was  used  to  examine  the  potential  cause  of  an  observed  change  in  the  
          hydrograph response to recharge events of a binary  karst system. The results support  
          the  hypothesis  of  a  change  of  the  properties  of  the  conduit  system  within  this  karst  
          aquifer,  possibly  due  to  sediment  redistribution  after  a  major  flood  event.  This  
          demonstrates  the  advantage  of  single-continuum  models:  on  the  one  hand,  they  are  
          able  to  account  for  geometrical  features  and  their  position  within  a  catchment  (as  
          opposed to global models); on the other hand, they are easier to implement compared  
          to hybrid or fracture models.  
            
          (iii) Chapter 3 also shows the usefulness of single-continuum models to mimic flow  
          processes  observed  within  karst  aquifers.  Indeed,  the  transient  inter-catchment  flow  
          behaviour reported from the Lurbach system was successfully reproduced for different  
          model  settings.  Moreover,  the  combination  of  the  single-continuum  approach  with  
          statistical methods (here time series analysis) helped to improve the understanding of  
          the overflow. Since hybrid or fracture models until now are not able to simulate such  
          an overflow process this is a promising result, which further supports the use of the  
          single-continuum approach, as such overflow processes are frequently encountered in  
          karst systems.  
  

                                                             71  
  

----------------------- Page 72-----------------------

          (iv) Chapter 4 supports the integration of turbulent or non-linear flow processes within  
          single-continuum  models  to  reproduce  appropriately  the  flow  dynamics  observed  
          within  karst  aquifers.  As  Chapters  2  and  3  described  the  limitations  of  the  two  
          previously existing turbulent flow packages (e.g. problems with the rewetting package  
          or with inactive cells), it was a need to develop another package allowing a broader  
          use of non-linear flow with single-continuum models. The Non-Linear Flow Process  
          package (NLFP) was developed based on the non-linear  Forchheimer flow law. The  
          computation of turbulent flow for three benchmark scenarios and a large more realistic  
          karst setting proved to be successful and encourage further use of this approach.  
            
These results lead to several future research topics as the direct consequence of this work. All  
of them are listed below and have the potential to further improve the common use of single- 
continuum models in karst aquifers (compared to hybrid or fracture models).  
            
          (i) turbulent and non-linear flow modelling should be further developed and applied to  
          a greater number of real karst systems. A promising research topic is the integration of  
          transport simulations using single-continuum models under turbulent flow conditions.  
            
          (ii) the use of different synergetic methods (e.g. tracer tests data/time series analysis,  
          as in chapters 2 and 3) with single-continuum model has to be generalized as it allows  
          to  improve  the  understanding  of  flow  processes  and  reduces  the  equifinality  of  the  
          model results.  
            
          (iii) the development of several guidelines for groundwater modelling in karst terrains  
          is  also  a  potential  promising  topic. These  guidelines  should  serve  as  case  study  and  
          help  other  users  (i.e.  practical  appliers  such  as  students  or  private  companies)  with  
          similar modelling purposes.  
  

                                                              72  
  

----------------------- Page 73-----------------------

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

APPENDICES  

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

                                 

    

                            73  
  

----------------------- Page 74-----------------------

                                                                      APPENDIX A  

                                                                                      

                                                                                      

                                                                                      

                                                                                      

                                                                                      

                                                                                      

                                                                                      

                                                                                      

               EIN BESSERES VERSTÄNDNIS DES  
    LURBACH-KARSTSYSTEMS DURCH EIN  
       KONZEPTIONELLES NIEDERSCHLAGS- 
                                             ABFLUSS-MODELL  
      A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF THE LURBACH KARST  
SYSTEM VIA A CONCEPTIONAL RAINFALL-RUNOFF MODEL  

                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
 Published in Grundwasser as: Wagner et al., 2013. Ein besseres Verständnis des Lurbach- 
 Karstsystems durch ein konzeptionelles Niederschlags-Abfluss-Modell. Grundwasser, 18(4),  
                                             225-235. doi: 10.1007/s00767-013-0234-4.  
                                                       

                                                                                  74  
  

----------------------- Page 75-----------------------

Zusammenfassung   
  
Am       Beispiel      des    Lurbach-Systems            (Österreich)       wird     untersucht,       inwieweit       ein  
parameterarmes  globales  Niederschlags-Abfluss-Modell  in  einem  komplexen  Karstsystem  
anwendbar ist. Trotz geringer Anzahl an freien Modellparametern sind Abflusssimulationen  
über  einen  Zeitraum  von  sieben  Jahren  in  zufriedenstellender  Übereinstimmung  mit  den  
beobachteten Abflüssen. In der darauffolgenden rund vierjährigen Zeitperiode ist das Modell  
jedoch  nur  unter  Verwendung  stark  veränderter  Param eter  in  der  Lage,  das  beobachtete  
Abflussverhalten  nachzuvollziehen.  Die  kalibrierten  Parameterwerte  zeigen,  dass  in  diesem  
Zeitraum  der  Abfluss  zu  benachbarten  Einzugsgebieten  und  die  Kapazität  des  Boden-  oder  
Gebietsspeichers         stark    erhöht      sind.    Dies    ist   in    Einklang      mit    Auswertungen          von  
Markierungsversuchen  und  Trockenwetterfalllinien,  die  auf  Änderungen  der  Eigenschaften  
des      Quelleinzugsgebiets            vermutlich         durch       Sedimentumlagerungen                bei     einem  
Starkniederschlagsereignis             hindeuten.        Solche       dynamischen          Prozesse        können        in  
Niederschlags-Abfluss-Modellen  (noch)  kaum  berücksichtigt  werden  und  bedingen  daher  
erhebliche       Prognoseunsicherheiten.           Das     vorgestellte     Beispiel      zeigt    jedoch,     dass    ein  
parameterarmes   hydrologisches   Modell   zur   Charakterisierung   von   Quelleinzugsgebieten  
beitragen kann.  
  
Abstract   
  
A parsimonious lumped-parameter rainfall-runoff model was tested to determine if it could be  
used to appropriately represent a karst hydrological system, the  Lurbach system in Austria.  
Simulated and observed hydrographs of spring discharge were favorably simulated for a time  
period of seven years in spite of the small number  of free parameters. Following this period  
the  four  year  discharge  records  were  only  reproducible  using  strongly  different  parameter  
values.  Results  suggest  during  this  period  overflow  to  neighboring  catchments  and  the  
capacity  of  production  or  routing  store  have  strongly  increased.  This  relationship  is  also  
observed  in  tracer  test  and  baseflow  recession  data  sets  and  is  attributed  to  the  likely  
redistributions  of  sediments.  Such  dynamic  processes  are  rarely  accounted  for  in  rainfall- 
runoff  models,  and  may  cause  severe  prediction  uncertainties.  However,  in  the  Lurbach  
system a parsimonious hydrological model was used successfully to characterize changes in  
hydrological conditions.  
  
Keywords:  Karst  -  Rainfall-runoff  model  -  Lumped-parameter  -  Groundwater  exchange  -  
Spring catchment - Sediment redistribution  
  
                                         

                                                            75  
  

----------------------- Page 76-----------------------

1. Einleitung  
  
Karstquellen      tragen    wesentlich      zur   Trinkwasserversorgung           bei.   Das    Verständnis      des  
Abflussverhaltens und die Bewertung der Vulnerabilität solcher Quellen sind daher wichtig.  
Für  derartige  hydrologische  Fragestellungen  könnten  grundsätzlich  physikalisch-basierte,  
distributive Modelle verwendet werden. Dabei ist allerdings die oft begrenzte Datengrundlage  
problematisch.  Häufig  sind  nur  Niederschlag,  Lufttemperatur  und  Abfluss  verfügbar  (z.  B.  
Jakeman  &  Hornberger  1993).  Alternativ  bieten  sich  parameterarme,  globale  („lumped- 
parameter“)  Niederschlags-  Abfluss-Modelle  (N-A-Modelle)  an.  Diese  Modelle  finden  ihre  
primäre     Verwendung,        um    Niederschlagsereignisse          und    deren    Auswirkungen         auf   das  
Abflussverhalten von Oberflächengewässern abbilden zu können (Perrin et al. 2001, Mouelhi  
et al. 2006), sind aber auch für Karstsysteme von Interesse, da meist die räumliche Lage und  
Geometrie der hochdurchlässigen Karsthohlräume und  deren Interaktion mit der geklüfteten  
Gesteinsmatrix  nur  unzureichend  bekannt  sind  (Rehrl  &  Birk  2010).  Es  wird  zwar  das  
(teilweise) Fehlen des physikalischen Hintergrundes dieser Modelle beanstandet (Abbott et al.  
1986), zugleich aber auch eingesehen, dass eine für physikalisch-basierte distributive Modelle  
ausreichende  hydrogeologische  Charakterisierung  sehr  aufwendig  ist  und  selbst  dann  das  
Problem      besteht,    dass    die   gemessenen       kleinskaligen      Werte     in   effektive    Werte     der  
Modellzellen umgerechnet werden müssen (z. B. Gupta et al. 2005). Ein distributives Modell  
wäre kaum eindeutig zu kalibrieren bzw. validieren, da es zu viele Unbekannte gibt, die aus  
dem Informationsgehalt von Niederschlag, Temperatur und Abfluss alleine nicht eindeutig zu  
bestimmen sind. Selbst globale Modelle leiden unter dem Prinzip der Zielgleichheit (Beven  
1993). Modellansätze mit einer geringen Anzahl an Parametern können jedoch auf effiziente  
Art und Weise die Transformation von Niederschlag zu Abfluss abbilden (Perrin et al. 2001).  
Nach  der  Kalibrierung  und  Validierung  solcher  Modelle  können  die  Parameterwerte  im  
Hinblick  auf  die  physikalische  Relevanz  interpretiert  werden  und  somit  potenziell  einen  
Beitrag zur Charakterisierung des Einzugsgebietes leisten (Mouelhi et al. 2006). In Bezug auf  
die  Anwendung  in  Karsteinzugsgebieten  kommen  Jeannin  &  Sauter  (1998)  jedoch  zur  
Erkenntnis,  dass  globale  Modelle  zwar  zum  besseren  Verständnis  der  Karst-Hydrodynamik  
beitragen  können  und  zur  Interpolation  (Lücken  füllen)  und  Extrapolation  (Prognose)  von  
Abflüssen   nützlich   sind,   jedoch   wenig   zur   Charakterisierung   des   Quelleinzugsgebietes  
geeignet  sind.  Globale  N-A-Modelle  zum  besseren  Verständnis  bzw.  zur  Charakterisierung  
von Karst-Grundwassersystemen konnten jedoch mehrfach erfolgreich eingesetzt werden (z.  
B.  Fleury  et  al.  2007,  Geyer  et  al.  2008,  Butscher  &  Huggenberger  2008,  Hartmann  et  al.  
2012).  Am  Beispiel  des  binären  Lurbach-Karstsystems  soll  hier  diskutiert  werden,  ob  ein  
parameterarmes N-A-Modell für Prognosezwecke herangezogen werden kann und inwieweit  
es helfen kann, das konzeptionelle Verständnis des Karstgrundwasserleiters zu verbessern und  
damit zur Charakterisierung des Quelleinzugsgebietes beizutragen. Von besonderem Interesse  
ist,  inwieweit      eine    augenscheinlich       abrupte     Änderung       der   Abflusscharakteristik        der  
untersuchten   Quelle   nach   einem      Hochwasserereignis                durch   das   verwendete   Modell  
nachvollzogen werden kann.  
                                       

                                                         76  
  

----------------------- Page 77-----------------------

2. Das Lurbach-System  
  
Das Lurbach-System (LBS) ist ein binäres Karstsystem (d. h. Oberflächenabfluss aus einem  
nicht  verkarsteten  Teil  des  Einzugsgebietes  speist  über  Schlucklöcher  das  Karstsystem)  im  
Mittelsteirischen Karst des Grazer Paläozoikums etwa 15 km nördlich von Graz (Österreich;  
                                                                                                                                 2 
Abb. 1). Das Gebiet kann generell in das stark verkarstete Tannebenkarstplateau (~8 km ) und  
                                                                                    2 
das  geringer  durchlässige  Semriacher  Becken  (~15  km )  eingeteilt  werden  (Behrens  et  al.  
1992). Das Semriacher Becken wird vom Lurbach (Abb. 1) in westlicher Richtung entwässert.   
  

                                                                                                                                             
Abb. 1  Das Lurbachsystem.  (a) Geologische Karte (basierend auf Geologische Bundesanstalt 2005; Blatt 164- 
Graz). Rotes Polygon: Karststock der Tanneben; gelbes Polygon: Einzugsgebiet des Lurbaches. Rot gestrichelte  
Linie: Hammerbach- und Schmelzbach-Aquifer bei Niedrigwasser (schematisch).  (b) Die Peggauer Wand bzw.  
der   Westabfall   des   Tannebenmassivs   gesehen   vom   Gamskogel   (859   m   Seehöhe)   aus.                       (c)   Lage   des  
Mittelsteirischen Karsts und des Lurbachsystems (LBS) (modifiziert nach Schubert 2003).  

  
                                              

                                                                    77  
  

----------------------- Page 78-----------------------

Der  Lurbach  verliert  nach  Übertreten  der  Schiefer-Kalk-Grenze  Wasser  in  den  Untergrund,  
bis er kurz nach dem Eintritt in die Lurgrotte in einem nicht weiter begehbaren Abschnitt zur  
Gänze  verschwindet.  Die  Verbindungen  zwischen  Lurbachschwinde  und  den  Quellen  des  
Hammerbaches  und  des  Schmelzbaches  (HB  u.  SB;  Abb.  1)  auf  der  westlichen  Seite  des  
Tannebenstocks  sind  durch  Markierungsversuche  bestätigt  (Behrens  et  al.  1992,  Oswald  
2009).  Die  Hammerbachquelle  stellt  unter  Niedrigwasserbedingungen  den  einzigen  Austritt  
                                                                                                                    2 
des versickernden Lurbachwassers dar. Ihr Einzugsgebiet umfasst etwas weniger als 20 km   
(Abb. 1a). Erst bei stärkerer Wasserführung der Hammerbachquelle (~200 l/s; Behrens et al.  
 1992)  wird  ein  anteilhafter  Austritt  von  Lurbachwasser  am  Schmelzbach  beobachtet.  Bei  
Starkniederschlägen kann zeitweise auch das Höhlensystem der Lurgrotte selbst als Fließweg  
genutzt werden. Aufgrund speläologischer Untersuchungen ist bekannt, dass diese Bereiche  
des  LBS  durch  ein  mehrstufiges  Höhlensystem  charakterisiert  sind  (Behrens  et  al.  1992,  
Wagner et al. 2010). Im Detail sind die Fließwege zwischen Lurbach und Hammerbachquelle  
nicht  bekannt  (erste  Ansätze  siehe  Kübeck  et  al.  20 13),  jedoch  sind  hochdurchlässige,  
phreatische Röhrensysteme anzunehmen.  
  
Für     das    Gesamteinzugsgebiet           liegen     langjährige      Datensätze       der    Schüttung       der  
Hammerbachquelle sowie Niederschlag und Lufttemperatur im Gebiet vor. Abflussdaten des  
Lurbaches (LBP – Lurbach-Pegel; LBH – Lurbach-Höhle) sowie des Schmelzbaches liegen  
nur  für  kurze  Zeiträume  vor.  Eine  Niederschlagsstation  befindet  sich  in  der  Ortschaft  
Semriach und einige weitere in unmittelbarer Nähe des Einzugsgebietes. Eine innerhalb des  
Einzugsgebiets auf dem Tannebenplateau bei der Ertlhube (Abb. 1) gelegene Station wurde  
aufgrund großer Datenlücken nicht berücksichtigt. Ferner sind auch keine Grundwasserstände  
bekannt, da im Gesamteinzugsgebiet keine verwertbaren Bohrungen vorhanden sind. Folglich  
steht für das N-A-Modell nur die Schüttung der Hammerbachquelle sowie Niederschlag und  
Lufttemperatur  zur  Verfügung.  Im  Untersuchungsgebiet  sind  im  Zeitbereich  der  Analyse  
(1998–2009)  keine  wesentlichen  Änderungen  der  Landnutzung  oder  Bodenbeschaffenheit  
bekannt. Eine Sedimentsperre oberhalb der Lurgrotte wird jedoch gelegentlich ausgebaggert  
und kann somit die Versickerung entlang des Lurbaches beeinflussen. Der verkarstete Bereich  
des Tannebenmassivs ist dicht bewaldet und ein Großteil des Semriacher Beckens dient seit  
jeher  der  landwirtschaftlichen  Nutzung.  Schnee  hat  in  diesem  Einzugsgebiet  aufgrund  der  
geringen und kurzzeitigen Schneedecke zwar nur eine untergeordnete Bedeutung, jedoch sind  
Schneeschmelzereignisse im Frühjahr ausgeprägt genug, um diese mit zu berücksichtigen.  
  
3. Niederschlags-Abfluss-Modellierung  
  
Das     konzeptionelle,       globale     N-A-Modell        GR2M        (Mouelhi      et   al.   2006)     ist   ein  
Wasserbilanzmodell  mit  monatlichem  Zeitschritt.  Das  Modell  benötigt  Niederschlag  und  
potenzielle      Evapotranspiration         (PET)      als   Eingangsgrößen          sowie     eine     gemessene  
Abflussganglinie für die Modellkalibrierung. Da nur Niederschlag und Lufttemperatur direkt  
zur  Verfügung  stehen,  wurde  die  PET  nach  Oudin  et  al.  (2005)  berechnet.  Hierbei  gehen  
neben   der   Lufttemperatur   auch   die   geographische   Lage   des   Einzugsgebietes   und   die  
Jahreszeit mit ein (um die extraterrestrische Sonnenstrahlung zu berechnen). Um die Effekte  
von  festem  Niederschlag,  Schneespeicherung  und  Schneeschmelze  aufgrund  sich  ändernder  

                                                         78  
  

----------------------- Page 79-----------------------

Lufttemperatur zu berücksichtigen, wurde ein Schneemodell nach Xu et al. (1996) verwendet.  
Somit      werden       die    PET     und     die    Schneespeicherung            entsprechend        der    bestehenden  
Datengrundlage  nur  mithilfe  der  Lufttemperatur  beschrieben.  Dieser  vereinfachende  Ansatz  
ist  gerade  bei  nur  eingeschränkt  vorhandenen  Messdaten  etwa  in  alpinen  Einzugsgebieten  
interessant.   
  

                                                                                                     
Abb. 2  Schematische Darstellung des N-A-Modells. T, P = gemessene Temperatur und Niederschlagshöhe; E =  
aktuelle  Evapotranspiration;  Re  =  extraterrestrische  Sonnenstrahlung;  Qsim  =  simulierte  Abflusshöhe.  Zwei  
Parameter  für das Schneemodell (Ts und  Tm), einer  für die Kapazität des Bodenspeichers (X 1), einer für den  
Austausch   mit   benachbarten   Einzugsgebieten   (X 5).   Die   Kapazität   des   Gebietsspeichers   (X 4)   und   der  
Perkolationskoeffizient      des   Bodenspeichers      (X 2)   sind   im   Standardmodell       konstant.   In   zusätzlichen  
Modellrechnungen wurden diese teils als freie Parameter verwendet (siehe Tab. 1).  

  
Abbildung  2  zeigt  schematisch  die  verwendete  Modellstruktur.  Es  werden  die  Prozesse  
Schneespeicherung und Schneeschmelze, Evapotranspiration, Boden- und Gebietsspeicherung  
sowie      der     Wasseraustausch           mit    benachbarten         Einzugsgebieten           berücksichtigt.        Das  
Standardmodell  (4Pb;  Tab.  1)  kommt  mit  nur  4  freien  Parametern  aus.  Die  Kapazität  des  
Bodenspeichers (X 1 [mm]; „production store“) sowie der Austauschkoeffizient (X 5 [–]), der  
Ab- (X 5 < 1) oder Zufluss (X 5 > 1) aus bzw. von benachbarten Einzugsgebieten erlaubt, sind  
die zwei freien Parameter des N-A-Modells. Le Moine et al. (2007) konnten zeigen, dass die  
Verwendung  eines  Austauschterms  in  Wasserbilanzmodellen  eine  wichtige  Rolle  spielt.  
Insbesondere          in    Karstgebieten          ist    eine     hydraulische         Wechselwirkung            zwischen  
Einzugsgebieten von großem Interesse. Im Falle des  Lurbachsystems ist diese Funktionalität  
wohl wichtig, da ein Überlauf vom Hammerbach-zum Schmelzbachsystem bekannt ist. Der  
Perkolationskoeffizient des Bodenspeichers (X 2 [–]) und die Kapazität des Gebietsspeichers  
(X4  [mm],  „routing  store“)  wurden  zunächst  wie  in  Mouelhi  et  al.  (2006)  vorgeschlagen  
konstant gehalten (3 bzw. 60 mm). Durch das Schneemodell kommen als zwei weitere freie  

                                                              79  
  

----------------------- Page 80-----------------------

Parameter die Schwellwerttemperaturen für die Trennung von Regen und Schneefall  Ts [◦C]  
und  der  Beginn  der  Schneeschmelze  Tm  [◦C]  hinzu.  Um  zu  untersuchen  inwieweit  die  
verschiedenen Parameter bzw. die durch sie repräsentierten Komponenten des Karstsystems  
einen  Einfluss  auf  die  Güte  der  Modellanpassung  und  die  Prognosefähigkeit  des  Modells  
haben,  wurden  ergänzend  zu  diesem  Standardmodell  (4Pb)  Varianten  mit  2  bis  6  freien  
Parametern  getestet  (Tab.  1).  Die  Niederschlagszeitreihe  für  die  Modellierung  wurde  durch  
arithmetische Mittelung aus 6 Stationen in der Umgebung (Semriach und Eichberg (Abb. 1)  
sowie  Frohnleiten,  Gratkorn,  Schöckl  und  St.  Radegund)  erhalten,  da  einzelne  Stationen  
lückenhafte  Datensätze  haben  und  weil  lokal  ausgeprägte  Niederschläge  von  einzelnen  
Stationen nicht immer erfasst werden. Temperaturdaten standen nur von der Station Eichberg  
auf  der  Murwestseite  (Abb.  1;  610  m  Seehöhe)  für  den  Zeitraum  von  1998–2009  zur  
Verfügung. Da für diesen Zeitraum auch Abflussdaten des Hammerbachs mit nur kleineren  
Lücken  vorlagen,  wurde  die  N-A-Modellierung  für  diesen  Zeitraum  durchgeführt.  Die  
Modellkalibrierung erfolgte mithilfe des Solvers in Excel (Gradientenmethode).  
  

                                                                                                                             
Tab. 1 Übersicht der unterschiedlichen Modellvarianten und der jeweilig verwendeten freien Parameter.  

  
Um die Güte des simulierten Abflusses zu beurteilen, wurde das klassische Nash- Sutcliffe-  
(Nash  &  Sutcliffe  1970)  sowie  das  logarithmisch  und  quadratwurzeltransformierte  Nash- 
Sutcliffe-Effizienzkriterium   verwendet.   Die   Zeitreihen   wurden   auf   alle   drei   Kriterien  
gemeinsam  optimiert  um  alle  Bereiche  des  Quellhydrographen  (Basisabfluss,  Mittelwasser  
und Spitzenabfluss) gleichermaßen zu berücksichtigen (z. B. Perrin et al. 2001, Krause et al.  
2005, Oudin et al. 2006). Der Anschaulichkeit halber wurden die Werte der Effizienzkriterien  
gemittelt,  sodass  ein  Wertebereich  zwischen  −∞  und  100  %  entsteht.  Als  Nebenbedingung  
wurde  verlangt,  dass  jedes  einzelne  der  3  Kriterien  zumindest  60  %  erreichen  sollte.  
Zusätzlich        wurden        die      Abweichung           zwischen        simulierter        und       beobachteter  

                                                            80  
  

----------------------- Page 81-----------------------

Gesamtabflussmenge (Bias) und die Residuen der simulierten und beobachteten Einzelwerte  
berücksichtigt (hier nicht gezeigt). Die Modellkalibrierung und -validierung wurde nach dem  
Prinzip  des  „(differential)  split-sample  test“  (Klemes  1986)  durchgeführt,  d.  h.  es  wurden  
verschiedene  Zeitperioden  für  die  Kalibrierung  und  Validierung  definiert.  Es  wurden  drei  
Zeitabschnitte  gewählt,  die  ein  sehr  unterschiedliches  hydrologisches  Verhalten  zeigen,  
einerseits      eine      gegenüber        früheren      Aufzeichnungen           ungewöhnlich          gedämpfte  
Abflussdynamik  nach  einem  Hochwasserereignis  (September  2005  bis  Juni  2009)  und  
andererseits einen Zeitraum mit ausgeprägten Niedrigwasserperioden (Juli 2001 bis Juli 2005)  
sowie einen Zeitbereich, der eher unauffällig („normal“) erscheint (Juli 1998 bis Juli 2001).  
Zusätzlich wurde der Zeitraum von Juli 2000 bis Juli 2003 gesondert betrachtet, da dieser nur  
die  Niedrigwasserperioden  sowie  das  Trockenjahr  2003  beinhaltet  und  somit  eine  weitere  
Herausforderung  im  Hinblick  auf  die  Prognosefähigkeit  des  Modells  darstellt.  Ergänzend  
wurde für jede der oben genannten Kalibrierungsperioden auch die Anpassung an die gesamte  
Datenreihe (Juli 1998 bis Dezember 2009) betrachtet. Um geeignete Anfangsbedingungen zu  
schaffen,     wurden     die    Wasserstände       in   den    jeweiligen     Speichern      durch    mehrjährige  
Simulationsperioden (Aufwärmphasen) vor den zu analysierenden Zeiträumen eingestellt. Da  
Lufttemperaturdaten          erst    ab     1998      vorliegen,      wurden       für     die    Aufwärmphase  
Monatsmittelwerte der vorhandenen Zeitreihe verwendet.  
  
4. Ergebnisse  
  
Die    Kalibrierung      und     Validierung      des    Standardmodells        (4Pb)     an   unterschiedlichen  
Zeitfenstern  zeigt  generell  eine  zufriedenstellende  Übereinstimmung  bis  2005,  nicht  jedoch  
für die Zeit danach (Abb. 3 und Tab. 2). Je nach Zeitperiode erreicht das kalibrierte Modell  
Effizienzkriterien von 55 % bis 79 %, für den Zeitbereich 2005–2009 jedoch nur 28 %. Bei  
der Validierung ergeben sich in der Regel Effizienzkriterien von wenig unter 50 %, für den  
Zeitbereich  2005–2009  jedoch  stark  negative  Werte.  Entsprechend  ergeben  sich  auch  bei  
Anwendung  der  kalibrierten  Modelle  auf  die  ganze  Zeitreihe  (1998–2009)  etwas  geringere  
Effizienzkriterien  (12  %  bis  46  %).  Für  die  Periode  nach  dem  Niederschlagsereignis  vom  
August 2005 bis etwa Juni 2009 kann mit den für andere Zeitbereiche kalibrierten Modellen  
nicht  einmal  eine  minimal  zulässige  Übereinstimmung  (d.  h.  Werte  sind  deutlich  negativ)  
gefunden  werden  (Abb.  3;  Tab.  2).  Umgekehrt  ergibt  sich  mit  dem  Parametersatz  aus  der  
Kalibrierung       für   diesen     Zeitraum      bei    Validierung       in   anderen      Zeiträumen       keine  
zufriedenstellende Anpassung. Ebenso werden die geringen Abflüsse der Sommermonate Juli  
bis  September  des  Trockenjahrs  2003  vom  Modell  nicht  zutreffend  simuliert  (Abb.  3).  Die  
Niedrigwasserperioden  der  Jahre  2000  und  2001  werden  dagegen  recht  gut  vom  Modell  
nachvollzogen.  Betrachtet  man  die  optimalen  Parametersätze,  die  sich  für  die  jeweiligen  
Zeitbereiche ergeben (Tab. 2), so fällt auf, dass die Kapazität des Bodenspeichers (X 1) und  
der   Austauschkoeffizient   (X 5)   für   den   Zeitbereich   2005–2009   gegenüber   den   anderen  
Perioden  deutlich  erhöht  bzw.  erniedrigt  sind.  Im  vorliegenden  Fall  mit  X 5  <  1  zeigen  
erniedrigte  Werte  des  Austauschkoeffizienten  einen  zunehmenden  Abfluss  in  ein  anderes  
Einzugsgebiet        an.   Effizienzkriterien       und     Parametersätze        von    Modellvarianten         mit  
unterschiedlich gewählten freien Parametern sind ebenfalls in Tabelle 2 aufgelistet. Generell  
ist  festzustellen,  dass  mit  keiner  Modellvariante  eine  zufriedenstellende  Simulation  der  

                                                         81  
  

----------------------- Page 82-----------------------

ganzen Zeitreihe möglich ist; die Periode 2005–2009 wird nicht zufriedenstellend simuliert,  
wenn  das  Modell  auf  andere  Zeiträume  kalibriert  wird,  und  ein  auf  diese  Zeitperiode  
kalibriertes  Modell  versagt  bei  Anwendung  auf  andere  Zeiträume.  Beispielhaft  sind  in  
Abbildung  4  die  simulierten  Quellschüttungen  der  unterschiedlichen  Modelle  im  Vergleich  
zur  Beobachtung  durch  Kalibrierung  auf  die  Zeitreihe  2001–2005  dargestellt.  Wird  das  
Schneemodell          weggelassen        (Modellvariante         „2P“),     ergeben      sich   keine     grundlegenden  
Verschlechterungen            bei    den     Effizienzkriterien.         Dies     lässt     darauf     schließen,       dass  
Schneespeicherung und -schmelze zumindest für das Monatsmodell an diesem Standort nicht  
sehr  wichtig  sind.  Bei  Anwendung  in  stärker  alpinen  Bereichen  (z.  B.  Wagner  et  al.  2012)  
sind diese Prozesse jedoch auch im Monatsmodell von hoher Bedeutung.  
  

                                                                                                                                
Abb. 3 Beobachtete und simulierte Abflussganglinien der Hammerbachquelle sowie Niederschlagssummen und  
Temperaturen repräsentativ für das Einzugsgebiet auf Monatsbasis. Die Farbe der Zeitbalken entspricht jener der  
simulierten Ganglinie, die bei Kalibrierung im entsprechenden Zeitraum erhalten wird (s. Abb. 4).  

  
Eine  wesentliche  Verschlechterung  der  Effizienzkriterien  ist  hingegen  sowohl  beim  3- 
Parameter-Modell  (3P)  als  auch  beim  4-Parameter-Modell  ohne  Austauschterm  (4Pa)  zu  
beobachten.  Lediglich  in  den  Zeiträumen,  die  durch  Niedrigwasserperioden  geprägt  sind  
(2001–2005 bzw. 2000– 2003) erreichen diese Modellvarianten Effizienz-Kriterien von über  
50  %.  Bei  der  Kalibrierung  oder  Validierung  in  anderen  Zeiträumen  erweisen  sich  die  
Varianten  ohne  Austauschterm  dagegen  als  ungenügend.  Im  Zeitraum  des  gedämpften  
Verhaltens  sind  selbst  beim  Kalibrieren  stark  negative  Effizienzkriterien  und  damit  ein  
Versagen des Modells zu beobachten. Somit scheint in dieser Periode der Austauschterm von  
großer Bedeutung zu sein. Verwendet man im 4-Parameter-Modell (P4c) statt der Kapazität  
des  Bodenspeichers  die  des  Gebietsspeichers  (X 4  statt  X 1),  so  ergeben  sich  vergleichbare  
Effizienzkriterien  (Tab.  2).  Auch  hier  zeigt  sich  die  Notwendigkeit  einer  starken  Erhöhung  

                                                             82  
  

----------------------- Page 83-----------------------

des  (Gebiets-)  Speichers,  um  das  gedämpfte  Verhalten  in  den  Jahren  2005  bis  2009  zu  
reproduzieren.   In   beiden   Modellvarianten   (4Pb   und   4Pc)   gibt   es   jeweils   einen   freien  
Parameter, der die Speicherung beeinflusst, und  in  beiden ist eine Erhöhung der jeweiligen  
Speicherkapazität (im Standardmodell X 1 und in der Modellvariante 4Pc X4) notwendig, um  
das  Modell  im  Zeitbereich  2005–2009  zu  kalibrieren.  Dies  legt  den  Schluss  nahe,  dass  in  
dieser  Zeit  das  Speichervermögen  im  Quelleinzugsgebiet  erhöht  war,  erlaubt  jedoch  keine  
eindeutigen Schlüsse in Bezug auf die Art des sich ändernden Speichers. Wird die Kapazität  
des  Gebietsspeichers  (X4)  zusätzlich  zu  den  anderen  vier  freien  Parametern  angepasst,  so  
ergibt sich eine geringe Verbesserung der Effizienzkriterien beim Kalibrieren, aber teilweise  
ein  leichter  Rückgang  beim  Validieren.  In  Übereinstimmung  mit  den  Ergebnissen  von  
Mouelhi et al. (2006) erweist sich ein zusätzlicher (fünfter) freier Parameter hier demnach als  
kaum  gerechtfertigt.  Auch mit diesem Modellansatz (5P) ist deutlich zu erkennen, dass der  
Austausch  und  die  Kapazität  des  Bodenspeichers  in  der  Periode  von  2005  bis  2009  erhöht  
werden müssen. Die zusätzliche Anpassung des Perkolationskoeffizienten des Bodenspeichers  
(X 2) im 6-Parameter-Modell (6P) verbessert die Güte der Kalibrierung weiter. X 2 schwankt  
jedoch nur wenig und der Anstieg der Effizienzkriterien bei der Validierung ist nur gering;  
teilweise  sind  sogar  geringere  Effizienzkriterien  als  bei  Modellvarianten  mit  weniger  freien  
Parametern zu beobachten, was auf eine Überparametrisierung hinweist (Beven 1989, Perrin  
et al. 2003). Auch hier sind wieder gegenüber den anderen Zeitperioden eine Erhöhung der  
Kapazität  des  Bodenspeichers  und  eine  Erniedrigung  des  Austauschkoeffizienten  in  der  
Periode 2005–2009 erforderlich.  
  

                                                           83  
  

----------------------- Page 84-----------------------

                                                                                                                                       
Tab.  2  Mittelwert  der  drei  Nash-Sutcliffe-Effizienzkriterien  (in  %)  des  N-A-Modells  für  die  jeweiligen  
Zeitbereiche in denen das Modell kalibriert bzw. validiert wurde (siehe Abb. 3). Die Zahl in der Mitte jeder Box  
bezieht    sich   auf   das   Standardmodell       („4Pb“).    Die   umliegenden      kleineren     Zahlen    beziehen    sich   auf  
unterschiedliche  Modellvarianten  (Tab.  1)  entsprechend  der  Legende.  Der  untere  Teil  der  Tabelle  listet  die  
kalibrierten Modellparameter der einzelnen Perioden bzw. Modellvarianten auf.  

  
5. Diskussion  
  
Der  hier  verwendete  globale  Modellansatz  liefert  selbst  mit  nur  zwei  freien  Parametern  
akzeptable  Effizienzkriterien  bei  der  Modellkalibrierung.  Angesichts  der  Komplexität  des  
betrachteten  binären  Karstsystems  erweist  sich  das  Modell  auch  bei  der  Validierung  im  
Zeitraum        bis    2005      als   zufrieden       stellend      und     erscheint      daher      für   Prognosezwecke  
grundsätzlich  geeignet.  Unabhängig  von  der  Zahl  der  kalibrierten  Modellparameter  wird  
jedoch die Niedrigwasserperiode im Jahr 2003 nicht  zutreffend simuliert, selbst wenn sie in  
den  für  die  Kalibrierung  verwendeten  Zeitraum  (2001–2005)  fällt  (Abb.  4).  Dies  legt  den  
Schluss nahe, dass die vereinfachte Abbildung der Abflussbildungsprozesse in der gegebenen  
Modellstruktur          für    zuverlässige        Prognosen         sommerlicher          Niedrigwasserperioden              nicht  
ausreicht, sodass hier der Ansatz von instationären Modellparametern, die sich z. B. zwischen  
trockenen und feuchten Jahren unterscheiden können, notwendig erscheint (Long & Mahler  
2013).  
  

                                                                 84  
  

----------------------- Page 85-----------------------

                                                                                                                           
Abb. 4 Beobachtete und simulierte Abflussganglinien der Hammerbachquelle bei Kalibrierung auf den Zeitraum  
2001–2005 unter Verwendung der unterschiedlichen Modellvarianten (Tab. 1).  

  
Aus den zuvor erwähnten Markierungsversuchen (Behrens et al. 1992) ist bekannt, dass sich  
die  unterirdischen  Abflussverhältnisse  in  diesem  Karstsystem  bei  Niedrigwassersituationen  
gegenüber Mittel- oder Hochwassersituationen stark unterscheiden. In Übereinstimmung mit  
der  Beobachtung,  dass  bei  Niedrigwasser  keine  Verbindung  zwischen  Hammerbach  und  
Schmelzbach          besteht,     ergibt    sich     bei    Kalibrierung       mit     dem     durch      ausgeprägte  
Niedrigwassersituationen gekennzeichneten  Zeitraum  2000–2003 der höchste Werte für den  
Austauschkoeffizienten und damit der geringste Wasseraustausch im Modell. Aus demselben  
Grund ist in diesem (und nur in diesem) Zeitraum auch die Kalibrierung von Modellvarianten  
ohne  Austausch  (X 5  =  1)  erfolgreich.  Der  in  anderen  Zeiträumen  stärkere  Abfluss  vom  
Hammerbach   ins   Schmelzbacheinzugsgebiet                    kann   von   diesen   Modellen   jedoch   nicht  
nachgebildet  werden.  Umgekehrt  gelingt  die  Simulation  der  Niedrigwasserperioden  mit  
geringem  oder  ohne  Wasseraustausch  nur  bedingt,  wenn  im  Kalibrierungszeitraum  eher  
Mittel-  oder  Hochwassersituationen  vorherrschen.  Der  Einbau  eines  Schwellwertes,  nach  
dessen Überschreiten der Austausch erst aktiv wird, brachte keine Verbesserung des Modells.  
Offenbar      kann     ein    Monatsmodell         aufgrund      der   hohen      kurzzeitigen      Variabilität     der  
Quellschüttung  dieses  Schwellenwertverhalten  nicht  zutreffend  abbilden.  Bei  Verwendung  
einer  höheren  zeitlichen  Auflösung  (Tagesmodell)  wäre  dieser  Ansatz  aber  vermutlich  
vielversprechend. Im Gegensatz zu den akzeptablen Simulationsergebnissen für den Zeitraum  
bis 2005, versagt das Modell im Zeitraum 2005–2009. Selbst bei der Kalibrierung liegen die  
Effizienzkriterien   allerModellvarianten   deutlich   unter   50%und   bei   der   Validierung   mit  
anderen Zeiträumen ergeben sich stark negative Effizienzkriterien. Der Austauschkoeffizient  
X 5 ist für diesen Zeitraum kleiner als bei allen anderen Kalibrierungsperioden (Tab. 2). Das  

                                                           85  
  

----------------------- Page 86-----------------------

bedeutet,     dass     in   diesem      Zeitraum       ein   größerer      Abfluss      vom     Hammerbach-          zum  
Schmelzbachsystem angenommen werden muss.   
  

                                                                                                                             
Abb. 5  Feldeindrücke der befahrbaren Teile der Lurgrotte.  (a) Sedimentumlagerungen im Schauhöhlenbereich  
der Lurgrotte, Sept. 2008. (b) Aktives Gerinne des SB-Höhlenbaches bei erhöhter Wasserführung, Juli 2012. (c)  
Beschädigte Führungssteige in der Lurgrotte 2008.  (d) Sedimentablagerungen beim Schmelzbachursprung nach  
einem Hochwasser im Juni 2012.  (e) Zerstörter Führungssteig im Bereich Blocksberg nach einem Hochwasser  
im August 2009. (f) Mit Sediment verlegte ehemals phreatische Gänge im Tannebenmassiv (Josefinenhöhle; 425  
m), vermutlich pleistozänen Alters, November 2008.  
  
Dies  ist  mit  Feldbeobachtungen  konsistent.  Während  eines  Markierungsversuchs  im  Jahre  
2008  (Oswald  2009,  Wagner  et  al.  2011)  konnte  gezeigt  werden,  dass  der  Überlauf  ins  
Schmelzbachsystem   bereits   bei   einem   gegenüber   früheren   Untersuchungen   geringeren  
Abfluss   des   Hammerbachs   stattfand   (etwa   135   l/s   statt   200   l/s)   und   gleichzeitig   der  
Markierungsstoff verhältnismäßig lange Durchgangszeiten aufwies (> 60 h gegenüber < 40 h  
bei vergleichbarem Abfluss in früheren Untersuchungen). Gleichzeitig ist in diesem Zeitraum  
im Modell eine Erhöhung der Speicherung erforderlich, um das gedämpfte Auslaufverhalten  
der Hammerbachquelle zu ermöglichen. Dies wirft die Frage auf, ob und welche Vorgänge im  
Hammerbachsystem  zu  einer  Vergrößerung  der  Speicherkapazität  und  einem  Überlauf  ins  
Schmelzbachsystem  bei  gegenüber  früheren  Beobachtungen  geringeren  Abflüssen  geführt  
haben  könnte.  In  diesem  Zusammenhang  ist  festzuhalten,  dass  das  Abflussverhalten  des  
Hammerbachs ab Ende 2009 anscheinend wieder sprunghafter wird (Abb. 3). Angesichts der  
in   den     begehbaren       Teilen     der    Höhle      nach    größeren       Flutereignissen       beobachtbaren  
Sedimentumlagerungen (Abb. 5) liegt es nahe, diese Reversibilität durch ähnliche Vorgänge  
im Hammerbachsystem zu erklären. Wie von Covington et al. (2009, 2012) gezeigt, sind etwa  
durch  Sedimentablagerungen  geschaffene  Engstellen  plausible  geometrische  Strukturen,  um  
ein gedämpftes Verhalten einer Quelle zu verursachen. Solche Verengungen würden zudem  
einen  Anstieg  des  Wasserspiegels  oberstromig  bewirken  und  somit  einen  Überlauf  in  das  
benachbarte Schmelzbachsystem bereits bei geringerem Abfluss des Hammerbachs und damit  
den  erhöhten  Austauschfluss  im Modell  im  Zeitraum  2005–  2009  erklären.  Die  Hypothese,  
dass     das    gedämpfte       Abflussverhalten          des    Hammerbachs          durch      Veränderungen          im  

                                                            86  
  

----------------------- Page 87-----------------------

Karstsystem  und  nicht  durch  unterschiedliche  Witterungsbedingungen  verursacht  ist,  wird  
durch  die  Auswertung  von  Trockenwetterfalllinien  in  den  unterschiedlichen  Zeiträumen  
gestützt: Vor 2005 zeigt sich generell ein rascheres Auslaufen mit geringeren Basisabflüssen  
der   Hammerbachquelle   als   im   Zeitraum   2005–2009   (Birk   &Wagner   2011).   Da   das  
Auslaufverhalten        von    Quellen      in   Trockenperioden        primär     durch    die    hydraulischen  
Eigenschaften   des   Grundwasserleiters   bestimmt   wird,   liegt   es   nahe,   dies   strukturellen  
Änderungen  im  System  selbst  zuzuschreiben  (Kresic  &  Bonacci  2010,  S.  134).  Sollte  die  
beobachtete Veränderung des Abflussverhaltens der Hammerbachquelle tatsächlich aufgrund  
von   Sedimentumlagerungen   und   damit   verbundene   Änderungen   in   den   hydraulischen  
Eigenschaften des Karstgrundwasserleiters verursacht sein, so ist es nicht verwunderlich, dass  
die  Kalibrierung  in  diesem  Zeitraum  stark  veränderte  Parameter  ergibt.  Ein  ähnliches  
Ergebnis  wäre  dann  allerdings  auch  für  physikalisch-basierte  Modelle  zu  erwarten.  In  
Modellszenarien  mit  MODFLOW  kann  eine  derartige  Veränderung  des  Abflussverhaltens  
beispielsweise   durch   Herabsetzung   der   hydraulischen   Leitfähigkeit   und   Erhöhung   des  
Speicherkoeffizienten   von   Modellzellen,   die   den   hochdurchlässigen   Fließweg   von   der  
Lurbachschwinde  zum  Hammerbach  repräsentieren,  bewirkt  werden  (Mayaud  et  al.  2013).  
Bis dato werden nach Kenntnis der Autoren allerdings in keinem physikalisch-basierten N-A- 
Modell durch Sedimenttransport und -ablagerung bedingte Änderungen in Fließquerschnitten  
(bis  hin  zu  möglichen  Verstopfungen  von  Fließwegen)  berücksichtigt  (erste  Ansätze  siehe  
Covington et al. 2010).  
  
6. Schlussfolgerungen  
  
Zusammenfassend  kann  festgestellt  werden,  dass  ein  parameterarmes  N-A-Modell  zwar  die  
Quellschüttung des Hammerbaches bis 2005 simulieren kann, nicht aber im Zeit raum 2005  
bis  2009.  Nur  durch  Verwendung  anderer  Parameterwerte  kann  in  diesem  Zeitraum  eine  
minimal        akzeptable        Übereinstimmung           gefunden        werden.        Die      erforderlichen  
Parameteränderungen  sind  jedoch  konzeptionell  in  Übereinstimmung  mit  Ergebnissen  aus  
Markierungsversuchen           und    Auswertungen        von    Trockenwetterfalllinien,        die   in  diesem  
Zeitraum  auf  einen  gegenüber  früheren  Zeiten  erhöhten  Speicher  und  einen  häufigeren  
Überlauf        zum       Schmelzbach          hindeuten.        Als      mögliche        Ursache        kommen  
Sedimentumlagerungen  während  des  Hochwasserereignisses  im  Sommer  2005  in  Frage.  
Durch     derartige     Prozesse     verursachte      Parameteränderungen          stellen   zwangsläufig       die  
Prognosefähigkeit   hydrologischer   Modelle   in  Frage.   Insofern   zeigt   sich,   dass   die   hier  
offenkundige        Dynamik         von     Karstsystemen         große      Herausforderungen          bezüglich  
hydrologischer   Prognosen   stellt.   Das   hier   vorgestellte   Beispiel   zeigt   jedoch,   dass   die  
Anwendung         des   konzeptionellen       hydrologischen       Modells     wertvolle     Rückschlüsse       auf  
Abflussprozesse und Eigenschaften im Karstsystem erlaubt und damit zur hydrogeologischen  
Charakterisierung        des   Quelleinzugsgebietes         beiträgt.    Die    aus   der   Modellkalibrierung  
erhaltenen Parameterwerte haben zwar keine unmittelbare physikalische Bedeutung, können  
jedoch im Sinne konzeptioneller Modellvorstellung i nterpretiert werden und tragen damit zu  
einem  besseren  Prozessverständnis  bei.  Die  untersuchten  Modellvarianten  zeigen  eine  in  
diesem  Quelleinzugsgebiet  untergeordnete  Rolle  der  Schneespeicherung.  Dagegen  wird  das  
Abflussverhalten  der  Quelle  bei  Mittel-  und  Hochwasserbedingungen  stark  vom  Überlauf  

                                                         87  
  

----------------------- Page 88-----------------------

zum      benachbarten        Einzugsgebiet        beeinflusst.      Im     vorliegenden        Fall     können      die  
Modellergebnisse zudem dahingehend bewertet werden, dass die beobachtete Veränderung im  
Abflussverhalten   nicht   primär   auf   Änderungen   der   meteorologischen   Eingangsgrößen,  
sondern auf Änderungen im Karstsystem (erhöhte Speichereigenschaften, verstärkter Überlauf  
zum benachbarten Einzugsgebiet) selbst zurückzuführen sind.   
  
Danksagung  
  
Die  Daten  wurden  vom  Hydrographischen  Dienst  Steiermark  zur  Verfügung  gestellt.  Dem  
Team  der  Lurgrotte  Peggau  sei  für  die  gute  Zusammenarbeit  herzlich  gedankt.  Wir  danken  
dem  Land  Steiermark  (Fachabteilung  GIS-Steiermark)  für  die  Bereitstellung  der  digitalen  
geologischen Karte sowie des zugrunde liegenden Höhenmodells. Diese Arbeit wurde von der  
Österreichischen  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  ÖAW  (Projekt:  Global  models  of  spring  
catchments) und dem Austrian Science Fund (FWF): L 576-N21 finanziell unterstützt.  
  
Literatur  
  
Abbott, M.B., Bathurst, J.C., Cunge, J.A., O’Connell, P.E., Rasmussen, J.: An introduction to  
         the  European  hydrological  system—systeme  hydrologique  europeen,  “SHE”,  1_:  
         history and philosophy of a physically-based, distributed modelling system. J. Hydrol.  
          87, 45–59 (1986)  

Behrens,  H.,  Benischke,  R.,  Bricelj,  M.,  Harum,  T.,  Käss,  W.,  Kosi,  G.,  Leditzky,  H.P.,  
         Leibundgut,  C.,  Maloszewski,  P.,  Maurin,  V.,  Rajner,  V.,  Rank,  D.,  Reichert,  B.,  
          Stadler,  H.,  Stichler,  W.,  Trimborn,  P.,  Zojer,  H.,  Zupan,  M.:  Investigations  with  
         natural  and  artificial  tracers  in  the  karst  aquifer  of  the  Lurbach  system  (Peggau-  
         Tanneben-Semriach. Austria Steir. Beitr. Hydrogeol. 43, 9–158 (1992)  

Beven,  K.:  Changing  ideas  in  hydrology—the  case  of  physically  based  models.  J.  Hydrol.  
          105, 157–172 (1989)  

Beven,  K.:  Prophecy,  reality  and  uncertainty  in  distributed  hydrological  modelling.  Adv.  
         Water Resour. 16, 41–51 (1993)  

Birk,  S.,  Wagner,  T.:  New  directions  in  the  application  of  hydrograph  recession  models  to  
         karst  aquifers,  IAMG  2011  Publication  (2011).  In:  Proc.  IAMG  2011  Conference,  
          Salzburg, September 5–9, 2011. doi:10.5242/iamg.2011.0261  

Butscher, C., Huggenberger, P.: Intrinsic vulnerability assessment in karst areas: a numerical  
         modelling approach. Water Resour. Res. 44, W03408 (2008)  

Covington, M.D., Wicks, C.M., Saar, M.O.: A dimensionless number describing the effects of  
         recharge and geometry on discharge from simple karstic aquifers. Water Resour. Res.  
         45, W11410 (2009). doi:10.1029/2009WR008004  

                                                           88  
  

----------------------- Page 89-----------------------

Covington, M.D., Luhmann, A.J., Wicks, C., Saar, M.O.: Process length scales: a conceptual  
         tool  for  karst  hydrogeology,  geomorphology,  and  hydroecology.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.  
         Abstracts Programs 42(5), 329 (2010)  

Covington, M.D., Banwell, A.F., Gulley, J., Saar, M.O., Willis, I., Wicks, C.M.: Quantifying  
         the effects of glacier conduit geometry and recharge on proglacial hydrograph form. J.  
         Hydrol. 414–415, 59–71 (2012)  

Fleury, P., Plagnes, V., Bakalowicz, M.: Modelling of the functioning of karst aquifers with a  
         reservoir model: application to fontaine de vaucluse (South of France). J. Hydrol. 345,  
         38–49 (2007)  

Bundesanstalt,  G.:  Provisorische  Geologische  Karte  der  Republik  Österreich,  164–Graz.  –  
         Geofast 1:50.000. Wien, Geologische Bundesanstalt (2005)  

Geyer, T., Birk, S., Liedl, R., Sauter, M.: Quantification of temporal distribution of recharge  
         in karst systems from spring hydrographs. J. Hydrol. 348, 452–463 (2008)  

Gupta,  H.V.,  Beven,  K.J.,  Wagener,  T.:  Model  Calibration  and  Uncertainty  Estimation.  
         Encyclopedia  of  Hydrological  Sciences,  Bd.  3,  S.  20 15–2032.  Wiley,  Chichester  
         (2005). Part 11, Section 131  

Hartmann, A., Lange, J., Weiler, M., Arbel, Y., Greenbaum, N.: A new approach to model the  
         spatial and temporal variability of recharge to karst aquifers. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci.  
         16(7), 2219–2231 (2012)  

Jakeman,  A.J.,  Hornberger,  G.M.:  How  much  complexity  is  warranted  in  a  rainfall-runoff  
         model? Water Resour. Bull. 29(8), 2637–2649 (1993)  

Jeannin, P.Y., Sauter, M.: Analysis of karst hydrodynamic behaviour using global approaches:  
         a review. Bull. Hydrogéol. (Neuchâtel) 16, 31–48 (1998)  

Klemes, V.: Operational testing of hydrological simulation models. Hydrolog. Sci. 31, 13–24  
         (1986)  

Krause, P., Boyle, D.P., Bäse, F.: Comparison of different efficiency criteria for hydrological  
         model assessment. Adv. Geosci. 5, 89– 97 (2005)  

Kresic, N., Bonacci, O.: Spring discharge hydrograph. In: Kresic, N., Stevanovic, Z. (Hrsg.)  
         Groundwater       Hydrology       of   Springs:    Engineering,      Theory,     Management,        and  
         Sustainability, S. 129–163. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2010). Chapter 4  

Kübeck,  C.,  Maloszewski,  P.J.,  Benischke,  R.:  Determination  of  the  conduit  structure  in  a  
         karst aquifer based on tracer data—Lurbach system. Austria Hydrol. Process. 27, 225– 
         235 (2013)  

Le Moine, N., Andréassian, V., Perrin, C., Michel, C.: How can rainfall-runoff models handle  
         intercatchment      groundwater       flows?    Theoretical     study    based    on   1040     French  
         catchments. Water Resour. Res. 43, W06428 (2007). doi:10.1029/2006WR005608  

                                                       89  
  

----------------------- Page 90-----------------------

Long, A.J., Mahler, B.J.: Prediction, time variance, and classification of hydraulic responses  
         to recharge in two karst aquifers. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. 17, 281–294 (2013)  

Mayaud, C., Wagner, T., Benischke, R., Birk, S.: Understanding changes in the hydrological  
         behaviour  within  a  karst  aquifer  (Lurbach  system,  Austria).  Carbonate  Evaporite  
         (2013). doi:10.1007/s13146-013- 0172-3  

Mouelhi,  S.,Michel,  C.,  Perrin,  C.,  Andréassian,  V.:  Stepwise  development  of  a  two- 
         parameter monthly water balance model. J. Hydrol. 3 18, 200–214 (2006)  

Nash,  J.E.,  Sutcliffe,  J.V.:  River  flow  forecasting  through  conceptual  models.  Part  I—A  
         discussion of principles. J. Hydrol. 27(3), 282– 290 (1970)  

Oswald,  S.:  Künstliche und  natürliche  Tracer  in  einem  Karsteinzugsgebiet  mit  allochthoner  
         Neubildung (Lurbach, Österreich) (2009)  

Oudin,  L.,  Hervieu,  F.,  Michel,  C.,  Perrin,  C.,  Andréassian,  V.,  Anctil,  F.,  Loumagne,  C.:  
         Which potential evapotranspiration input for a lumped rainfall-runoff model? Part 2— 
         Towards a simple and efficient potential evapotranspiration model for rainfall-runoff  
         modelling. J. Hydrol. 303, 290–306 (2005)  

Oudin,  L.,  Andréassian,  V.,  Mathevet,  T.,  Perrin,  C.,  Michel,  C.:  Dynamic  averaging  of  
         rainfall-runoff   model   simulations   from   complementary   model   parameterizations.  
         Water Resour. Res. 42, W07410 (2006). doi:10.1029/2005WR004636  

Perrin, C., Michel, C., Andréassian, V.: Does a large number of parameters enhance model  
         performance? Comparative assessment of common catchment model structures on 429  
         catchments. J. Hydrol. 242, 275–301 (2001)  

Perrin, C., Michel, C., Andréassian, V.: Improvement of a parsimonious model for streamflow  
         simulation. J. Hydrol. 279, 275–289 (2003)  

Rehrl, C., Birk, S.: Hydrogeological characterisation and modelling of spring catchments in a  
         changing environment. Aust. J. Earth Sci. 103(2), 106–117 (2010)  

Schubert, G.: Hydrogeological Map of Austria 1:500.000. Geologische Bundesanstalt, Wien  
         (2003)  

Wagner, T., Fabel, D., Fiebig, M., Häuselmann, P., Sahy, D., Xu, S., Stüwe, K.: Young uplift  
         in the non-glaciated parts of the Eastern Alps. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 295, 159–169  
         (2010)  

Wagner, T., Mayaud, C., Oswald, S., Rinder, T., Leis, A., Stadler, H., Benischke, R., Birk, S.:  
         Understanding  intercatchment  flow  in  a  karst  aquifer—using  the  Lurbach  system  
         example (Eastern Alps– Austria). Geophys. Res. Abstr. 13, (EGU2011) 7962 (2011)  

Wagner, T., Themeßl, M., Schüppel, A., Gobiet, A.,  Stigler, H., Birk, S.: Auswirkungen des  
         Kimawandels  auf  Abfluss  und  Wasserkrafterzeugung  österreichischer  Flüsse,  In:  

                                                        90  
  

----------------------- Page 91-----------------------

           Wasserbau Symposium 2012 Tagungsband, Graz, S. 1–8  (2012). ISBN 978-3-85125- 
           230- 9  

Xu,  C.-Y.,  Seibert,  J.,  Halldin,  S.:  Regional  water  balance  modelling  in  the  NOPEX  area:  
           development and application of monthly water balance models. J. Hydrol. 180, 211– 
           236 (1996)  

  

                                             

                                                                  91  
  

----------------------- Page 92-----------------------

                                                      APPENDIX B  

                                                                  

                       CONFERENCE ABSTRACTS RELATED TO THIS THESIS   

                                       (PRESENTED AS FIRST AUTHOR)  

                                                                  

                                                                  

                                                                  

                                                                  

1.  A  dual  approach  to  compute  groundwater  flow  in  karst  aquifers  using  
distributive models: example of the Lurbach system (Austria)  
Cyril Mayaud, Kim Maren Lompe, Thomas Reimann, Ralf Benischke and Steffen Birk  
  
2.  Changes  in  the  hydrological  behaviour  of  a  karst  aquifer  (Lurbach  
system, Austria)  
Cyril Mayaud, Thomas Wagner, Ralf Benischke and Steffen Birk  
  
3.   Recharge   time   scales   and   discretization   length   scales   for   single- 
continuum models with turbulent flow in karst catchments  
Cyril Mayaud, Thomas Reimann and Steffen Birk  
  
4. New insights into the functioning of the Lurbach system (Central Styrian  
Karst, Austria)  
Cyril Mayaud, Thomas Wagner, Ralf Benischke and Steffen Birk  
  
5. Single event time series analysis in a karst catchment evaluated using a  
groundwater model  
Cyril Mayaud, Thomas Wagner and Steffen Birk  
  
                                           

                                                              92  
  

----------------------- Page 93-----------------------

1.  A  dual  approach  to  compute  groundwater  flow  in  karst  aquifers  using  
distributive models: example of the Lurbach system (Austria)  
  
Distributive models of different complexity were applied to the binary Lurbach karst system,  
which is located 20 km north of Graz (Austria). The upper part of the catchment comprises  
impermeable schists and is drained by a stream, the Lurbach, towards the lower part, the 8.3  
    2 
km   limestone  plateau  of  the  Tanneben  massif.  After  it  reaches  the  limestone  unit,  the  
Lurbach  infiltrates  along  its  course  and  finally  disappears  into  an  inaccessible  subterranean  
sinkhole  located  in  a  cave,  the  Lurgrotte.  Then,  the  water  flows  through  the  fissures  and  
conduits  of  the  massif  and  resurges  at  two  springs,  the  Hammerbach  spring  and  the  
Schmelzbach spring, located at the foot of the Peggauer Wand, a 300 m high limestone cliff,  
at  the  western  border  of  the  catchment.  Two  different  modelling  approaches  were  used  to  
learn more about the behaviour of the karst system:   
     (A) MODFLOW             laminar     single-continuum         models      were     implemented         using    the  
          geological knowledge, tracer results, and spring  discharge data. The purpose was to  
          reproduce the response of the two springs under different hydrological conditions.  
     (B) Idealized catchments served to analyse the transfer of an input signal in a conduit with  
          simple  geometrical  assumptions  (such  as  varying  matrix  parameters)  to  learn  more  
          about prevailing effects in the system and to evaluate the significance of pressurized-  
          and open-channel flow.   
  
Three different numerical models were used for the investigation: the hybrid models CFPM1  
(USGS), which couples MODFLOW to a discrete pipe network simulating pressurized flow;  
ModBraC,  which  couples  MODFLOW  to  a  discrete  open-channel  flow  model  adapted  for  
karst  conduits;  and  the  modified  single-continuum  model  CFPM2,  which  is  a  version  of  
MODFLOW  that  accounts  for  turbulent  flow  by  appropriately  adjusting  the  hydraulic  
conductivity of the model cells.  
  
Results lead to the following conclusions:  
(A) The MODFLOW simulations in steady and transient state show good agreement with the  
discharge data. Transient state should be privileged in the future, because karst aquifers are  
rarely in steady-state conditions. Even though the behaviour of the system is reproduced, the  
lack of Schmelzbach data was a problem. Further investigations are needed and should use  
more data.  
(B)  Studies  with  synthetic  catchments  show  that  the  observed  damping  of  the  input  signal  
during  recharge  events  at  the  Hammerbach  spring  could  be  a  consequence  of  strong  
interaction  between  conduits  and  the  carbonate  matrix  when  pipe  flow  is  pressurized.  The  
model results with the new hybrid model ModBraC show that damping can also be obtained  
using open-channel flow. As opposed to CFPM1 and CFPM2, ModBraC displays a time lag  
between  the  in-  and  output  signal,  which  is  also  observed  at  the  field  site.  First  modelling  
results with a ModBraC regional model, however, show that open-channel flow alone cannot  
explain the strongly damped discharge curve and the time lag of up to 26 hours between the  
in-  and  output  signal  at  the  Hammerbach  spring.  This  means  that  the  recharge  signal  is  
obviously  influenced  by  a  combination  of  open-channel  flow,  pressurized  flow,  and  by  the  

                                                           93  
  

----------------------- Page 94-----------------------

presence of reservoirs along the conduits. However, reasonable results were obtained for the  
Schmelzbach system using the open-channel flow model.  
  
Finally,  results  suggest  that  single-continuum  and  hybrid  models  each  with  turbulent  flow  
representation are adequate to compute spring water discharge in karst aquifers. Nevertheless,  
information about the conduit geometry and sufficient hydrological data are required.  
                                              

                                                                    94  
  

----------------------- Page 95-----------------------

2.  Changes  in  the  hydrological  behaviour  of  a  karst  aquifer  (Lurbach  
system, Austria)  
  
The  purpose  of  this  work  is  to  better  understand  the  processes  which  influence  the  global  
behaviour  of  a  karst  aquifer.  The  area  under  investigation  is  the  Lurbach  system,  a  binary  
karst  aquifer  located  20  km  north  of  Graz  (Austria).  The  upper  part  of  the  catchment  
comprises  impermeable  schists  and  is  drained  by  a  stream,  the  Lurbach,  towards  the  lower  
part,  the  8.3  km2  limestone  plateau  of  the  Tanneben  massif.  After  it  reaches  the  limestone  

unit,  the  Lurbach  infiltrates  along  its  course  and  finally  disappears  into  an  inaccessible  
subterranean  sinkhole  located  in  a  cave,  the  Lurgrotte.  Then,  the  water  flows  through  the  
fissures and conduits of the massif and resurges at two springs, the Hammerbach spring and  
the Schmelzbach spring, located at the foot of the  Peggauer Wand, a 300 m high limestone  
cliff, at the western border of the catchment. Climate data, water discharge at the springs and  
sinkhole  as  well  as  chemical  data,  which  are  available  for  different  types  of  hydrological  
conditions,  suggest  that  the  Schmelzbach  and  Hammerbach  springs  react  very  differently  
during flood, drought or normal water conditions. A number of tracer tests further show that  
the  Hammerbach  is  the  only  resurgence  of  the  sinking  Lurbach  stream  at  low  water  
conditions, whereas at high water conditions the Lurbach water resurges at both Schmelzbach  
and Hammerbach.  
  
A thorough analysis using the hydrological data suggests that the behaviour of the Lurbach  
system has changed due to a large  flood in August 2005. Since then, no similar event  was  
recorded  and  the  Hammerbach  discharge  seems  to  be  strongly  damped  compared  to  the  
Lurbach input data. Recession analysis and cumulative frequency curves support this finding.  
Analysis of chemical data based on recent tracer experiments are also in good agreement with  
this hypothesis and further suggest that intercatchment flow now occurs  at lower discharge  
rates than before August 2005. To improve the understanding of the different behaviour of the  
two  springs  as  well  as  the  changes  in  their  hydrological  behaviour,  groundwater  modelling  
with process-based distributive models was carried  out. Transient MODFLOW models were  
implemented successfully. Turbulent flow was integrated using a modified version of the free  
USGS   Software   Conduit   Flow   Process   Mode   2   for   MODFLOW-2005.   Considering  
constricted  flow  in  conduits  with  reduced  hydraulic  conductivity,  the  new  behaviour  was  
reproduced by the model. Thus, the change in the system’s behaviour might be due to collapse  
material or sediment aggradation causing a constriction and thus lower hydraulic conductivity  
of a conduit pathway connecting Lurbach sink and Hammerbach spring.   
  
In summary, this approach was useful to improve the understanding of the Lurbach system  
and might be easily applied to investigate the hydraulic behaviour of other karst aquifers.  
                                         

                                                            95  
  

----------------------- Page 96-----------------------

3.   Recharge   time   scales   and   discretization   length   scales   for   single- 
continuum models with turbulent flow in karst catchments  

  
Karst catchments are known to have dual flow regimes: laminar flow is essentially present in  
the  fissured  matrix,  whereas  turbulent  flow  occurs  through  solution  conduits.  This  duality  
poses great challenges to the application of conventional numerical groundwater models.  
For more than 20 years, specific approaches have been developed to reproduce the hydraulic  
behaviour  of  karst  aquifers  (e.g.  exhibited  by  the  spring  hydrographs)  using  groundwater  
models. For instance, Teutsch (1988) introduced the double-continuum approach, where the  
fissured matrix and the solution conduits are represented by two continuum models that are  
coupled  by  a  linear  exchange  term.  Later,  hybrid  models,  coupling  continuum  and  discrete  
approaches,  were  found  to  provide  adequate  representations  of  the  dual  flow  behaviour  of  
karst aquifers (e.g., Birk et al., 2006). The discrete approaches implemented in hybrid models  
may  also  account  for  turbulent  conduit  flow.  Compared  to  conventional  single-continuum  
models,  these  models  require  higher  computational  efforts  and  additional  input  parameters,  
which are frequently not available. Earlier research (e.g. Teutsch and Sauter, 1998) suggested  
that single-continuum models cannot simulate the characteristic hydraulic responses of karst  
aquifers.  
However, Reimann et al. (2011, 2012) recently proposed the concept of conduit type flow in  
continuum  cells  (CTFC)  and  demonstrated  that  single-continuum  models  that  account  for  
turbulent flow, in principal, have the ability to mimic the realistic behaviour of more complex  
hybrid  models.  Yet,  in  the  simple  hypothetical  catchment  considered  by  Reimann  et  al.  
(2011b), the solution conduit was represented by cells with sizes corresponding to the conduit  
diameter.  This  is  hardly  possible  in  model  applications  to  real  karst  catchments.  Thus,  this  
work examines how far this numerical model concept is capable of reproducing the dualistic  
behaviour of karst aquifers if the cell sizes are much larger than the conduit size. To this end,  
the CTFC approach was used for a parameter study in order to identify the influence of the  
cell  discretization  on  the  simulated  dynamic  response  of  the  karst  aquifer.  In  doing  so,  the  
performance of different model set-ups is evaluated for different recharge pulses with varying  
time duration in order to infer relationships between the recharge time scale and the length  
scale  of  the  model  cells  required  to  provide  an  adequate  representation  of  the  hydraulic  
aquifer response.  
  
References:  

Birk,  S.,  Liedl,  R.,  Sauter  M.,  2006.  Karst  spring  responses  examined  by  process-based  
         modelling, Groundwater, 44(6), 832-836.  

Reimann, T., Birk, S., Rehrl, C., Shoemaker, W.B., 2012. Modifications to the Conduit Flow  
         Process      Mode      2   for    MODFLOW-2005,              Groundwater,        50(1),     144-148.      doi  
          10.1111/Fj.1745-6584.2011.00805.x.  

Reimann,  T.,  Rehrl,  C.,  Shoemaker,  W.B.,  Geyer,  T.,  Birk,  S.,  2011b.  The  significance  of  
         turbulent  flow  representation  in  single-continuum  models,  Water  Resour.  Res.,  47,  
         W09503, doi:10.1029/2010WR010133.  
                                                          96  
  

----------------------- Page 97-----------------------

Teutsch,  G.,  1988.  Grundwassermodelle  im  Karst:  Praktische  Ansätze  am  Beispiel  zweier  
          Einzugsgebiete  im  Tiefen  und  Seichten  Malmkarst  der  Schwäbischen  Alb.  PhD  
          Thesis, Eberhard-Karls-Universität, Tübingen.  

Teutsch,   G.,   Sauter,   M.,   1998.   Distributed   parameter   modelling   approaches   in   karst- 
          hydrological investigations. Bulletin d’Hydrogéologie, 16: 99-110.  

                                            

                                                                97  
  

----------------------- Page 98-----------------------

4. New insights into the functioning of the Lurbach system (Central Styrian  
Karst, Austria)  
  
Keywords:  binary  Karst,  MODFLOW,  single-continuum  model,  groundwater  modelling,  
laminar/turbulent flow, hydrological behaviour  
  
Karst  aquifers  are  widespread  (~20%  of  the  ice-free  emerged  areas  are  constituted  of  
limestone or similar other karstifiable rocks; Ford and Williams, 2007) and well-known for  
their large heterogeneities essentially due to a triple porosity, a duality in their storage and a  
dual flow behaviour. These features need to be addressed in groundwater modelling. Because  
karstic waters represent an important part of the water supply for the world’s population (20- 
25%;   Ford   and   Williams,   2007)   but   are   highly   vulnerable   to   chemical   and   bacterial  
contamination, and under pressure by an intensive agricultural use, it is necessary to improve  
the global understanding of processes which govern flow through karst aquifers and to assess  
how changes in these systems might influence the spring behaviour over time.   
                                                                                                     2 
The  here  investigated  aquifer  belongs  to  the  Lurbach  system,  a  22.3  km   binary  karst  
catchment located 15 km north of Graz, in the Central Styrian Karst, Austria. The Lurbach  
drains the upper low-permeable part of the catchment and disappears into the Lurgrotte cave,  
some  hundred  meters  after  it  enters  the  karstified  area.  Then,  the  water  flows  through  the  
limestone massif and resurges at the Hammerbach spring and the Schmelzbach outlet at the  
western  border  of  the  catchment.  Spring  hydrograph  analyses  suggest  that  a  change  in  
behaviour  happened  in  the  system  between  2005  and  2009.  Previous  work  showed  that  a  
redistribution of sediment within the conduits of the Hammerbach network could explain this  
temporary  behaviour  (Wagner  et  al.,  2011;  Mayaud  et  al.,  2011).  The  present  study  uses  
MODFLOW   to   investigate   whether   the   behaviour   can   be   reproduced   using   different  
hypotheses  like  a  reservoir  filling  and  emptying  water  over  the  time.  The  role  of  turbulent  
flow  is  also  investigated  using  the  equivalent  porous  media  approach  of  the  Conduit  Flow  
Process,  a  MODFLOW-compatible  package  developed  by  the  USGS  (Shoemaker  et  al.,  
2008).  The  study  focuses  first  on  the  behaviour  of  the  Hammerbach  spring  where  long  
continuous       time    series    are   available;     then    we     investigate     the   interactions      of   the  
Hammerbach/Schmelzbach  system  where  overflow  from  the  Hammerbach  system  to  the  
Schmelzbach system is known to occur at high water levels.  
  
References:  

Ford, D., Williams, P., 2007. Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology. John Wiley & Sons,  
         Ltd.  

Mayaud,  C.,  Wagner,  T.,  Benischke,  R.,  Birk,  S.,  20 11.  Changes  in  the  hydrological  
         behaviour of a karst aquifer (Lurbach system, Austria). Proc. H2Karst, 9th Conference  
         on Limestone Hydrogeology, Besançon (France) 1-4 Sep. 2011, pp. 331-334.  

Shoemaker, W.B., Kuniansky, E.L., Birk, S., Bauer, S., Swain, E.D., 2008. Documentation of  
         a   Conduit   Flow   Process   (CFP)   for   MODFLOW-2005.   U.S.   Geological   Survey  
         Techniques and Methods 6-A24.  

                                                           98  
  

----------------------- Page 99-----------------------

Wagner, T., Mayaud, C., Oswald, S., Rinder, T., Leis, A., Stadler, H., Benischke, R., Birk, S.,  
          2011. Understanding intercatchment flow in a karst aquifer - using the Lurbach system  
          example   (Eastern   Alps   -   Austria).   Geophysical   Research   Abstracts,   Vol.   13,  
          EGU2011-7962, EGU General Assembly 2011.  

                                            

                                                                  99  
  

----------------------- Page 100-----------------------

5. Single event time series analysis in a karst catchment evaluated using a  
groundwater model  
  
The  Lurbach-Tanneben  karst  system  (Styria,  Austria)  is  drained  by  two  major  springs  and  
replenished by both autogenic recharge from the karst massive itself and a sinking stream that  
originates  in  low  permeable  schists  (allogenic  recharge).  Detailed  data  from  two  events  
recorded  during  a  tracer  experiment  in  2008  (Oswald  et  al.,  EGU2009-9255)  demonstrates  
that  an  overflow  from  one  of  the  sub-catchment  to  the  other  is  activated  if  the  spring  
discharge exceeds a threshold. Time-series analysis (e.g., auto-correlation, cross-correlation)  
was applied to examine how far the various available methods support the identification of the  
transient  inter-catchment  flow  observed  in  this  karst  system.  As  inter-catchment  flow  is  
intermittent, the evaluation was focused on single events. In order to support the interpretation  
of  the  results  from  the  time-series  analysis  a  simplified  groundwater  flow  model  was  built  
using  MODFLOW  based  on  the  current  conceptual  understanding  of  the  karst  system.  The  
groundwater  model  represents  a  synthetic  karst  aquifer  for  which  the  same  methods  were  
applied.  Using  the  wetting  capability  package  of  MODFLOW,  the  model  simulated  an  
overflow similar to what has been observed during the tracer experiment. Various options of  
recharge (e.g., allogenic versus autogenic) were used to generate synthetic discharge data for  
the time-series analysis. In addition, geometric and hydraulic properties of the karst system  
were  varied  in  several  model  scenarios.  This  approach  helps  to  identify  effects  of  recharge  
and aquifer properties in the results from the time-series analysis. Comparing the results from  
the time-series analysis of the observed data with those of the synthetic data a good agreement  
was  found.  For  instance,  the  cross-correlograms  show  similar  patterns  with  respect  to  time  
lags  and  maximum  cross-correlation  coefficients  if  appropriate  hydraulic  parameters  are  
assigned to the groundwater model. Thus, the heterogeneity of hydraulic aquifer parameters  
appears to be a controlling factor. Moreover, the location of the overflow connecting the sub- 
catchments of the two springs is found to be of primary importance. Thus, time-series analysis  
of  single  events  can  potentially  be  used  to  characterize  transient  inter-catchment  flow  
behaviour of karst systems.  
                                        

                                                          100  
  

----------------------- Page 101-----------------------

                                                      APPENDIX C  

                                                                  

                CONFERENCES ABSTRACTS TITLES RELATED TO THIS THESIS  

                                         (PRESENTED AS CO-AUTHOR)  

                                                                  

                                                                  

                                                                  

                                                                  

1.  The  Lurbach  system  (Central  Styrian  Karst  -  Semriach,  Austria)  -  a  
complex  (but)  instructive  karst  aquifer  to  evaluate  predictive  modelling  
capabilities of rainfall - runoff approaches  
Thomas Wagner, Cyril Mayaud, Ralf Benischke and Steffen Birk  
  
2.  Changing intercatchment  flow  in  a  binary  karst system  -  The  Lurbach  
system, Austria  
Thomas  Wagner,  Cyril  Mayaud,  Kim  Maren  Lompe,  Thomas  Reimann,  Ralf  Benischke,  
Stefan Hergarten, Gerfried Winkler and Steffen Birk  
  
3.   Understanding  intercatchment   flow   in  a   karst  aquifer   -   using   the  
Lurbach system example (Eastern Alps - Austria)  
Thomas  Wagner,  Cyril  Mayaud,  Stefan  Oswald,  Thomas  Rinder,  Albrecht  Leis,  Hermann  
Stadler, Ralf Benischke and Steffen Birk  
  
4.    Evaluating            the     changing          discharge           behaviour           of    a    karst       spring  
(Hammerbach, Austria)  
Thomas Wagner, Cyril Mayaud, Ralf Benischke and Steffen Birk  
  
5. Thresholds in karst catchments: the example of the Lurbach karst system  
Steffen Birk, Thomas Wagner and Cyril Mayaud  
  
                                           

                                                              101  
  

----------------------- Page 102-----------------------

REFERENCES  
  

Aguilar, J.P., Michaux, J., Pélissié, T., Sigé, B., 2007. Early late Pliocene paleo karstic fillings  
         predating  the  major  Plio-Pleistocene  erosion  of  the  Quercy  table,  SW-France.  Acta  
         Carsologica, 36/3, 469-473.  

Amraoui,  F.,  Razack,  M.,  Bouchaou,  L.,  2003.  Turbidity  dynamics  in  karstic  systems.  
         Example of Ribaa and Bittit springs in the Middle Atlas (Morocco). - Hydrol. Sci. J.,  
         48, 6, 971-984.  

Anderson,  M.P.,  Woessner,  W.,  1992.  Applied  Groundwater  Modelling.  Acad  Press,  San  
         Diego. ISBN 9780120594856.   

Atkinson, T.C., 1977. Diffuse flow and conduit flow in limestone terrain in the Mendip Hills,  
         Sommerset (Great Britain). J. Hydrol., 35, 93-110.  

Atkinson, T.C., Smart, P.L., 1981. Artificial tracers in hydrogeology. In: A Survey of British  
         Hydrogeology 1980, 173-190. The Royal Society, London.  

Bailly-Comte,  V.,  Jourde,  H.,  Roesch,  A.,  Pistre,  S.,  Batiot-Guilhe,  C.,  2008.  Time  series  
         analyses for karst/river interactions assessment: Case of the Coulazou River (southern  
         France), J. Hydrol., 349(1-2), 98-114.  

Bailly-Comte, V., Martin, J.B., Screaton, E.J., 201 1. Time variant cross correlation to assess  
         residence  time  of  water  and  implication  for  hydraulics  of  a  sink-rise  karst  system,  
         Water Resour. Res., 47, W05547, doi:10.1029/2010WR009613.  

Bailly-Comte,       V.,   Borrell-Estupina,      V.,   Jourde,    H.,   Pistre,   S.,   2012.    A    conceptual  
         semidistributed  model  of  the  Coulazou  River  as  a  tool  for  assessing  surface  water– 
         karst groundwater interactions during flood in Mediterranean ephemeral rivers, Water  
         Resour. Res., 48, W09534, doi:10.1029/2010WR010072.  

Bakalowicz, M., 2005. Karst groundwater: a challenge for new resources. Hydrogeol. J., 13,  
         148-160 doi: 10.1007/s10040-004-0402-9.  

Bastian, F., Alabouvette, C., 2009. Lights and shadows on the conservation of a rock art cave:  
         The  case  of  Lascaux  Cave.  International  Journal  of  Speleology,  38(1),  55-60.  ISSN  
         0392-6672.  

Behrens,  H.,  Benischke,  R.,  Bricelj,  M.,  Harum,  T.,  Käss,  W.,  Kosi,  G.,  Leditzky,  H.P.,  
         Leibundgut,  Ch.,  Małoszewski,  P.,  Maurin,  N.,  Rajner,  V.,  Rank,  D.,  Reichart,  B.,  
         Stadler, H., Stichler, W., Trimborn, P., Zojer, H., Zupan, M., 1992. Investigations with  
         Natural  and  Artificial  Tracers  in  the  Karst  Aquifer  of  the  Lurbach  System  (Peggau- 
         Tanneben-Semriach, Austria); Steir. Beitr. z. Hydrogeologie 43, Graz.  

                                                        102  
  

----------------------- Page 103-----------------------

Benischke,  R.,  Schaffler,  H.,  Weissensteiner,  V.,  (Eds.)  1994.  Festschrift  Lurgrotte  1894  - 
         1994.  Eigenverlag  Landesverein  für  Höhlenkunde  in  der  Steiermark,  Graz,  pp  151- 
         154.  

Berkowitz.  B.,  2002.  Characterizing  flow  and  transport  in  fractured  geological  media:  a  
         review. Adv. Water Resour., 25:861-884.  

Bon, C., Berthonaud, V., Fosse, P., Gély, B., Maksud, F., Vitalis, R., Philippe, M., van der  
         Plicht, J., Elalouf, J.M., 2011. Low regional diversity of late cave bears mitochondrial  
         DNA at the time of Chauvet Aurignacian paintings. J. Archaeol. Sci., 38, 1886-1895.  
         doi:10.1016/j.jas.2011.03.033.  

Bonacci, O., 1987. Karst Hydrology. Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany.  

Bonacci, O., 1995. Ground water behavior in karst – Example of the Ombla Spring (Croatia)  
         J. Hydrol., 165, 113-134.  

Bouchaou,  L., Mangin, A., Chauve, P., 2002. Turbidity mechanism of water from a karstic  
         spring:  example  of  the  Ain-Asserdoune  spring  (Beni  Mellal  Atlas,  Morocco).  J.  
         Hydrol., 265, 34-42.  

Budge, T.J., Sharp, J.M., 2009. Modeling the Usefulness of Spatial Correlation Analysis on  
         Karst Systems. Groundwater, 47(3), 427-437.  

Chin,  D.A.,  Price,  R.M.,  DiFrenna,   V.J.,  2009.  Nonlinear  Flow  in  Karst   Formations,  
         Groundwater, 47(5), 669-674. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-6584.2009.00574.x.  

COST  Action  65.,  1995.  Hydrogeological  aspects  of  groundwater  protection  in  karst  areas.  
         Final  report  EUR  16547  EN,  Office  for  Official  publications  of  the  European  
         Communities, Luxembourg, 446 pp.  

Covington,  M.D.,  Wicks,  C.M.,  Saar,  M.O.,  2009.  A  dimensionless  number  describing  the  
         effects  of  recharge  and  geometry  on  discharge  from  simple  karstic  aquifers,  Water  
         Resour. Res., 45, W11410, doi:10.1029/2009WR008004.  

Covington,  M.D.,  Banwell,  A.F.,  Gulley,  J.,  Saar,  M.O.,  Willis,  I.,  Wicks,  C.M.,  2012.  
         Quantifying  the  effects  of  glacier  conduit  geometry  and  recharge  on  proglacial  
         hydrograph form. J. Hydrol., 414-415, 59-71. doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2011.10.027.  

Cvijić,  J.,  1893.  Das  Karstphänomen:  Versuch  einer  morphologischen  Monographie,  Wien,  
         113 p. (Geographische Abhandlungen, hrsg. von Prof. Dr Albrecht Penck. V, Heft 3).  

Darcy, H., 1856. Les fontaines publiques de la ville de Dijon. Paris, France: Victor Dalmont.  

Denmark  Hydrology  Institute  (DHI).,  2007.  Mike  She  User  Manual  and  Reference  Guide,  
         December 2007, Denmark (V1 and 2).  

                                                                                                                 th 
DHI-WASY GmbH., 2011. FEFLOW, available at http://www.feflow.info, (last accessed 23                                 
         January 2014).  

                                                        103  
  

----------------------- Page 104-----------------------

Dörfliger,  N.,  Zwahlen,  F.,  1998.  Practical  guide:  groundwater  vulnerability  mapping  in  
         karstic regions (EPIK). Environment in practice, Swiss Agency for the Environment,  
         Forests and Landscape (SAEFL), Bern, 56 pp.  

Dörfliger,  N.,  Plagnes,  V.,  2009.  Cartographie  de  la  vulnérabilité  des  aquifères  karstiques.  
         Guide  méthodologique  de  la  méthode  PaPRIKa  [Mapping  the  vulnerability  of  karst  
         aquifers.   Guidelines   of   the   method   PAPRIKa].   Rapport   BRGM   RP-57527-FR,  
         BRGM, Orleans, France, 100 pp.  

Eisenlohr, L., Bouzelboudjen, M., Király, L., Rossier, Y., 1997. Numerical versus statistical  
         modelling of natural response of a karst hydrogeological system, J. Hydrol., 202(1-4),  
         244-262.  

Farrant,  A.R.,  Smart,  P.L.,  2011.  Role  of  sediment  in  speleogenesis;  sedimentation  and  
         paragenesis. Geomorphology, 134, 79-93. doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2011.06.006.  

Filipponi,   M.,   2009.   Spatial   analysis   of   karst   conduit   networks   and   determination   of  
         parameters controlling the speleogenesis along preferential lithostratigraphic horizons,  
         PhD   Thesis,   Faculté   Environnement   Naturel,   Architectural   et   Construit,   École  
         Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 303 pp.  

Fleury, P., Plagnes, V., Bakalowicz, M., 2007. Modelling of the functioning of karst aquifers  
         with  a  reservoir  model:  application  to  fontaine  de  vaucluse  (South  of  France).  J.  
         Hydrol., 345, 38-49.  

Forchheimer,  P.,  1901.Wasserbewegung  durch  Boden.  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  deutscher  
         Ingenieure, 45, 1782-1788.  

Ford, D., Williams, P., 2007. Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology. John Wiley & Sons,  
         Ltd.  

Gallegos, J.J., Hu, B.X., Davis, H., 2013. Simulating flow in karst aquifers at laboratory and  
         sub-regional  scales  using  MODFLOW-CFP.   Hydrogeol.  J.,  21,  1749-1760.  doi:  
         10.1007/s10040-013-1046-4.  

Geologische Bundesanstalt., 2005. Provisorische Geologische Karte der Republik Österreich,  
         164-Graz. – Geofast 1:50.000, Geologische Bundesanstalt, Wien.  

Genthon,  P.,  Bataille,  A.,  Fromant,  A.,  D’Hulst,  D.,  Bourges,  F.,  2005.  Temperature  as  a  
         marker  for  karstic  waters  hydrodynamics.  Inferences  from  1  year  recording  at  La  
         Peyrére cave (Ariège, France). J. Hydrol., 311 157- 171.  

Geyer,     T.,  Birk,    S.,   Reimann,      T.,   Dörfliger,    N.,   Sauter,    M.,    2013.    Differentiated  
         characterization of karst aquifers: some contributions. Carbonate Evaporite, 28 (1-2):  
         41-46. doi: 10.1007/s13146-013-0150-9.  

Ghasemizadeh,        R.,   Hellweger,      F.,  Butscher,     C.,   Padilla,   I.,  Vesper,     D.,   Field,   M.,  
         Alshawabkeh, A., 2012. Review: Groundwater flow and transport modeling of karst  

                                                        104  
  

----------------------- Page 105-----------------------

         aquifers,  with  particular  reference  to  the  North  Coast  Limestone  aquifer  system  of  
         Puerto Rico. Hydrogeol. J., 20, 1441-1461. doi: 10. 1007/s10040-012-0897-4.  

Gray, D.M., 1970. Handbook on the Principles of Hydrogeology. Secretariat Canadian Nat.  
         Com. For the International Hydrological Decade, Ottawa.  

Halford,  K.J.,  2000.  Simulation  and  interpretation  of  borehole  flowmeter  results  under  
         laminar  and  turbulent  flow  conditions.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Seventh  International  
         Symposium   on   Logging   for   Minerals   and   Geotechnical   Applications,   Golden,  
         Colorado,   October   24-26,   2000,   157-168.   Houston,   Texas:   The   Minerals   and  
         Geotechnical Logging Society.  

Harbaugh,  A.W.,  Banta,  E.R.,  Hill,  M.C.,  McDonald,  M.G.,  2000.  MODFLOW–2000,  the  
         U.S. Geological Survey Modular Ground-Water Model - User guide to modularization  
         concepts and the Ground-Water Flow Process: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Rep  
         00-92, 121 p.  

Harbaugh,  A.W.,  2005.  MODFLOW-2005,  The  U.S.  Geological  Survey  Modular  Ground- 
         Water Model—The Ground-Water Flow Process. U.S. Geological Survey Techniques  
         and Methods Book 6, Chapter A16. Reston, Virginia: USGS.  

Harum,  T.,  Stadler,  H.,  1992.  Hydrologic  and  Climatologic  Conditions,  in:  Behrens,  H.,  
         Benischke, R., Bricelj, M., Harum, T., Käss, W., Kosi, G., Leditzky, H.P., Leibundgut,  
         Ch.,  Małoszewski,  P.,  Maurin,  N.,  Rajner,  V.,  Rank,  D.,  Reichart,  B.,  Stadler,  H.,  
         Stichler,  W.,  Trimborn,  P.,  Zojer,  H.,  Zupan,  M.,  1992.  Investigations  with  Natural  
         and Artificial Tracers in the Karst Aquifer of the Lurbach System (Peggau-Tanneben- 
         Semriach, Austria); Steir. Beitr. z. Hydrogeologie 43, Graz.  

Heinz, B., Birk, S., Liedl, R., Geyer, T., Straub,  K.L., Andresen, J., Bester, K., Kappler, A.,  
         2009.  Water  quality  deterioration  at  a  karst  spring  (Gallusquelle,  Germany)  due  to  
         combined  sewer  overflow:  evidence  of  bacterial  and  micro-pollutant  contamination.  
         Environ. Geol., 57(4), 797-808. doi: 10.1007/s00254-008-1359-0.  

Hill,  M.E.,  Stewart,  M.T.,  Martin,  A.,  2010.  Evaluation  of  the  MODFLOW-2005  Conduit  
         Flow Process, Groundwater, 48 (4), 549-559.  

Hubinger, B., Birk, S., 2011. Influence of initial heterogeneities and recharge limitations on  
         the evolution of aperture distributions in carbonate aquifers, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci.,  
         15, 3715–15 3729, doi:10.5194/hess-15-3715-2011.  

Jeannin,  P.Y.,  Sauter,  M.,  1998.  Analysis  of  karst  hydrodynamic  behaviour  using  global  
         approaches: a review. Bull. Hydrogéol. (Neuchâtel) 16, 31-48.  

Jemcov,  I.,  Petrič,  M.,  2010.  Time  serie  analysis,  modeling  and  assessment  of  optimal  
         exploitation of the Nemanja spring, Serbia. Acta Carsologica, 39/2, 187-200.  

Kavouri,  K.,  Plagnes,  V.,  Tremoulet,  J.,  Dörfliger,  N.,  Rejiba,  F.,  Marchet,  P.,  2011.  
         PaPRIKa:   a   method   for   estimating   karst   resource   and   source   vulnerability— 

                                                        105  
  

----------------------- Page 106-----------------------

         application to the Ouysse karst system (southwest France) Hydrogeol. J., 19, 339-353  
         doi:10.1007/s10040-010-0688-8.  

Kiraly, L., 1998. Modelling karst aquifers by the combined discrete channel and continuum  
         approach. Bull. Hydrogéol. (Neuchâtel) 16, 77-98.  

Klimchouk,  A.,  1996.  Gypsum  karst  in  the  Western  Ukraine.  International  Journal  of  
         Speleology, 25: 263-278.  

Kong-A-Siou, L., Johannet, A., Borrell Estupina, V., Pistre, S., 2011. Complexity selection of  
         a neural network model for karst flood forecasting: the case of the Lez Basin (southern  
         France). J. Hydrol., 403, 367-380.  

Kovačič, G., 2010. Hydrogeological study of the Malenščica karst spring (SW Slovenia) by  
         means of a time series analysis. Acta Carsologica, 39/2, 201-215.  

Kralik, M., 2001. Strategie zum Schutz der Karstwassergebiete in  Österreich. BE-189 Wien,  
         ISBN 3-85457-585-8 pp 3.  

Kresic, N., Stevanovic, Z., 2010. Groundwater Hydrology of Springs: Engineering, Theory,  
         Management, and Sustainability. Elsevier.  

Kresic, N., Bonacci, O., 2010. Spring discharge hydrograph,  In: Kresic, N., Stevanovic, Z.,  
         (Eds.)  Groundwater  Hydrology  of  Springs:  Engineering,  Theory,  Management,  and  
         Sustainability. Elsevier, Chapter 4, pp 129-163.  

Kübeck, C., Małoszewski, P., Benischke, R., 2013. Determination of the conduit structure in a  
         karst  aquifer  based  on  tracer  data  –  Lurbach  system,  Austria.  Hydrol.  Process.,  27,  
         225-235. doi: 10.1002/hyp.9221.  

Kuniansky,  E.L.,  Halford,  K.J.,  Shoemaker,  W.B.,  2008.  Permeameter  data  verify  new  
         turbulence process for MODFLOW, Groundwater, 46(5), 768-771.  

Larocque,  M.,  Mangin,  A.,  Razack,  M.,  Banton,  O.,  1998.  Contribution  of  correlation  and  
         spectral  analyses  to  regional  study  of  a  large  karst  aquifer  (Charentes,  France).  J.  
         Hydrol., 205 (3–4), 217-231.  

Larocque,  M.,  Banton,  O.,  Razack,  M.,  2000.  Transient-state  history  matching  of  a  karst  
         aquifer groundwater flow model. Groundwater, 38(6), 939-946.  

Le  Moine,  N.,  Andréassian,  V.,  Mathevet,  T.,  2008.  Confronting  surface-  and  groundwater  
         balances  on  the  La  Rochefoucauld-Touvre  karstic  system  (Charente,  France),  Water  
         Resour. Res., 44, W03403, doi:10.1029/2007WR005984.  

Leroi-Gourhan, A., Michelson, A., 1986. The Religion of the Caves: Magic or Metaphysics?  
         The MIT Press, October, 37, 6-17.  

                                                       106  
  

----------------------- Page 107-----------------------

Liedl,  R.,  Sauter,  M.,  Hückinghaus,  D.,  Clemens,  T.,  Teutsch,  G.,  2003.  Simulation  of  the  
         development  of  karst  aquifers  using  a  coupled  continuum  pipe  flow  model.  Water  
         Resour. Res., 39, 3, 1057. doi: 10.1029/2001WR001206.  

Llasat, M.C., Llasat-Botija, M., Prat, M.A., Porcú, F., Price, C., Mugnai, A., Lagouvardos, K.,  
         Kotroni,  V.,  Katsanos,  D.,  Michaelides,  S.,  Yair,  Y.,  Savvidou,  K.,  Nicolaides,  K.,  
         2010.  High-impact  floods  and  flash  floods  in  Mediterranean  countries:  The  FLASH  
         preliminary database, Adv. Geosci., 23, 47-55, doi: 10.5194/adgeo-23-47-2010.  

Mangin, A., 1984. Pour une meilleure connaissance des systèmes hydrologiques à partir des  
         analyses corrélatoire et spectrale. J. Hydrol., 67, 25–43.  

Marchet,  A.,  1928.  Phosphaterden  der  Drachenhöhle  bei  Mixnitz.  Mineralogische  und  
         petrographische          Mitteilungen         January        1928,        39(1-2),       28-34.       doi:  
         10.1007/BF03013095.  

Maréchal,  J.C.,  Ladouche,  B.,  Dörfliger,  N.,  2008.  Karst  flash  flooding  in  a  Mediterranean  
         karst, the example of Fontaine de Nîmes. Eng. Geol., 99 138-146.  

Marsaud,  B.,  1996.  Structure  et  fonctionnement  de  la  zone  noyée  des  karsts  à  partir  des  
         résultats expérimentaux, PhD Thesis, Univ. Paris sud, 301 pp.  

Martel,   E.A.,   1894.   Les   abîmes:   les   eaux   souterraines,   les   cavernes,   les   sources,   la  
         spéléologie: explorations souterraines effectuées de 1888 à 1893 en France, Belgique,  
         Autriche et Grèce, Paris, Librairie Ch. Delagrave, 578 p.  

Massei, N., Dupont, J.P., Mahler, B.J., Laignel, B., Fournier, M., Valdes, D., Ogier, S., 2006.  
         Investigating  transport  properties  and  turbidity  dynamics  of  a  karst  aquifer  using  
         correlation, spectral, and wavelet analyses. J. Hydrol., 329, 244-257.  

Mayaud, C., 2010. Groundwater modelling in karstic terrains: example of the Lurbach system.  
         Master  2  Sciences  de  l´Univers,  Environnement,  Ecologie,  Parcours  Hydrologie- 
         Hydrogéologie. Université Pierre et Marie Curie, École des Mines de Paris & École  
         Nationale du Génie Rural des Eaux et des Forêts; unpubl master thesis.  

Mayaud,  C.,  Wagner,  T.,  Benischke,  R.,  Birk,  S.,  20 13.  Understanding  changes  in  the  
         hydrological  behaviour  within  a  karst  aquifer  (Lurbach  system,  Austria).  Carbonate  
         Evaporite. doi: 10.1007/s13146-013-0172-3.  

Mayaud,  C.,  Wagner,  T.,  Benischke,  R.,  and  Birk,  S.,  (in  press)  Single  event  time  series  
         analysis  in  a  binary  karst  catchment  evaluated  using  a  groundwater  model  (Lurbach  
         system,  Austria).  doi:  10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.02.024.  Accepted  for  publication  by  
         Journal of Hydrology.  

Mayaud, C., Walker, P., Hergarten, S., and Birk, S., (under review) Non-Linear Flow Process  
         (NLFP):  a  new  package  to  compute  non-linear  flow  in  MODFLOW.  Submitted  as  
         Methods Note to Groundwater.  

                                                        107  
  

----------------------- Page 108-----------------------

Mithen, S.J., 1996. The prehistory of the mind: a search for the origins of art, religion, and  
         science, London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05081-3.  

Moussu.  F.,  Oudin,  L.,  Plagnes,  V.,  Mangin,  A.,  Bendjoudi,  H.,  2011.  A  multi-objective  
         calibration  framework  for  rainfall–discharge  models  applied  to  karst  systems.  J.  
         Hydrol., 400, 364–376. doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2011.0 1.047.  

Moutsopoulos,   K.N,   Tsihrintzis,   V.A.,   2005.   Approximate   analytical   solutions   for   the  
         Forchheimer equation. J. Hydrol., 309(1–4): 93-103.  

Oswald,   S.,   2009.   Künstliche   und   natürliche   Tracer   in   einem   Karsteinzugsgebiet   mit  
         allochthoner  Neubildung  (Lurbach,  Österreich).  Karl-Franzens-University  of  Graz;  
         unpubl. bachelor thesis.  

Panagopoulos, G., Lambrakis, N., 2006. The contribution of time series analysis to the study  
         of the hydrodynamic characteristics of the karst systems: Application on two typical  
         karst aquifers of Greece (Trifilia, Almyros Crete). J. Hydrol., 329, 368- 376.  

Panagopoulos, G., 2012. Application of MODFLOW for  simulating groundwater flow in the  
         Trifilia karst aquifer, Greece. Environ Earth Sci 67:1877-1889. doi: 10.1007/s12665- 
         012-1630-2.  

Pételet-Giraud,      E.,  Dörfliger,     N.,   Crochet,     P.,  2000.    RISKE:      méthode      d’évaluation  
         multicritère de la vulnérabilité des aquifères karstiques. Application aux systèmes des  
         Fontanilles  et  Cent-  Fonts  (Hérault,  Sud  de  la  France)  [Risk:  methodology  for  
         multicriteria evaluation of the vulnerability of karst aquifers. Application to systems  
         Fontanilles and Cent-Fonts Fontanilles (Herault, southern France)]. Hydrogéologie 4,  
         71-88.  

Pezdirc,  M.,  Heath,  E.,  Bizjak-Mali,  L.,  Bulog,  B.,  2011.  PCB  accumulation  and  tissue  
         distribution  in  cave  salamander  (Proteus  anguinus  anguinus,  Amphibia,  Urodela)  in  
         the polluted karstic hinterland of the Krupa River, Slovenia. Chemosphere, 84, 987– 
         993. doi:10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.05.026.  

Pinault,  J.L.,  Plagnes,  V.,  Aquilina,  L.,  Bakalowicz,  M.,  2001.  Inverse  modeling  of  the  
         hydrological  and  the  hydrochemical  behavior  of  hydrosystems:  Characterization  of  
         karst system functioning, Water Resour. Res., 37, 8, 2191-2204.  

Plan,  L.,  Decker,  K.,  2006.  Quantitative  karst  morphology  of  the  Hochschwab  plateau.  
           Eastern Alps, Austria. Z. Geomorph. N.F. 147, 29-54.  

Polomčić, D., Dragišić, V., Živanović, V., 2013. Hydrodynamic modeling of a complex karst- 
         alluvial  aquifer:  case  study  of  Prijedor  groundwater  Source,  Republic  of  Srpska,  
         Bosnia and Herzegovina. Acta Carsologica, 42/1, 93- 107.  

Posavec, K., Bačani, A., Nakić, Z., 2006. A Visual Basic Spreadsheet Macro for Recession  
         Curve       Analysis.       Groundwater,         44(5),      764-767.        doi:     10.1111/j.1745- 
         6584.2006.00226.x.  

                                                       108  
  

----------------------- Page 109-----------------------

Ravbar,   N.,   Engelhardt,   I.,   Goldscheider,   N.,   2011.   Anomalous   behaviour   of   specific  
         electrical conductivity at a karst spring induced by variable catchment boundaries: the  
         case   of   the   Podstenjšek      spring,    Slovenia.    Hydrol.     Process.,    25,       2130-2140.  
         doi:10.1002/hyp.7966.  

Rehrl,   C.,   Birk,   S.,   2010.   Hydrogeological   characterization   and   modelling   of   spring  
         catchments in a changing environment. Aust J Earth Sci, 103(2), 106-117.  

Reimann,  T.,  Rehrl,  C.,  Shoemaker,  W.B.,  Geyer,  T.,  Birk,  S.,  2011.  The  significance  of  
         turbulent flow representation 363 in single-continuum models, Water Resour. Res., 47,  
         W09503. doi: 10.1029/2010WR010133.  

Reimann, T., Birk, S., Rehrl, C., Shoemaker W.B., 2012. Modifications to the Conduit Flow  
         Process     Mode     2    for   MODFLOW-2005,             Groundwater,       50(1),    144-148.     doi  
         :10.1111/Fj.1745-6584.2011.00805.x.  

Reimann,   T.,   2012   Adaptation   of   numerical   modeling   approaches   for   karst   aquifer  
         characterization.  PhD  Thesis.  Institute  for  Groundwater  Management,  TU  Dresden,  
         Dresden, Germany.  

Renko,  T.,  Iršič-Žibert,  M.,  2011.  Heavy  rain  and  floods  in  Croatia  and  Slovenia.  17-19  
         September          2010.        EUMeTrain           document          available        online        at:  
         http://eumetrain.org/data/2/202/navmenu.php (last accessed 2nd February 2014).  

Saller, S.P., Ronayne, M.J., Long, A.J., 2013. Comparison of a karst groundwater model with  
         and without discrete conduit flow. Hydrogeol. J., 21, 1555-1566. doi: 10.1007/s10040- 
         013-1036-6.  

Salomon,      J.N.,    2006.    Précis    de   karstologie,     Presses     Universitaires     de    Bordeaux,  
         coll.«Scieteren», ISBN 9782867814112.  

Sauter, M., 1992. Quantification and forecasting of regional groundwater flow and transport  
         in  a  karst  aquifer  (Gallusquelle,  Malm,  SW.  Germany),  PhD  Thesis,  Universität  
         Tübingen, Tübingen (Germany).  

Sauter,  M.,  Kovács,  A.,  Geyer,  T.,  Teutsch,  G.,  2006.  Modellierung  der  Hydraulik  von  
         Karstgrundwasserleitern – Eine Übersicht. Grundwasser – Zeitschrift der Fachsektion  
         Hydrogeologie 3/2006. doi: 10.1007/s00767-006-0140-0.  

Scanlon,  B.R.,  Mace,  R.E.,  Barrett,  M.E.,  Smith,  B.,  2003.  Can  we  simulate  regional  
         groundwater  flow  in  a  karst  system  using  equivalent  porous  media  models?  Case  
         study, Barton Springs Edwards aquifer, USA, J. Hydrol., 276(1-4), 137-158.  

Schubert, G., 2003. Hydrogeological Map of Austria  1: 500.000. Geologische Bundesanstalt,  
         Wien.  

Shen, G., Wu, X., Wang, Q., Tu, H., Feng, X., Zhao, J., 2013. Mass spectrometric U-series  
         dating  of  Huanglong  Cave  in  Hubei  Province,  central  China:  Evidence  for  early  
         presence of modern humans in eastern Asia. J. Hum. Evol., 65, 162-167.  

                                                       109  
  

----------------------- Page 110-----------------------

Shoemaker, W.B., Kuniansky, E.L., Birk, S., Bauer, S., Swain, E.D., 2008. Documentation of  
         a   Conduit   Flow   Process   (CFP)   for   MODFLOW-2005.   U.S.   Geological   Survey  
         Techniques and Methods Book 6, Chapter A24. Reston, Virginia: USGS.  

Sidiropoulou,      M.G.,     Moutsopoulos,        K.N.,    Tsihrintzis,    V.A.    2007.     Determination       of  
         Forchheimer  equation  coefficients  a  and  b.  Hydrol.  Process.,  21,  534-554.  doi:  
         10.1002/hyp.6264.  

Teutsch,  G.,  Sauter,  M.,  1991.  Groundwater  modelling  in  karst  terranes:  scale  effects,  data  
         acquisition  and  field  validation.  Proc.  3rd  Conference  on  Hydrogeology,  Ecology,  
         Monitoring   and   Management   of   Ground   Water   in   Karst   Terranes,   Dec.   1991,  
         Nashville.  

The Unesco Courier., 1995. Troglodytes: a hidden world. Issue from December 1995. 62 pp.   

Thrailkill, J., 1974. Pipe flow models of a Kentucky limestone aquifer. Groundwater, 12(4),  
         202-205.  

Unicef., 2013. Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. 40p. ISBN 978  
         92 4 150539 0.  

Valdes,  D.,  Dupont,  J.P.,  Massei,  N.,  Laignel,  B.,  Rodet,  J.,  2006.  Investigation  of  karst  
         hydrodynamics  and  organization  using  autocorrelation  and  T-∆C  curves.  J.  Hydrol.,  
         329, 432-443.  

Vesper, D.J., Loop, C.M., White, W.B., 2001. Contaminant transport in karst aquifers. Theor  
         et Appl. Karstol., 13–14 (2001), pp. 101-111.  

Wagner,  T.,  Fritz,  H.,  Stüwe,  K.,  Nestroy,  O.,  Rodnight,  H.,  Hellstrom,  J.,  Benischke,  R.,  
         2011.  Correlations  of  cave  levels,  stream  terraces  and  planation  surfaces  along  the  
         River  Mur—Timing  of  landscape  evolution  along  the  eastern  margin  of  the  Alps.  
         Geomorphology, 134, 62-78. doi: 373 10.1016/j.geomorph.2011.04.024.  

Wagner,      T.,  Themessl,      M.,    Schüppel,     A.,   Gobiet,    A.,   Stigler,   H.,   Birk,    S.,    2012.  
         Auswirkungen         des     Klimawandels         auf    Abfluss      und      Wasserkrafterzeugung  
         österreichischer  Flüsse.  In:  Zenz,  G.  (ed.),  Wasserbau  Symposium  2012  Wasser  -  
         Energie, Global denken - lokal handeln, Verlag der Technischen Universität Graz: 1-8.  

Wagner,  T.,  Mayaud,  C.,  Benischke,  R.,  Birk,  S.,  20 13.  Ein  besseres  Verständnis  des  
         Lurbach-Karstsystems          durch     ein    konzeptionelles       Niederschlags-Abflussmodell.  
         Grundwasser, 18(4), 225-235. doi: 10.1007/s00767-013-0234-4.  

Wen, Z., Huang, G., Zhan, H., 2011. Non-Darcian flow to a well in a leaky aquifer using the  
         Forchheimer equation. Hydrogeol. J., 19, 563-572. doi: 10.1007/s10040-011-0709-2.  

Williams,  P.,  Fong,  Y.,  2011.  World  map  of  carbonate  rock  outcrops  v3.0,  available  at  
         http://www.geog.auckland.ac.nz/research/karst.shtml,  (last  accessed  14th  November  

         2013).  

                                                        110  
  

----------------------- Page 111-----------------------

Worthington, S.R.H., 2007. Ground-water residence times in unconfined carbonate aquifers.  
          Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, v. 69, no. 1, p. 94-102.  

Worthington,  S.R.H.,  2009.  Diagnostic  hydrogeologic  characteristics  of  a  karst  aquifer  
          (Kentucky, USA). Hydrogeol. J., 17(7), 1665-1678.  

Zheng,  Z.,  Grigg,  R.,  2006.  A  Criterious  for  Non-Darcy  Flow  in  Porous  Media.  Transport  
          Porous Med., 63, 57-69. doi: 10.1007/s11242-005-2720-3.  

                                          

                                                             111  
  

----------------------- Page 112-----------------------

                                                                    
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                                                    

                                             THANKS TO …  

  
  
During this PhD I met many people who helped, guided and advised me. This contributed a  
lot to improve my vision of sciences, karst, groundwater modelling or just life in general. As  
the  final  work  wouldn’t  have  been  the  same  without  their  contribution,  I  would  like  to  
acknowledge  all  of  them  in  the  following  section.  Of  course  this  is  a  succinct  list  and  I  
apologize if I forget someone.  
  
First of all, I want to thank my PhD advisor Steffen Birk, who gave me the opportunity to  
make a PhD in the field of karst sciences in Graz. Thank you Steffen for being available, for  
your enthusiasm and all your precious advices and also for giving me so much freedom in my  
work!  
  
The second person who I’m greatly indebted is my office mate Thomas Wagner. Tom, I have  
no words to express my profound gratitude for all the interests you continuously showed to  
my studies. I really enjoyed the many discussions we had about sciences and mountaineering.  
I think now that I understand better the meaning of the expression “to work in a team”.  
  
Because  modelling  needs  to  stay  close  to  field  observations,  I  would  like  to  thank  warmly  
Ralf Benischke for sharing me his tremendous knowledge about the Lurbach system and the  
Central Styrian Karst (and its very rich history). Thank you Ralf, I learned many things from  
you!  
  
I’m grateful to Stefan Hergarten for his precious help. Thank you for your good mood, for the  
easy way you found the analytical solution of the Forchheimer equation. I really enjoyed the  
nice bike tour we shared together (I’m ashamed that we couldn’t bike more during the time  
you were in Graz but I hope we will ride again in the future).  
  
Many good advices were given to me by Gerfried Winkler, my second “unofficial” advisor.  
Thank you for that and thank you for correcting my mistakes in German!  
  
I  shared  many  funny  moments  with  Abraham  and  Marcus,  the  two  great  guys  from  the  
neighboring  office:  both  of  you  contributed  significantly  to  improve  my  mood  with  your  
smiles and your jokes and I appreciated it a lot! Abraham: አመሰግናለሁ brother!; Marcus: thanks  
for  teaching  me  this  amazing  Austrian  and  Styrian  slang!  Thanks  as  well  for  the  kleine  
Wappler;  I  will  still  have  my  revenge  for  the  keyboard!  I  hope  I  will  be  present  at  your  
respective defenses.  
  

                                                                112  
  

----------------------- Page 113-----------------------

Sylvain: thank you for all the discussions we had since three and a half years! I really enjoyed  
all  the  lunches  we  had  together  speaking  about  everything  and  I  learned  many  things  from  
your wisdom.  
  
I  would  like  to  thank  also  all  the  other  members  (past  and  present)  of  our  research  group:  
Michaela,  Bernhard,  Michi,  and  Andreas,  and  from  the  institute:  Claudia,  Markus,  Patrick,  
Amon,  Yanlong,  Tamer,  Syed,  Mahmoud,  Angela,  Andreas  B,  Michi  L,  Rolland,  Felix,  
Patrica as well as all the PhD students from the UZAG doctoral school.  Georg Stegmüller,  
Franz  Tscherne  (Hallo  servas!),  Gertraud  Bauer  and  Erwin  Kober  are  thanked  for  the  
administrative and technical support.  
  
During  these  three  and  a  half  years,  I  took  part  at  many  interesting  meetings  in  several  
different  countries.  Those  meetings  contributed  a  lot  to  my  present  work.  I  would  like  
especially to acknowledge all the participants of the karst modelling workshop from 2011 to  
2013  (Rudolf  Liedl,  Georg  Kaufmann,  Wolfgang  Dreybrodt,  Thomas  Reimann,  Thomas  
Hiller,   Markus   Giese,   Dushko   Romanov,   Matija   Perne,   Matt   Covington   and   Franci  
Gabrovšek). I thank also Martin, Carole and Manon for the good time we had together during  
the 20th Karst Summer School in Postojna and all the interesting discussions we had after that.  

I should also hereby mention my profound gratitude to two teachers I had during my school  
years: Christophe Huet at high school level and Francois Métivier at university level. Thank  
you  both  for  transmitting  me  your  passion  for  geosciences  for  the  first  one  and  your  
enthusiasm of research for the second one!  
  
Barclay Shoemaker is thanked for his kindness and support with his regular emails coming  
from  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  A  particular  thank  is  addressed  to  Kim  and  
Christoph for the nice time I had during my stay in Dresden! I enjoyed a lot the hikes and the  
nice evenings at the Biergarten near the Blaue Wunder with you, and I hope we will see us  
very  soon.  Nikos  is  thanked  for  his  good  mood  and  all  the  brilliant  discussions  we  had  
together. Danke mein Kampfgenosse!  
  
The  Ginko  (Graz),  Maharaja  and  Namasté  (Ljubljana)  are  acknowledged  for  the  nice  food  
they provide. The Triglav National park, the Schöckl and Mixnitz mountains as well as the  
hills of Novystein, Linecker and Šmarna gora are thanked to exist and to offer so many nice  
biking and hikking trips. The music of Gojira, Cult of  Luna, Explosions in the Sky,  Bijelo  
Dugme, Bajaga i Instruktori and FM4 were really good for my ears and my mind.  
  
I would like to thank all my friends from France and especially those of whom I had a regular  
contact during the years: Alexandra, Damien, Adrien, Boris le hachoir mon pote de toujours,  
Pierre, Anne-Lise, Solène, Benji, Camille, Hugo, Lola and Guillaume with a special mention  
to Séverin who visited me two times.  
  
Nina is thanked a lot for her nice mood as well as  her understanding and patience with me  
during the years ()()*.  
  

                                                             113  
  

----------------------- Page 114-----------------------

Finally my last thought is for my family and especially for my parents Claude and Sylvie: all  
their love and constant support during the years allowed me to become what I am today.   
  
This work was funded by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF): L 576-N21.  
                                              

                                                                     114  
  

----------------------- Page 115-----------------------

                                                SHORT CV  
  

                                                                                                         

  
Personal information  
Full name: Cyril Mayaud  
Date of birth: 01.01.1987  
Place of birth: Longjumeau, France  
Citizenship: French  
Languages: French, German, English  
  
Education  

2010-2014:                              PhD student, University of Graz, Austria  
                                        Thesis title: " Groundwater modelling in karst terrains using   
                                        single-continuum models"   
                                        Supervisor: Univ. Prof. Dr. Steffen Birk  
                                         
2009-2010:                              MsC studies, Pierre-and-Marie-Curie University, Paris, France  
                                        Six month exchange at the University of Graz, Austria  
                                        Thesis title: " Groundwater modelling in karst terrains: example  
                                        of the Lurbach catchment"   
                                        Supervisor: Univ. Prof. Dr. Steffen Birk; Dr. Valérie Plagnes  
                                         
2008-2009:                              MsC studies, Paris Diderot University and IPGP, Paris, France  
                                        Five month at SANTEC-Fuchs compagny, Hürth, Germany  
                                        Thesis title: "Groundwater and subsoil decontamination with  
                                        activated carbon"   
                                         
2006-2008:                              BsC studies, Paris Diderot University, Paris, France  

                                                             115  
  

----------------------- Page 116-----------------------

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

                                                                             
  
  
  
  
  
                            Before all things reborn again  
                    You learn the painful breath of time  
               Cold mourning stretches out your arms  
              To the mighty warmth of the golden sun  
                     Seem all have gone insane for gold  
                          All was created out of the night  
                 We're all born from the burst of a star  
              The day you'll come to life you'll realize  
           Expanding force to life where you belong  
            And in the winter cold, with opened eyes  
You'll find the strength to fight and stand upright  
  One day you'll walk the world and keep in mind  
          The heart you've been given in winter time  
     And through the bitter cold, with opened eyes  
You'll find the strength to fight and stand upright  
                                     Gojira - Born In Winter  
  

116  
  
