UNIVERSITY OF NOVA GORICA 
GRADUATE SCHOOL 
UVALA 
– CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF KARST DEPRESSIONS 
(WITH SELECTED EXAMPLES FROM DINARIDES AND 
CARPATHO-BALKANIDES) 
DISSERTATION 
Jelena Ćalić 
Mentors: dr Andrej Kranjc 
dr Andrzej Tyc 
Nova Gorica, 2009 
UNIVERZA V NOVI GORICI 
FAKULTETA ZA PODIPLOMSKI ŠTUDIJ 
UVALA – PRISPEVEK K ŠTUDIJI KRAŠKIH GLOBELI 
(Z IZBRANIMI PRIMERI IZ DINARIDOV 
IN KARPATO-BALKANIDOV) 
DOKTORSKA DISERTACIJA 
Jelena Ćalić 
Mentorja: dr Andrej Kranjc 
dr Andrzej Tyc 
Nova Gorica, 2009. 
Hereby I declare this thesis is entirely my author work. 
Izjavljam, da je doktorsko delo v celoti moje avtorsko delo. 
Acknowledgements 
Let me start this list of acknowledgements with my sincere gratitude and respect to all 
the people who have established the post-graduate program of karstology at the 
University of Nova Gorica. This excellent idea and successful realization have been a 
significant step in further improvement of the position of karstology in the system of 
geo-sciences. 
My PhD studies would not have been possible without the scholarship that I was 
receiving from the Slovene human resources development and scholarship fund (Ad 
Futura). I am very grateful to the kind people from the Ad Futura team, and to the 
Government of the Republic of Slovenia for establishing such a fund. Part of the 
scholarship was covered by the Slovene Ministry of higher education, science and 
technology. 
I am very grateful to my supervisors, Dr. Andrej Kranjc and Dr. Andrzej Tyc, who have 
supported and encouraged me from the very beginning of this research. Their 
suggestions and comments have been of immense help for me. 
It has been more than a decade since I first met the great people from the Karst Research 
Institute in Postojna. Their energy and team work have been an inspiration to me ever 
since. I am using this opportunity to thank all of them for the past and future field trips, 
discussions, literature, and above all their kindness. 
To my dear colleagues and co-workers at the Geographical Institute “Jovan Cvijić” of 
the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts in Belgrade, thank you all for your support 
and understanding during the finalization of this thesis. Special thanks to Dragoljub 
Štrbac, for transferring to me a part of his huge knowledge on geographical information 
systems. 
I sincerely thank Dr. Ugo Sauro and Dr. Francesco Ferrarese for hosting me at the 
University of Padova, and for showing me the methods and results of their research of 
dolines. 
I am very grateful to Dr. Jože Čar for his valuable instructions regarding the structural- 
geological mapping and for the company in fieldwork in the uvalas of Trnovski Gozd. 
i 
To my caving friends from the Speleological Section “Velebit” from Zagreb, especially 
to Ana and Darko Bakšić, Petra Bajo, and Andrej Stroj, thank you for your company in 
the field and for interesting, wide-ranging karstological discussions. 
My sincere thanks to Dr. Sanja Faivre and Dr. Neven Bočić from the Geographical 
Department of the Faculty of Science and Mathematics, University of Zagreb, for 
providing me the literature related to the Croatian part of the Dinaric karst. 
For a number of valuable favours during my studies in Slovenia, I sincerely thank to 
Staša Mesec, Miha Staut, and the family Rapaić from Ljubljana. 
I thank Ms. Nataša Pregl for translating the Summary to Slovene language. 
And finally, very special thanks to my very special family – Predrag and Tomislav, 
together with my parents Gordana and Petar, who have all been so supportive and full of 
understanding regarding my work and my frequent absences. 
ii 
Uvala – contribution to the study of karst depressions, 
with selected examples from Dinarides and Carpatho-Balkanides 
Abstract: 
Uvalas are a particular type of karst closed depressions. While other types of closed 
depressions – dolines and poljes – are regularly listed and relatively well defined in 
overviews of karst surface morphology, the uvalas are either excluded or their vague 
identification is stressed. The leading idea of the thesis is to start a systematic study of 
uvalas, in order to obtain the clear meaning of the term uvala and prevent its abandoning 
in karstology and general geomorphology. Within the study, 43 examples of uvalas have 
been selected. The studied uvalas are located in the Dinaric karst and karst of the 
Carpatho-Balkanides. All the case examples have been digitally processed in the same 
way. Creation of high-resolution digital elevation models enabled quantification of 
morphometrical parameters, generation of inclination maps and cross-sections, as well 
as application of descriptive, exploratory and inferential statistical analyses. Formation 
of the geographical information system of the studied uvalas was done using raster- 
based and vector-based GIS software packages. In 12 studied uvalas, detailed structural- 
geological mapping has been carried out, which revealed dominant development of 
uvalas along tectonically broken zones of regional scale. Several delicate issues related 
to the position of uvalas in the system of karst closed depressions are discussed: 
terminological problems, genetic issues, relation to other geomorphological processes 
(fluvial and glacial), as well as some directions for future research. A revised definition 
of the term uvala is suggested, leaving the opportunity for further discussions and 
upgrades. 
Key words: 
karst surface morphology, karst depression, uvala, geographic information system, 
Dinarides, Carpatho-Balkanides 
iii 
Uvala – prispevek k študiji kraških globeli 
z izbranimi primeri iz Dinaridov in Karpato-Balkanidov 
Izvleček: 
Uvale so značilna vrsta zaprtih kraških globeli. Medtem ko se druge vrste zaprtih globeli 
– vrtače in polje – redno pojavljajo v pregledih kraške površinske morfologije in so tudi 
precej dobro opredeljene, so uvale potisnjene ob rob ali pa je poudarjeno, kako težko jih 
je natančno opredeliti. Glavni namen disertacije je začeti s sistematsko raziskavo uval, 
da bi pridobili jasen pomen izraza uvala in preprečili njegovo popolno izginotje iz 
krasoslovja in splošne geomorfologije. V okviru študije smo izbrali 43 primerov uval. 
Te uvale se nahajajo na Dinarskem krasu in na krasu Karpato-Balkanidov. Vsi vzorčni 
primeri so bili digitalno obdelani na enak način. Oblikovali smo digitalne modele reliefa 
z visoko ločljivostjo, s čimer smo omogočili količinsko opredelitev morfoloških 
parametrov, pripravo kart naklonov in presekov ter uporabo opisnih, raziskovalnih in 
inferencialnih statističnih analiz. Z uporabo rastrskih in vektorskih programskih paketov 
GIS smo vzpostavili geografski informacijski sistem uval, vključenih v raziskavo. 
Dvanajst izbranih uval smo podrobno strukturno-geološko kartirali, pri čemer smo 
ugotovili, da so uvale nastajale zlasti vzdolž tektonsko porušenih con na regionalni 
ravni. Obravnavali smo več občutljivih vprašanj, povezanih s položajem uval v sistemu 
zaprtih kraških globeli: terminološke probleme, genetske probleme, povezavo z drugimi 
geomorfološkimi procesi (fluvialnimi in glacialnimi) ter nekatere smernice za nadaljnje 
raziskave. Predlagali smo spremenjeno definicijo termina uvala, pri čemer dopuščamo 
možnost nadaljnjih razprav in nadgradnje. 
Ključne besede: 
kraška površinska morfologija, kraška globel, uvala, geografski informacijski sistem, 
Dinaridi, Karpato-Balkanidi 
iv 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Introduction 1 
2. Overview of definitions and classifications of dolines and poljes 4 
2.1. Dolines 4 
2.2. Poljes 10 3. Usage of the term uvala – an overview 15 
3.1. Regional usage 15 
3.2. History of the karstological term uvala 15 
3.3. Textbooks, encyclopedias, and dictionaries 17 
3.4. Scientific papers and regional studies 23 
4. Methodology 29 
4.1. Cartographic input 29 
4.2. Definition of basic parameters 30 
4.2.1. Measured parameters 30 
4.2.1.1. Perimeter line 30 
4.2.1.2. The lowest point 34 
4.2.1.3. Other measured parameters 34 
4.2.2. Computed parameters 35 
4.3. Digital processing 36 
4.4. Structural-geological mapping 38 
4.5. Statistical analyses 40 
4.6. Geographical information system 41 5. Selected field examples 43 
5.1. Dinaric karst 48 
5.1.1. Uvalas Mrzli Log and Kanji Dol, on Trnovski Gozd 52 
5.1.2. Uvala Hrastov Dol, the region of Suha Krajina (Dolenjska) 58 
5.1.3. Uvala Ravan on the Bloke Plateau 61 
5.1.4. Uvala Grda Draga on Mt.Snežnik 63 
5.1.5. Uvalas of Mt.Velebit 67 
5.1.6. Uvalas of the tectonic unit Mala Kapela 83 
v 
5.1.7. Uvala Vagan, between Mazinsko polje and Lapačko polje 92 
5.1.8. Uvala Poljica, in the area of the Imotsko polje 94 
5.1.9. Uvala Rupa on Mt.Grmeč 98 
5.1.10. Uvalas in the area of Mt.Lunjevača and Mt.Klekovača 99 
5.1.11. Uvalas around Livanjsko, Glamočko and Kupreško polje 103 
5.1.12. Uvalas in the regions Oputne Rudine and Banjani 109 
5.1.13. Uvalas of the region Katunska Nahija 112 
5.1.14. Uvala Dolovi on Mt.Lovćen 120 
5.2. Carpatho-Balkan Mountains 123 
5.2.1. Veliko Igrište on Mt.Kučaj 125 
5.2.2. Uvalas of the Tepoš plateau, Mt.Vidlič 129 6. Statistical processing 133 
6.1. Descriptive statistics 133 
6.2. Correlation statistic 144 
6.3. Confirmatory data analyses 149 
6.4. Exploratory statistics 154 7. Geographical information system 159 
8. Discussion 162 
8.1. Terminological inconsistencies 162 
8.2. Planar shape 162 
8.3. Coalescence issue 163 
8.4. Inherited forms 165 
8.5. Genetic issue 167 
8.6. Boundary examples 168 
8.7. Slopes 170 
8.8. The role of hydrological function 174 
8.9. Relation to other geomorphological processes 175 
8.9.1. Fluvial process 175 
8.9.2. Glacial process 177 
vi 
8.10. Direction of further research 178 
8.10.1. Database filling and GIS improvement 178 
8.10.2. Sedimentological studies 179 
8.10.3. Fourier analyses of vertical and horizontal components 179 
8.10.4. Application of fuzzy sets theory for 
classifications of karst surface depressions 183 9. Conclusions 185 9.1. General remarks 185 
9.2. Typical examples 185 
9.3. Classification(s) 186 
9.4. Towards a new definition 187 10. Povzetek 188 
10.1. Uvod 188 
10.2. Metodologija 190 
10.3. Izbrani primeri 191 
10.4. Zaključki 192 
10.4.1. Splošne pripombe 192 
10.4.2. Značilni primeri 193 
10.4.3. Klasifikacija/-e 193 
10.4.1. Proti novi definiciji 194 
11. References 195 
Appendix 1: CD with .kmz files for Google Earth 
Appendix 2: Integrated table of morphometric and elevation parameters 
vii 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig. 2.1: Two types of solution dolines (defined by Ford & Williams 1989 and 2007; Figure by 
Sauro, 2003) Fig. 2.2: Inception dolines – new sub-type of solution dolines, besides point recharge and 
drawdown dolines (Sauro, 2003). Fig. 2.3: The main categories of dolines (Sauro, 2003) Fig. 2.4: Structural classification of dolines (Čar, 2001) (A – stratification doline; B – Fissure 
doline; C – Bedded-fissure doline; D – Broken doline; E – Near-fault doline; F – Fault dolines) Fig. 2.5: Types of poljes suggested by Gams (1978) Fig. 2.6: Types of poljes according to Ford & Williams (2007) (condensed classification of 
Gams, 1978) Fig. 3.1: Glade (uvala) south of Chanal, Northern Chiapas, Mexico (sketch by A.Gerstenhauer; 
Sweeting, 1972) Fig. 3.2: Evolution of compound sinks (White, 1988) Fig. 4.1. Several ways of defining a perimeter line for a doline: dashed line – perimeter of the 
closed depression; dotted line – portion of slope influenced by the doline; dash-and-dot line – water divide (Bondesan et al., 1992; parts of Figures 1 and 11) Fig. 4.2. Delineation of perimeter line (red line) for: a) dolines (sharp change of slope 
inclination), and b) poljes (flat bottom). Location of (a) is in Marinkovci, close to Bosansko Grahovo in Bosnia, while (b) is flooded Fatničko polje in Herzegovina Fig. 4.3. Razdolje Uvala (ID 20) defined by highest closed contour at 700 m a.s.l. (red line) and 
topographical divide (blue line). Pink dots mark the lowest points, at 675 m a.s.l. Fig. 4.4: Macro-model designed in Idrisi Andes, for extraction of highest closed contour area, 
and subsequent volume calculation Fig. 4.5. The method of structural mapping developed by J.Čar, applied for the study of dolines 
(Čar, 2001) Fig. 4.6: Applied statistical procedures Fig. 5.1: Areas of research Fig. 5.2: Overview map of the studied uvalas, marked with ID numbers (see in landscape page 
orientation) Fig. 5.3: Elevations of the studied uvalas (lowest points and highest closed contours) Fig. 5.4: Rose diagram of orientations of uvala major diameters (on the scale 0o-180o) Fig. 5.5: Simplified general tectonic map of the Dinarides (Herak, 1986) Fig. 5.6: Dinaric karst, according to Roglić (1969) (1 – fluviokarst; 2 – deep karst) Fig. 5.7: Geological sketch of Banjšice, Trnovski Gozd, Nanos and Hrušica (Čar, 1997), with 
added positions of Mrzli Log and Kanji Dol Fig. 5.8: Uvala Mrzli Log, view from the north Fig. 5.9: Structural and lithological settings in the uvala Mrzli Log Fig. 5.10: Outcrop of broken zone in north-western part of Mrzli Log Fig. 5.11: Uvala Kanji Dol, view from the south-east Fig. 5.12: Structural and lithological settings in the uvala Kanji Dol Fig. 5.13: Digital elevation model of the vicinity of Mrzli Log and Kanji Dol (thick red lines 
represent spatial extension of a regional broken zone) Fig. 5.14: Digital elevation model of the uvala Hrastov Dol (grid resolution 5 x 5 m) Fig. 5.15: Slope inclination map of Hrastov Dol (grid resolution 10 x 10 m) Fig. 5.16: Uvala Ravan (view towards the south, from the low ridge between northern and 
southern lobe) Fig. 5.17: Digital elevation model of the uvala Ravan Fig. 5.18: Digital elevation model of Grda Draga 
viii 
Fig. 5.19: Structural-geological map of the uvala Grda Draga Fig. 5.20: The fault plane 275/70, at the eastern part of the uvala Fig. 5.21: Stereoplot of fissures in Grda Draga (poles of fissure planes) Fig. 5.22: Situation map of the uvalas Hrastov Dol, Ravan, and Grda Draga (mapped on the 
SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.23: Elements from the structural map of Velebit, by Prelogović (1995), with the positions 
of the studied uvalas (mapped on SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.24: Cross-section through Mt.Velebit, with positions of deep caves (Bakšić, 2008) Fig. 5.25: View from the slopes of Veliki Rajinac towards the SE part of Lomska Duliba Fig. 5.26: Digital elevation model of Lomska Duliba and Veliki Lubenovac Fig. 5.27: Structural-geological sketch of Lomska Duliba Fig. 5.28: Stereoplot of fissures in Lomska Duliba (poles of fissure planes); the situation in 
Veliki Lubenovac is almost the same. Fig. 5.29: Veliki Lubenovac; view from the peak Mali Kuk towards the east Fig. 5.30: Structural-geological sketch of Veliki Lubenovac Fig. 5.31: Digital elevation model of the uvala Bilenski Padež Fig. 5.32: Digital elevation model of the uvala Brizovac Fig. 5.33: Photos of Crni Dabar from 1951 (by J.Poljak), and 2008; taken from approximately 
the same place Fig. 5.34: Digital elevation model of Crni Dabar, Ravni Dabar, and Došen Dabar Fig. 5.35: Digital elevation model of the uvala Konjsko Fig. 5.36: Digital elevation model of Duboke Jasle Fig. 5.37: The uvala Duboke Jasle, view from the eastern margin (the slopes of the peak 
Ćelavac) Fig. 5.38: Digital elevation model of the uvala Duboki Dol Fig. 5.39: The uvala Duboki Dol, view from the west (Photo: P. Ćalić) Fig. 5.40: Digital elevation model of the Vagan Popinski Fig. 5.41: Structural-geological sketch of the Vagan Popinski Fig. 5.42: Vagan Popinski, view from the south Fig. 5.43: Hydrogeological map of Lička Jesenica region, Mt.M.Kapela (Bahun, 1989) Fig. 5.44: Tectonic units of the north-eastern part of Lika, with the positions of the studied 
uvalas (locations of faults according to Sokač et al. (1976b), Polšak et al. (1967), Šušnjar et al. (1965); mapped on the SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.45: The uvala Glibodol Fig. 5.46: Digital elevation model of the uvalas Glibodol and Mala Kapela Fig. 5.47: View from the central part of Čorkova Uvala towards the virgin forest on the north- 
west Fig. 5.48: Digital elevation model of Čorkova Uvala Fig. 5.49: Slope inclinations in the region of Čorkova Uvala (grid resolution 20 x 20 m) Fig. 5.50: Surface profile from the Trnavac polje to the Krbavica polje Fig. 5.51: The uvala Jasenova Korita, view towards the south Fig. 5.52: Digital elevation model of the uvala Jasenova Korita Fig. 5.53: Cross section through Jasenova Korita, in the W-E direction Fig. 5.54: Digital elevation model of the uvala Vagan, close to Mazin Fig. 5.55: Vagan (Mazin), view from the south-east Fig. 5.56: Situation map of the wider area of Imotsko polje, with selected geomorphological and 
structural elements (fluvial levels according to Roglić (1938); mapped on the SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.57: Digital elevation model of the uvala Poljica Fig. 5.58: Surface profile from Osoje to Gornji Proložac (generated from SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.59: The uvala Poljica, close to Imotski 
ix 
Fig. 5.60: Digital elevation model of the uvala Rupa Fig. 5.61: Situation map of the uvalas of Grmeč, Lunjevača, and Klekovača (mapped on the 
SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.62: Digital elevation model of the uvala Crljivica Fig. 5.63: Crljivica, view from the south-east Fig. 5.64: Structural-geological sketch of Materića Uvala Fig. 5.65: Digital elevation model of the Materića Uvala Fig. 5.66: Digital elevation model of the Klekovačka Uvala Fig. 5.67: Situation map of the uvalas in the area of great poljes of western Bosnia (mapped on 
the SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.68: Sediments at the bottom of the Livanjsko polje (Mt.Dinara in the background) Fig. 5.69: Digital elevation model of the uvala Razvala on Mt.Dinara Fig. 5.70: Ždralovac, view from the south (Photo: I. Dolić) Fig. 5.71: Digital elevation model of the uvala Ždralovac Fig. 5.72: Digital elevation model of the uvala Poljanica Fig. 5.73: Digital elevation model of the uvala Ljubodol Fig. 5.74: Structural-geological sketch of the uvala Vuči Do Fig. 5.75: Digital elevation model of the uvala Vuči Do Fig. 5.76: Vuči Do, view from the south Fig. 5.77: Digital elevation model of the uvala Baljački Do Fig. 5.78: Baljački Do, view from the north-west Fig. 5.79: Digital elevation model of the uvala Štrpca Fig. 5.80: Positions of some uvalas in the region Katunska Nahija (mapped on the SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.81: Digital elevation model of the uvala Broćanac Nikšićki Fig. 5.82: Broćanac Nikšićki, view from the north-east Fig. 5.83: Digital elevation model of the uvala Ljeskovi Dolovi Fig. 5.84: Ljeskovi Dolovi, view from the north-east Fig. 5.85: Digital elevation model of the uvala Ubaljski Do Fig. 5.86: Ubaljski Do, view from the north-east Fig. 5.87: Digital elevation model of the uvala Dragomi Do Fig. 5.88: Dragomi Do, view from the south Fig. 5.89: Structural-geological sketch of the uvala Ilinski Do Fig. 5.90: Digital elevation model of the uvala Ilinski Do Fig. 5.91: Ilinski Do, view from the south Fig. 5.92: Structural-geological sketch of the uvala Dolovi Fig. 5.93: Digital elevation model of the uvala Dolovi Fig. 5.94: Dolovi, view from the south Fig. 5.95: Tectonic sketch of the Carpatho-Balkanides (Kräutner & Krstić, 2003) Fig. 5.96: Geological map of a part of the western Kučaj (Veselinović, 1964) (overlapped with 
SRTM DEM) Fig. 5.97: Veliko Igrište, view from the north Fig. 5.98: One of the small quarries of road-making material in Veliko Igrište Fig. 5.99: Condition of rock in the quarries of Veliko Igrište Fig. 5.100: Structural-geological sketch of Veliko Igrište Fig. 5.101: Digital elevation model of Veliko Igrište, with the dominant tectonic structure Fig. 5.102: Situation map of the uvalas Baševica and Ovča Fig. 5.103: Structural-geological sketch of the uvala Baševica Fig. 5.104: Digital elevation model of the uvala Baševica Fig. 5.105: Baševica, view from the north-west Fig. 5.106: Digital elevation model of the uvala Ovča Fig. 5.107: Ovča, view from the south-east 
x 
Fig. 6.1: Frequency distribution histogram of the studied uvalas, based on the perimeter along 
the highest closed contour (Pc) Fig. 6.2: Decreasingly sorted Pc values of the studied uvalas Fig. 6.3: Frequency distribution histogram of the studied uvalas, based on the perimeter along 
the topographical divide (Pd) Fig. 6.4: Frequency distribution histogram of the studied uvalas, based on the area within the 
highest closed contour (Ac) Fig. 6.5: Decreasingly sorted Ac values of the studied uvalas Fig. 6.6: Frequency distribution histogram of the studied uvalas, based on the area within the 
topographical divide (Ad) Fig. 6.7: Decreasingly sorted Ad values of the studied uvalas Fig. 6.8: Frequency distribution histogram of the studied uvalas, based on the volume beneath 
the highest closed contour Fig. 6.9: Decreasingly sorted volumes of the studied uvalas Fig. 6.10: Scatterplot of correlation between uvala areas and volumes Fig. 6.11: Scatterplot of correlation between uvala depths (HUV) and volumes Fig. 6.12: Scatterplot of correlation between uvala volumes and R2H (see text) Fig. 6.13: Scatterplot of correlation between the uvala depth (HUV) and area (Ac) Fig. 6.14: Correlation of depth and average diameter for the dolines of the Trieste Karst. R2 
value is 0.78. (Bondesan et al., 1992) Fig. 6.15: Scatterplot of correlation between uvala average diameter (DAVEc) and depth (HUV) Fig. 6.16: Dendrogram formed by cluster analysis of complete morphometrical data Fig. 6.17: Three-dimensional scaling of all 43 examples (complete morphometrical dataset) Fig. 6.18: Two-dimensional scaling of 39 examples, largest 4 excluded (complete 
morphometrical dataset) Fig. 7.1: Screenshot showing an Idrisi Andes desktop with generated slope inclination map of 
the uvala Rupa (ID_24) Fig. 7.2: Screenshot showing a GeoMedia desktop, with the map-window zoomed on western 
Bosnian uvalas Fig. 8.1: Patterns of doline enlargement, forming a honeycomb or polygonal karst (Bondesan et 
al, 1992) Fig. 8.2: Compound dolines on Mt.Miroč (see also the .kmz file of the outlined feature, in the 
Appendix 1) Fig. 8.3: Panorama view of the polje of Homoljac Fig. 8.4: Dolines with rocky outcrops in the polje of Homoljac Fig. 8.5: Flow components in karst depressions, defined by Gunn (1981) Fig. 8.6: Schematic cross-sections of dolines, and their slope retreat (Gams, 2000) Fig. 8.7: Four evolutionary paths of solution dolines, according to Péntek et al. (2007) Fig. 8.8: Processing of series of Y coordinates by discrete Fourier transform, and smoothing 
(blue line) of the initial perimeter values (pink line) by inclusion of only six non-zero harmonics of highest magnitudes Fig. 8.9: Smoothing of the Pc perimeter of the Materića Uvala (ID_25) by discrete Fourier 
transform, using only one non-zero harmonic (with highest magnitude) Fig. 8.10: Smoothing of the Pc perimeter of the uvala Ljeskovi Dolovi (ID_36) by discrete 
Fourier transform, using six non-zero harmonics (with highest magnitudes) Fig. 8.11: Left: Borders of a fuzzy set; Right: Boolean (crisp) set (Burrough & McDonnell, 
1998) 
xi 
LIST OF TABLES 
Tab. 4.1: Measured parameters 
Tab. 4.2: Computed parameters 
Tab. 6.1: Perimeters of the uvalas (Pc and Pd), sorted decreasingly 
Tab. 6.2: Areas of the uvalas (Ac, Ad), sorted decreasingly 
Tab. 6.3: Volumes of the uvalas, sorted decreasingly 
Tab. 6.4: Coefficients of correlation and determination between two-dimensional 
morphometric parameters 
Tab. 6.5: Codes and abbreviations for nominal data on uvalas 
Tab. 6.6: Nominal (categorical) data on the studied uvalas. Codes from Tab. 6.5. 
Tab. 6.7: Contingency table for categorical variables of lithological and hydrological 
data. Abbreviations from Tab. 6.5. 
Tab. 6.8: Contingency table for lithological and hydrological data, with expected 
frequencies included (in small font) 
Tab. 6.9: Contingency table for lithological data and bottom morphology, with expected 
frequencies included (in small font). Abbreviations from the Tab. 6.5. 
Tab. 6.10: Contingency table for hydrological data and bottom morphology, with 
expected frequencies included (in small font). Abbreviations from the Tab. 6.5. 
xii 
1. Introduction 
Closed depressions are generally considered the most characteristic feature of karst 
surface morphology. In a great number of references, especially in south-eastern 
Europe, three forms are usually listed in classifications of karst surface depressions: 
doline, uvala, and polje. On the other hand, in western European and north American 
literature, uvala is often either excluded from such classifications, or it is given a 
marginal importance. 
Dolines are mostly regarded as “diagnostic” karst landforms. Most of the usual 
definitions say that dolines are depressions “circular to subcircular in plan form, and 
vary in diameter from a few meters to about one kilometer” (Ford & Williams, 
1989). On the other hand, the definitions of polje are usually more complex, but most 
authors agree that poljes are closed large depressions in karst, with flat bottom 
covered with unconsolidated sediments, and situated very close to the local water 
table. 
The definitions of uvalas, however, differ to a considerable extent. In most 
references, uvalas are defined as karst depressions which are formed due to 
coalescence of several dolines. Occasionally, the genetic factor is not included at all, 
and uvalas are mentioned only as forms whose size is “in between” those of dolines 
and poljes. Sometimes the authors quote Jovan Cvijić, who introduced this term into 
the karstological literature (first in 1893, and more precisely in 1899), but 
unfortunately with erroneous theory on genesis – that the uvalas are transitional 
evolutional elements between dolines and poljes. This mistake had a critical impact 
on the subsequent usage of the term uvala: as the cyclic theory on karst evolution 
(that dolines evolve into uvalas, and uvalas into poljes) was abandoned, uvalas were 
gradually losing the status of an established form of karst surface relief. This is 
maybe best illustrated in the explanation of uvala in the Glossary of a well known 
karstological internet portal speleogenesis.info: “The term was introduced to describe 
features assumed to be the second step in a 3-stage process of polje development, in 
which dolines were supposed to coalesce into uvalas. This mechanism is no longer 
accepted and the term uvala has fallen into disuse.” (definition taken from Lowe & 
Waltham (1995)). 
The starting idea of this work is that there are substantial reasons for re-introducing 
of uvalas into modern karstology. This requires thorough geomorphological analysis 
1 
which would help in correction of previous erroneous views and hopefully lead 
towards re-definition of the term uvala. 
The general objective of this thesis is to turn the attention of karstological scientific 
community towards uvalas – a “forgotten” and often misinterpreted form of karst 
surface relief. 
The initial hypothesis is that there is a type of karst surface depression which is by 
size larger than a doline and usually smaller than a polje, but differs from these two 
forms also in morphology and combination of genetic factors, which gives it a status 
of a particular karst relief form. It is a widely accepted fact that all karst features are 
formed by combination of corrosion and mechanical erosion, as well as more or less 
prominent influence of lithological and structural elements. For various features, 
various elements are considered dominant – for example, tectonic movements are 
often considered a dominant factor in formation of poljes, while lithology is of great 
importance in the development of forms like karren and kamenitzas. One of the goals 
of the thesis is to estimate roles of those particular factors in formation of uvalas. 
The objectives can be summed up in several points: 
- to give a detailed overview of usage of the term uvala, from its introduction 
to nowadays; covering various attitudes (references that approve the term, as 
well as those who disapprove or ignore it) 
- to pinpoint about 40 uvalas (the final number is 43) in the Dinaric and 
Carpatho-Balkan mountains, which present various types of this feature, in 
different lithological, structural and geomorphological conditions 
- to carry out detailed structural-geological field mapping of some of the 
selected uvalas (12 examples), which has lead to valuable answers about the 
influence of tectonics in their formation 
- to carry out morphometrical analyses of all the studied uvalas 
- to create a Geographical Information System which has comprised all the 
significant data about the studied examples, and allowed easier statistical 
processing and comparison. Even more important function of the GIS is to 
serve as a basis for future research in this field. 
- to suggest a classification of the studied uvalas and to offer a revised 
definition aimed at re-establishing of the uvalas in the system of karst closed 
depressions. 
2 
It was very important to establish a precise and consistent database, not only for the 
research within this thesis, but, even more important, for the future studies of this 
subject which are yet to come and are expected to be much more extensive and 
detailed. We opted for precise georeferring of cartographic input in order to obtain 
the most accurate positioning of the study areas. All the examples have been 
methodologically processed exactly in the same way, to make the comparisons fully 
reliable. 
Due to the previous poor coverage of uvalas and uvala-like features in karstological 
literature, it was impossible to encompass in this work all the segments necessary for 
their detailed study, i.e. to apply all the methods which are usually used for the study 
of other kinds of karst depressions. 
Particular attention has been paid to the development of fundamental background and 
standardization of initial methodological procedures which will in future be upgraded 
with more detailed research techniques from various disciplines of geo-sciences. In 
some way, it can be said that considerable part of the work is related to organization 
of the research, in comparison to the detailed research itself, and that, subsequently, 
due to limited extent of the thesis, some aspects of the issue had to remain open for 
future studies. Particular section (8.10) is dedicated to the ideas for further research 
on this matter. 
Instead of the intention of giving the final solutions and answers, it would be more 
appropriate and more realistic to say that this is the introductory research into the 
problem of karstic uvalas. 
3 
2. Overview of definitions and classifications of dolines and poljes 
Regarding the fact that dolines and poljes are generally recognized forms of karst 
surface relief, and uvalas are usually mentioned “in between” the two, it is necessary 
to outline the basic scientific opinions on these “boundary elements”. The references 
in this overview are listed in approximately chronological order. 
2.1. Dolines 
In great majority of references, doline is regarded as a surface relief form which 
determines karstic relief – a “diagnostic” karst form. Dolines are circular to sub- 
circular depressions of karstic origin, whose diameters are in most cases several tens 
of meters, but can reach even several hundreds of meters. First occurrences of this term in literature date back to middle 19th century 
(elaborated by Gams 1973), when Austrian authors accepted the word “dolina” from 
Slovenian language. This word has much wider meaning in many Slavic languages, 
denoting any low-lying part of relief (mostly a fluvial valley), but the inhabitants of 
the Kras region use it for medium-sized karst depressions, because such depressions 
are the only low-lying relief forms in the area (fluvial valleys are completely 
missing). For this reason, the Slavic word “doline”, although used in most part of the 
world for this form of karst relief, is not used in Slavic languages scientific 
terminologies (e.g. the word “vrtača” is used in Slovenian and Serbian, “ponikva” in 
Croatian, “lejek” (or “lej krasowy”) in Polish, “závrt” in Czech, etc.). 
Cvijić (1893, 1895) gave the first scientific elaboration of dolines in his capital work 
“Das Karstphänomen”. Although many overview references (e.g. Sweeting 1972, 
Ford & Williams 1989, 2007; and many others) stress Cvijić’s morphographic 
classifications of dolines (bowl-shaped, funnel-shaped and well-shaped), it must be 
said that this is only his sub-classification of “normal”, solutional dolines. The initial 
Cvijić’s classification, which is somehow “hidden” because of unsystematic 
organization of the chapters, distinguishes: (1) “normal” dolines (equivalent to the 
present term “solution dolines”); (2) abysses; (3) alluvial dolines. Abysses are steep- 
sided dolines which continue downwards into caves. Although this doline type is not 
present in contemporary classifications, it is worth to stress Cvijić’s awareness of the 
link between dolines and vertical shafts, which is recently again in the focus of 
4 
attention (Šušteršič, 1994; White, 1988; Sauro, 2003). The greatest Cvijić’s mistake 
in classification of dolines is his negative attitude towards collapse as a doline 
morphogenetic process. 
One of the most detailed systematical overviews of dolines ever, but especially for the time of middle 20th century, is the work of Cramer (1941). He reviewed virtually 
all up-to-date published references on dolines and extensive terminology of karst 
surface forms in several languages, i.e. regions – German, “Dinaric” (covering south- 
Slavic languages), French, Italian, and selected terms from other languages (native 
expressions from central America, Morocco, Greece, Hungary, etc.). Cramer 
distinguished five types of dolines: collapse, solution, suffosion, alluvial and 
“schwund” dolines (seemingly a sub-type of suffosion dolines). Collapse and 
solution dolines occur on bare karst, while other types are developed in covered 
karst. 
Jennings (1985) allows that dolines can reach “several hundreds of metres in 
horizontal dimensions” and states that “Increasing size is usually accompanied by 
complexity of form, which takes them into other categories of closed depressions”. 
In the classification, he differentiates the following types: solution doline, collapse 
doline, subsidence doline, subjacent karst doline (in formations overlying karst 
rocks), and alluvial streamsink doline. 
Ford & Williams (1989; 2007) stress that it is true that the dolines are the indicators 
of karst, but also that their absence on carbonate rocks does not mean that karst is not 
developed. In the first edition of their book (Ford & Williams, 1989), four types of 
dolines are distinguished (solution, collapse, subsidence, suffosion), while in the 
second edition (2007), there are six types: solution, collapse, dropout, buried, 
caprock, and suffosion. Solution dolines may be formed by two types of initiation: 
(1) point recharge and (2) drawdown. Point recharge development involves the 
development of proto-conduits in previously covered limestone, and initiation of 
dolines when proto-caves reach a breakthrough stage (towards a spring or other 
conduit) and become points of surface waters recharge. Drawdown dolines are 
formed in limestone without caprock, with already developed vadose conduit 
network, so the recharge of atmospheric waters is diffuse, depending on soil cover 
(Ford & Williams, 2007; Fig. 2.1. by Sauro, 2003). 
5 
Fig. 2.1: Two types of solution dolines (defined by Ford & Williams 1989 and 2007; 
Figure by Sauro, 2003) 
Sauro (2003) introduced an additional genetic type of solution dolines – inception 
dolines (apart from point recharge and drawdown dolines, defined previously by 
Ford & Williams, 1989). Inception dolines evolve in the conditions where a hanging 
karst aquifer exists over an impermeable rock layer. If there is an outlet in an 
impermeable layer, or a pre-existing void in the underlying karstic rock, the hanging 
aquifer focuses its drainage toward that point, which is a triggering factor for doline 
development (Fig. 2.2). 
6 
Fig. 2.2: Inception dolines – new sub-type of solution dolines, besides point recharge 
and drawdown dolines (Sauro, 2003). 
Close connection between dolines and pre-existing underground conduits was 
focused also by Šušteršič (1994). He stressed the role of vertical shafts (domepits) in 
the development of dolines, supporting the idea that dolines are “reproductions of the 
underground karst voids on the surface”, or more precisely, features that develop 
when underlying caverns (domepits) intersect with the surface which is being 
lowered by karst denudation. 
Several intricate questions regarding dolines are discussed by Sauro (1995); for 
example, general lack of very small dolines (less than 10-15 m diameter) in 
limestone areas is explained by the stage of “cryptodoline”, which in fact exists in 
rock, but is still filled with debris and sediments. Chains of dolines along dry valleys 
and structural and stratigraphical contacts are discussed as well. The author also 
explains the examples of forms of mixed origin (e.g. glacio-karstic) and polyphase 
development (Sauro, 1995). Extensive and systematic overview of all karst surface 
depressions, particularly dolines, was given by the same author within the 
Encyclopedia of caves (Sauro, 2004; in Culver & White, 2004). Classifications by 
different criteria is given (according to shape, geomorphological / topographical 
settings, hydrological behavior, and, of course, genetic processes), as well as 
7 
overview of other geomorphological processes (apart from karstic) that can take part 
in doline evolution: weathering (including frost shattering and soil forming), slope 
processes, overland flow, sediment trapping and evacuation. 
Fig. 2.3: The main categories of dolines (Sauro, 2003) 
One of the milestone articles related to doline morphogenetic processes is that of 
Gams (2000). Without entering the issue of classifications, some other important and 
delicate questions are discussed – general limestone solution dynamics, doline slope 
8 
development, global climatic restraints of the doline distribution, as well as the initial 
factors of doline development, especially the “local accelerated solution”. 
Fig. 2.4: Structural classification of dolines (Čar, 2001) 
(A – stratification doline; B – Fissure doline; C – Bedded-fissure doline; D – Broken 
doline; E – Near-fault doline; F – Fault dolines) 
Classification of dolines according to their position within the structural pattern is 
elaborated by Čar (2001), who differentiates six basic types: stratification dolines, 
fissure dolines, bedded-fissured dolines, broken dolines, near-fault dolines, and fault 
dolines; as well as two additional, more complex types: contact dolines and 
reproduced dolines. A particular type comprises broken collapse dolines, which are 
transitional features between classical collapse dolines (above horizontal cave 
9 
passages), and broken dolines (dolines in broken zones). Various positions regarding 
tectonically fractured zones (crushed, broken, fissured) result in specific forms and 
particular dynamics of development. 
By application of precise field measurements and mathematical and statistical 
processing, Šušteršič (2006) determined that small-sized solution dolines 
demonstrate a regular shape, which can be approximated by a “paraboloid that hardly 
differs from a cone”. Doline slopes consist of three zones – central zone (C), 
intermediate zone (S), and outer zone (Z). Intermediate segment is variable during 
the doline growth, while central and outer segments remain constant in size (inert). 
2.2. Poljes 
Although the Dinaric expression “polje” was occasionally used in literature since the second half of the 19th century (e.g. Mojsisovicz, 1880; cit. by Gams, 1978), it was 
Cvijić (1893, 1895) who made the first scientific introduction of the term. This first 
official definition states that the polje is “a great karstic depression, of vast flat 
bottom, with sharp angle between floor and slopes, and its longer axis is always 
clearly defined, parallel with bedding strike”. Cvijić claims that the most typical 
poljes are situated in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Two main classifications are by the 
criteria of shape (elongated; circular; irregular) and hydrographical function (dry; 
seasonally flooded; lake poljes). In the same study, Cvijić explains the dimensional 
relation between dolines and poljes: “...there are transition forms between poljes and 
dolines. Smaller of these transitional forms, not exceeding 1 km in diameter, are 
called dolines, and bigger are called poljes” (Cvijić, 1893, 1895). 
Penck (1900) also discussed that sometimes it is difficult to define whether some 
forms are big dolines or small poljes. He stressed that the sharp morphological line 
between floor and slopes of poljes (sharp angle) exists due to sediment infills of 
sand, clay, rarely gravel, that are brought to poljes by rivers. According to Penck, 
some large dolines on Mt.Orjen in Montenegro have functioned like poljes during the 
ice ages (they were hydrologically active). On the other hand, some large poljes, like 
Nevesinjsko polje in Herzegovina, are not flat, so numerous ponors divided it into 
several smaller depressions, which are again of similar dimensions as great dolines. 
As opposed to dolines, which are present almost everywhere on karsts, poljes are 
10 
more rare, they are not a “essential inventory” of karst, and are present only where 
parts of terrain have been uplifted or subsided (Penck, 1900). 
Among the first authors who indicated that poljes are not essentially karstic form, but 
only the inliers of normal fluvial landscapes in karst terrains was Roglić (1955, 
1974). He stressed the role of lateral (marginal) corrosion in the areas covered with 
impermeable sediments. These sediments suspend the normal karstic development, 
which is vertically oriented, and guide the corrosion into horizontal direction, to 
attack the margins of a polje. Roglić stresses the strength of the corrosional process, 
which is “very powerful and can be very fast”, helped with the organic matter in 
stagnating water and biochemical processes. 
Slovene karst terminology (edited by Gams, 1973) offers the following definition of 
a polje: “The largest karst depression with flat bottom and karstic outflow. In its 
typical form it has a sinking river and steep slopes”. 
Gams (1978), in one of the most cited papers on the issue of polje, gives a review of 
most relevant definitions of karst poljes in glossaries of karst terminology of that 
time. The most usual hydro-geomorphological and genetic elements from these 
definitions are: “large (largest) depression, flat bottom, steep slopes sharply rising 
from the bottom, karstic outflow, sinking river, inundations, selective erosion, 
tectonic control” According to Gams, the flat bottom (either of limestone or covered 
by alluvium, or formed in impermeable sediments) is the only indisputable element 
in the definitions. The main processes in poljes are (1) selective erosion (denudation 
of impermeable sediments); (2) marginal (lateral) corrosion if bottom sediments are 
impermeable; (3) subsoil corrosion and/or suballuvial corrosion (depending on the 
type of bottom deposits). 
The expression “large” depression is often questionable. Gams (op.cit.) indicates that 
“Size of a “large depression” or “largest depression” is a subjective matter and 
depends on the country and also on the author”. He advises that a definition of polje 
“has to be precise, so that without knowing the size of foreign poljes or the size of 
karst depressions in known karst areas, a person can recognize the form as a polje 
and distinguish it from uvala, blind valley and karst valley”. 
11 
Fig. 2.5: Types of poljes suggested by Gams (1978) 
Gams finally lists the minimal characteristics required for the status of a polje: (1) 
flat floor, either in rock (which can also be terraced), or in unconsolidated sediments, 
or alluviated, or covered by fluvisoils; (2) closed basin, with a steeply rising marginal 
slope at least on one side; (3) karstic drainage; (4) if all the mentioned characteristics 
are present, the flat floor must be at least 400 m wide. Considering the importance of 
the flat floor in all the definitions, Gams also points to some problems which may 
arise – “Especially questionable is the separation of a great basin into a polje and 
uvala when the flat floor is not continuous.”, or “(...) we cannot be precise about the 
proportion of the floor which needs to be flat if we call the form a polje”. 
Waltham (1981) made a very interesting case study of Matienzo depression in Spain, 
which has all the basic characteristics of a polje, but the author is cautious in usage of 
this term, due to some characteristics which are different from the Dinaric poljes 
(“The flat, flood-prone, cave-drained floor of the Secada part of the Matienzo 
depression suggests that it could be called a polje. However the valley lacks the 
sharply defined slope edges typical of the classical Yugoslavian poljes, and there is 
12 
no guiding element in the structural geology, so the term can only be applied 
loosely.”). 
Silvestru (1995) gave one of the overviews of previous polje definitions, favouring 
some simple, clear ones like “inliers of fluvial landscape...”. He offered a new 
definition, stating that “a polje should be an ante-Quaternary enclosed depression 
with a predominantly flat, alluviated bottom, in large massive limestone area” 
(p.506). Silvestru gives less significance to present hydrological function, 
considering it to be of secondary character and stating that “it may drain a temporary 
or permanent karst stream” (italics by J.Ćalić), as well as to the size, which he 
considers irrelevant. It is somewhat unusual that Silvestru considers only poljes to be 
true karst depressions, thanks to their flat bottoms (“truncated shape (...) mostly 
achieved by alluviation”), as opposed to dolines and uvalas, which “display a 
predominantly conical shape”. 
One of the largest documented poljes is the Jiloca polje in the Iberian Range, with the area of 705 km2. Initiated as a half-graben which deformed a Pliocene regional 
erosional surface, it continued to develop as a karst polje, which deepened about 300 
m by corrosion processes (Gracia et al., 2003). In a relatively recent phase of 
development, the polje was hydrographically captured by headward erosion of the 
Jiloca River, and turned into an “open polje”, with external drainage. 
Ford & Williams (2007) condensed the classification given by Gams (1978) to only 
three typical cases – border polje, structural polje and baselevel polje. 
Border poljes have the allogenic water input. They abound in floodplain deposits, 
with active processes of lateral planation and alluviation. Structural poljes are 
dominated by bedrock geological controls, because polje floors are made of 
impermeable rocks, thanks to intensive tectonic activity (faulting). Local water tables 
(relating only to polje floors) are near the surface, but the hydraulic gradients steepen 
on polje margins, at the contact with limestones. Therefore waters drain from the 
basins through series of ponors. When quantities of waters are too large for 
capacities of ponors, the flooding takes place. 
13 
Fig. 2.6: Types of poljes according to Ford & Williams (2007) 
(condensed classification of Gams, 1978) 
Most Dinaric poljes belong to this group. Baselevel poljes are formed where 
denudation lowering of karst surface has reached the regional water table. In a way, 
these poljes are “windows on the water table”, because they are flooded during the 
water table oscillations. The processes are then not directed vertically, but laterally. 
Thanks to the fact that they do not depend either on allogenic waters or geological 
controls, “they can be considered the purest kind of polje” (Ford & Williams, 2007). 
14 
3. Usage of the term uvala – an overview 
3.1. Regional usage 
The word “uvala”, denoting a geomorphological form, exists in the language of people 
in Croatia, Bosnia, and Serbia. In the region of Lika and western Bosnia, as well as in 
some parts of Serbia, it means a depression in relief (usually a karstic depression of 
bigger dimensions than a doline), while along the Croatian coast, the term uvala denotes 
a small gulf on a sea shore. This dual meaning is a significant problem in scientific 
usage of the term “uvala”. In Slovenia, people mostly use the terms “draga” and “dol” 
for the relief forms of this kind. In the Alps of Slovenia, there are forms partially similar 
to uvalas, which are called “konta” and will be briefly discussed further in this chapter. 
In Croatian part of the Dinaric karst, where karstic uvalas are present in great number, 
there are various popular expressions for such a relief form. In the regions of Gorski 
Kotar and Lika, especially on Mt.Velika Kapela, people use both the words “uvala” and 
“draga”. On the northern part of Mt.Velebit, this form is called “duliba”, while on 
southern Velebit, there is also the word “korito”. In western Bosnia, the word “uvala” is 
abundantly used for features of this kind. No precise counting has been carried out, but it 
can be said, undoubtedly, that in the regions of Lika and western Bosnia dozens of 
toponymes contain the word uvala, and it is properly used for the relief forms of this 
kind. In Montenegro, relief forms which we consider uvalas are mostly called “do” and 
“ubli” (the latter can be etymologically linked to the word “uvala”). 
3.2. History of the karstological term 
The term uvala, denoting a form of karst surface relief, was introduced into karstological 
literature by Jovan Cvijić. Cvijić first mentions uvalas in his capital work “Das 
Karstphänomen” (1893, translation to Serbian published in 1895). However, in this 
work, the uvalas are not introduced “officially” – the word is only mentioned twice, 
without the intention of stressing its meaning. In the chapter on dolines, under the sub- 
title “Deviations from normal size and shape”, Cvijić describes the “dolines with huge 
diameter” (250 m in average, with maximums up to 600 m), and states that “Such 
dolines are called do and uvala, and most settlements in western Montenegro are 
15 
situated in them”. The second occurrence of the term uvala is within a subtitle in the 
chapter on poljes: “Poljes, and uvalas similar to poljes in Montenegro”. Unfortunately, 
the term uvala is not mentioned anywhere in the further text. 
In some later works, like “Glacial and morphological studies on mountains of Bosnia, 
Herzegovina and Montenegro” (Cvijić, 1899, 1900a), the word uvala appears as already 
established term. Describing the glacial traces on Mt.Treskavica in Bosnia, Cvijić states: 
“...Jezero is the deepest (...) karst uvala, that was transformed into a lake thanks to 
numerous springs”. Further in the text, many karst depressions are classified as uvalas 
(Crno Polje on Mt.Prenj, Gvozd on Mt.Čvrsnica, Carev Do on Mt.Maglić, etc.). 
Cvijić made the first more precise analysis of uvalas in his paper about karst poljes of 
western Bosnia and Herzegovina (1900b, 1901). This is actually the paper in which he 
introduced the idea that the uvalas evolve into poljes (inspired by W.M.Davis’ concept 
of erosional cycle): “The difference between them is this: poljes are deeper, their 
bottoms are flat and without dolines, covered with thick sediments; poljes have 
characteristic hydrographic features, which are missing in uvalas. But the upper main 
characteristics of these forms show the direct relation between uvalas and poljes; uvalas 
are the initial forms, from which poljes evolve”. A great number of uvalas are 
mentioned, mostly within the ridges between poljes. The most interesting example is the 
Grahovo area, which “consists of small poljes and uvalas” and is described with a lot of 
details. Finally, Cvijić concludes that “... numerous Grahovo basins are in various stages 
of development, and therefore no other area is so convenient for studies on poljes 
development”. He additionally states that in Grahovo area one can see “(1) uvalas, from 
which poljes are formed: Vlasulje, Korita, Isjek; (2) transitional type between uvalas and 
poljes, and uvala bottoms in poljes: Vedro and Marinkovačko polje, and the flat portion 
of Grahovsko polje; (3) coalescence of uvalas and poljes, and formation of large poljes 
of irregular shape; it is clearly visible that all poljes of irregular and strange shape could 
have been formed by coalescence of uvalas to poljes”. In the same work, after the 
regional outlines, there is a chapter on genesis of karst poljes, in which the “transitional 
process” doline-uvala-polje is described with more details. The role of denudational 
process in formation of karst depressions is stressed, stating that “Denudation is a steady 
process, which lowers the bottom of uvala; the ridges between its dolines are being 
16 
washed away, and small flat surfaces are developed at the bottom of uvala” (Cvijić, 
1900b). 
Finally, in one of his latest works “La géographie des terrains calcaires”, published only 
in 1960, Cvijić repeats the opinion on transitional role of uvala, even stating that “uvalas 
are nothing else but large dolines, with diameters from 500 to 1000 m (...)”. He admits 
that W.M.Davis’ concept of erosional cycle is hardly applicable to karst, “because karst 
erosion does not act by same regulations as normal erosion”, but claims that karst 
requires special definitions of evolution of every single form, thus we need to “prove 
and, if possible, explain the transition from one to another, and connect it to 
underground hydrography” (Cvijić, 1960). 
We have presented Cvijić’s contributions more in detail, for two main reasons. On one 
hand, he introduced the term uvala, which requires particular attention. But on the other 
hand, by linking the uvalas to the incorrect idea of karst cycle, Cvijić indirectly 
contributed to partial disregard of the term after the concept of karst cycle was generally 
abandoned. 
In this review of usage of the term uvala, the references are grouped by their type, to: (a) 
textbooks, encyclopedias, and dictionaries; and (b) particular scientific papers and 
regional studies. In this way, it is possible to stress the impact of “educational” literature, 
which subsequently has a great influence on usage of the term. 
3.3. Textbooks, encyclopedias, and dictionaries 
Within this group of references, there are both karstological and general 
geomorphological publications. One may notice that general geomorphological 
(physical-geographical) references usually use very simplified definition of uvala, which 
mostly means size and/or basic genesis (“coalescence of dolines”). On the other hand, 
karstological sources mostly put up a kind of complex discussion, commenting also the 
cyclic concept of evolution. 
Sweeting (1972) in “Karst landforms” included uvalas into the chapter on dolines (“... 
dolines evolve or become bigger; as they grow they sometimes coalesce and such 
coalescent dolines are known as uvalas. Uvalas are hollows with undulating floors made 
17 
up of more than one doline.” Further on in the text, the author mentions a discussion on 
karst terminology, organized in 1962 by the Slovenian Geological and Geographical 
Society, where “several different types of uvalas were recognized: (a) elongated uvalas 
or dols; (b) uvalas composed of a number of adjoining basins (or vrtačasta uvala); (c) 
periodically inundated uvalas; (d) waterlogged uvalas”. In the section on tropical karst, it 
is stated that elongated depressions known as glades in Jamaica, are roughly similar to 
uvalas. In the chapter on karst poljes, the author considers that the concept of cyclic 
evolution of karst landforms (from doline through the uvala to the polje) is incorrect 
(Sweeting, 1972). 
Fig. 3.1: Glade (uvala) south of Chanal, Northern Chiapas, Mexico 
(sketch by A.Gerstenhauer; Sweeting, 1972) 
The Encyclopedia of Geomorphology, edited by Fairbridge (1968), contains the entry 
uvala (“...a series of joined or coalescent dolinas, often elongate and marking a former 
subterranean stream channel or series of collapsed sinkholes. It does not necessarily 
contain a stream at the present time. An uvala is generally of the order of 1 km in length; 
it is thus intermediate in size between a doline and a polje”). It is interesting to notice 
that this is the only definition that associates the uvalas with coalescence of collapse 
dolines, and also contains a hint on unroofed caves (“marking a former subterranean 
stream channel”). In the same Encyclopedia, uvala is also mentioned under the entries 
blind valley, doline, geomorphic maps, karst, and polje. 
In “Slovene karst terminology” (edited by Gams, 1973), evolution of uvalas is not 
discussed, it is just mentioned that they are smaller than poljes, and bigger than dolines, 
usually with dolines at the bottom. The sub-types are dolasta uvala (elongated), and 
vrtačasta uvala (uvala with dolines). In “Serbian karst terminology” (Gavrilović, 1974), 
18 
where Cvijić influences are much stronger, the entry Karst uvala (kraška uvala) contains 
the cyclic concept (“It is a transitional type between a doline and a karst polje”). On the 
other hand, this entry contains an incorrect citation – that this term was scientifically 
defined by Cvijić in 1889, although it was not before 1900 (Cvijić, 1900b, 1901). In 
“Contribution to the Croatian karst terminology” (Roglić, 1974), the term uvala is 
criticized for being the same as the term for small coastal gulf in the Adriatic. The 
explanation contains the disapproval of the cyclic concept (“The concept of cyclic relief 
development is generally abandoned, so the term “uvala” will in future get the meaning 
which corresponds to it linguistically”). It is very surprising that Roglić had such an 
antagonistic attitude towards the term uvala, because, apart from western Bosnia, it is 
Croatia where the term originated linguistically. In the mountains Velika Kapela and 
Mala Kapela, as well as Lika region, this term is used in people’s language, and it 
constitutes a great number of toponymes, as opposed to all other regions where its usage 
is restricted only to scientific (karstological) terminology. 
Trudgill (1985) states that “Simple, conical-shaped depressions, or dolines, are thought 
to coalesce, forming compound features termed uvalas (Sweeting, 1972; Jennings, 
1971). The author Cvijic suggested that this led to the formation of poljes, but as 
discussed by Sweeting (1972, p.192) and in this book on p.105, poljes have a rather 
different scale and mode of origin”. 
Jennings (1985) defines uvalas as complex forms “having uneven floors with more than 
one low point, but no extensive flat areas”. The formation is often due to “intersection of 
dolines”, and elongated shape can be a consequence of location along the strike of 
steeply-dipping limestones. Jennings gives some examples of uvalas from New Zealand, 
Tasmania and Morocco. 
In “Geomorphological field manual” by Dackombe and Gardiner (1983), there are no 
uvalas and poljes among the geomorphological mapping symbols. 
“Geomorphology” by Chorley et al. (1985) gives a brief, yet a compound definition: 
“The uniting of several adjacent dolines produces a more complex uvala, but the largest 
class of karst closed depressions, the polje, cannot be attributed to such growth.” 
Small (1970) in his textbook on geomorphology explains the karst forms through the 
case study of Grands Causses in France: “The basic form is the small round or elongated 
19 
hollow (referred to locally as a ‘sotch’) which is comparable with the ‘doline’ of the 
Jugoslavian karst (...) In many areas closely adjoining sotchs have amalgamated, through 
lateral extension, to give larger depressions comparable with the ‘uvalas’ of the Karst 
proper.” 
White (1988) approves usage of a particular term for features sized between dolines and 
poljes, but favours the expression compound sink instead of uvala: “I have used the 
terms sinkhole and doline interchangeably (...). For features of intermediate size, I use 
compound sink or valley sink rather than uvala; the uvalas of the Adriatic karst are 
similar to compound sinks”. 
Fig. 3.2: Evolution of compound sinks (White, 1988) 
Regretfully, one of the most cited publications related to karst, the “Karst 
Geomorphology and Hydrology” by Ford & Williams (1989), mentions uvalas in 
completely incorrect way. Discussing Cvijić’s early ideas on karst, it is stated as follows: 
“In his 1893 monograph he suggested a genetic sequence involving amalgamation from 
dolines to uvulas to poljes, but it was not until 1918 that he published his considered 
opinion on the morphological evolution of karst (...)” (p.452). First of all, the word 
uvala is written incorrectly, as uvula (in the Index there is again the incorrect plural 
form, uvuals; probably a typing mistake). Furthermore, Cvijić did not suggest a genetic 
sequence dolines-uvalas-poljes in his 1893 monograph, but only in 1900 (Cvijić, 1900b, 
1901). In the new edition of this book (“Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology”, 
Ford & Williams, 2007), the above-mentioned citation is repeated (p.391). It is again 
with erroneous reference (Cvijić 1893 instead of Cvijić 1901) and incorrectly spelled 
(uvula). Uvala-type depressions are not recognized under any other term or expression 
(such as, e.g. “compound depression” in some other references) – dolines and poljes are 
the only mentioned karst depressions. Only in the citation of a regional study by 
20 
Racoviţă et al, it is stated “doline clusters on the plateau surface are set within larger 
enclosed basins (thus constituting uvalas, i.e. compound closed depressions)” (p.346), 
without any additional details, or using of the term elsewhere. We can suppose that such 
an approach in these major karstological references has probably contributed to 
decreasing usage of the term uvala. 
The “Encyclopedic Dictionary of Physical Geography”, edited by Goudie et al. (1994), 
defines the uvala rather briefly, without mentioning a cyclic concept (it is not mentioned 
under the entries doline and polje, either): “Uvala: A depression or large hollow in 
limestone areas produced when several sinkholes coalesce.” 
Lowe & Waltham (1995), in “A Dictionary of Karst and Caves”, stress only the cyclic 
concept, and by disapproving it, discard the whole notion of uvalas: “Uvala: A multi- 
coned closed depression; now little-used term of Croat, Serb or Bulgarian origin. The 
term was introduced to describe features assumed to be the second step in a 3-stage 
process of polje development, in which dolines were supposed to coalesce into uvalas. 
This mechanism is no longer accepted and the term uvala has fallen into disuse.” 
Waltham et al. (2005) again stressed the disuse of the term uvala in the Glossary of 
sinkhole terminology, within their book on karst engineering (“Uvala – Closed 
depression with multiple sink points (now little used)”). 
A “Glossary of cave and karst terminology”, published within the book by Gillieson 
(1996), offers a simple definition of uvala, without any genetic details: “Uvala: A 
complex closed depression with several lesser depressions within its rim”. 
In East European literature, uvala is usually listed in all classifications of karst surface 
forms. One of the distinctive examples is the book by M. Pulina (1999), where it is 
stated that, beside karst dolines, there is also a composite form, uvala, and that the 
development of big groups of dolines can lead to formation of large karst depressions 
(“Obok pojedynczych lejów występują formy połączone uvala (serb.), a rozwój 
większych skupień lejków może prowadzić do powstania dużych depresji krasowych”, 
p.51). Furthermore, in the contribution about karst and caves in the Geographic 
Encyclopedia of the World (Wielka encyklopedia geografii świata), Pulina & 
Andrejchuk (2000) even introduce the term uvala into cryokarst terminology, as glacier 
21 
uvalas (“(....)inne, połączone z kilkoma lejkam, tworzą uwala lodowcowe”). The term 
uvala is an entry also in the terminology of Panoš (2001). 
Also in French references, there is a broad acceptance of uvalas. In one of the major 
references, “Précis de Karstologie” by Salomon (2000), the closed karst depressions are 
listed as “dolines, ouvalas et poljés”. Apart from mentioning formation by coalescence 
of dolines, the author describes a number of other conditions which favour formation of 
uvalas, and finally concludes that uvalas are rather rare phenomenon because it is a rare 
case that so many conditions are fulfilled (“La rareté relative du nombre d’ouvalas 
indique que ces conditions ne se réalisent que peu souvent”; p.46). 
The Lexicon of Cave and Karst Terminology (US Environmental Protection Agency, 
2002, p. 201-202), offers three definitions of uvala: (1) definition by Lowe & Waltham 
(1995), cited above in the text; (2) definition by Sweeting (1973): “Large closed 
depression formed by the coalescence of several dolines which have enlarged towards 
each other. Typically, the floor is irregular, being a combination of doline floors and 
degraded slopes of the individual hollows”; (3) definition from the “Glossary and 
Multilingual Equivalents of Karst Terms” (UNESCO 1972): “A Yugoslavian term for an 
elongated closed depression in karst that is commonly dry or with periodical small 
sinking streams or inundations. They are generally a few hundred metres long and may 
be considered as a small polje”. The definition (3) is generally the least correct, 
overlooking the hydrological function and emphasizing only the size. 
Two fundamental encyclopedias on karstological issues were published in 2004. The 
one edited by J. Gunn (2004) does not contain the entry Uvala, but the term is mentioned 
within the entry Dinaric Karst (in the sense of origin of the term), and within the entry 
Doline (“Individual dolines may merge to form compound closed depressions (known as 
uvalas) and large dolines may subdivide internally into smaller second generation 
basins”). 
Sauro (2004) contributed a broad, all-encompassing chapter on karst closed depressions 
in the Encyclopedia of Caves, edited by Culver & White (2004). This chapter offers one 
of the best explanations of uvala-type features, although the term itself is mentioned 
only as a synonym: “The large closed depressions that do not show a doline morphology 
are also referred to as uvala”. Among closed depressions which are sized from several 
22 
hundreds of metres to a few kilometres, the author distinguishes compound hollows 
(which are formed by coalescence of dolines), and polygenetic sinks (“which evolved 
through both the karst process and another morphogenetic process”). Depending on the 
nature of that other process, polygenetic sinks can be divided to tecto-karstic hollows, 
fluvio-karstic hollows, and glacio-karstic hollows. 
In a comprehensive monograph dealing with most aspects of cave geology, Palmer 
(2007) briefly covers also the karst surface landforms. The term uvala appears together 
with dolines and poljes in the section on closed depressions (also in the Index), but with 
the awareness of general vague notion of the term (p.30): “Uvalas are compound 
sinkholes containing multiple depressions. The term uvala is used in a variety of ways 
and is sometimes applied to youthful poljes or to dry valleys floored by sinkholes. This 
term needs to be more clearly defined or abandoned entirely.“ 
3.4. Scientific papers and regional studies 
Of course, it would be impossible to list and discuss all the papers that mention to some 
point the subject of uvalas. Some of the most significant, as well as those that report 
about uvalas in various karstological settings, are listed below. 
Katzer (1909) used both the words uvala and karstmulde (German term for the same 
form) in his discussion pointed towards negation of the existence of uvalas. Katzer states 
that uvalas are formed either without the influence of tectonics, which makes them only 
a kind of solution dolines, or they are formed along tectonic lines, which makes them a 
kind of poljes. From that, Katzer infers that the term uvala is “not morphologically 
convincing”. He continues that the term is used in people’s language in western Bosnia, 
for the depressions larger than dolines and smaller than poljes, but “not uniformly”. 
However, in further discussion, where he debates against the cyclic evolution of karst 
landscapes, he states: “Uvala cannot be formed from a doline, neither can polje be 
formed in such a sequence. These are three various forms in karst, each formed for itself, 
and not three various stages of evolutionary cycle”. 
Cramer (1941) defines the uvalas as dolines lined up in a valley (“zu Talungen 
vereinigte Dolinen”), and he offers a similar explanation within the terminological list 
23 
from various regions (“Dinarische Karstgebiete: Uvala – Dolinentalungen in Bosnien 
und Herzegowina”). 
One of the most important papers that deals with genesis of uvalas and their relation to 
dolines and poljes, is that of Poljak (1951). Mentioning and analyzing a great number of 
uvalas in Croatia and western Bosnia, Poljak disapproves the cyclic theory on their 
evolution, and stresses the influence of tectonics on their genesis and development. It 
seems that this is the first (and one of the very few) papers which argues with the cyclic 
concept not only generally, but with plenty of detailed examples and analyses. Poljak 
strictly differentiates those uvalas that were formed by coalescence of dolines (calling 
them ponikvaste uvale; dolined uvalas, uvalas with dolines), from the “regular” uvalas, 
whose main genetic factor is tectonic activity. It is well noticed that one of the strongest 
arguments in favour of tectonic influence is the fact that karst levelled surfaces 
completely lack uvalas, regardless of the fact that they are often pitted with dolines. 
Although Poljak in some statements goes to other extreme, completely disregarding the 
role of karst erosion in formation of uvalas (“they are of tectonic importance, and not 
erosional like dolines”), this paper is of utmost importance in the study of uvalas. 
Šerko (1948) gives a broad list of 228 various large karst depressions on the territory of 
the former Yugoslavia, categorizing them as poljes, uvalas, or transitional forms 
between polje and uvala (“really small polje, or a larger uvala”). 
Gams (1978) covers some questionable issues related to distinguishing the uvalas from 
the poljes (“According to modern views, an uvala is different from a polje not in its size, 
but in terms of the flatness of its floor”). 
Cocean & Petrescu (1989), in their paper about uvalas on Apuseni Mountains, express 
the view that uvalas are the classical form of karstic relief, which is by dimensions 
situated between dolines and poljes, but has a specific genesis influenced both by 
tectonics and corrosion, as well as modified by fluvial erosion. They differentiate three 
types of uvalas: (1) uvalas resulting from tectonics; (2) uvalas of fluvial origin; and (3) 
uvalas formed by coalescence of dolines. It is stressed that the uvalas of the third type 
are very rare, and that there is a plenty of conditions that need to be fulfilled for that 
course of development. 
24 
Rusu (1990) discusses the uvalas within his paper on principal types of karst 
depressions. He explains the genesis and evolution, and suggests a classification of 
depressions de capture karstique, which are in fact blind valleys that protrude more or 
less into karst. Rusu argues that uvalas of fluvial origin, as defined by Cocean & 
Petrescu (1989) should be in the category of depressions de capture karstique, instead of 
a type of uvalas. Additionally, he offers a classification of uvalas by shape, to circular 
(formed in tectonized zones), linear (formed along a linear series of dolines), elliptical 
(formed in former affluent basins), meandering (following a form of a “primary valley”), 
and lobate (convergence of multiple elements). 
Petrović, D. (1994) classifies uvalas into karstic and polygenetic. Karstic uvalas are 
formed by coalescence of dolines, and have two sub-types: those with dolines on the 
bottom, and those with flat bottom, where all ridges between former dolines have been 
lowered, and only flat bottom remained. Polygenetic uvalas can be fluvio-karstic and 
glacio-karstic, depending on the type of process which took part in their genesis. In 
formation of fluvio-karstic uvalas, Petrović presumes the existence of a “pre-karstic” 
river, later disorganized by karstic erosion; dolines at its bottom are coalescing into an 
uvala. However, Petrović avoided the intricate question of evolving of uvalas into poljes, 
so this issue remained open in this paper. 
Habič (1978) mentions that there are two types of uvalas, vrtačaste uvale (uvalas with 
dolines), and dolaste uvale (uvalas in a form of do, elongated). In one of his later works 
(Habič, 1986), he extensively discusses the problems of definitions and origin of uvalas, 
with some very bright remarks. He theoretically allows the cyclic evolution in the sense 
of Cvijić, but stresses that these cases are very rare, and generally the whole model must 
be revised. He opts for keeping the term uvala, but in revised context (“The notion of 
uvala, which is adopted in karstology, has to be preserved, but not in the initial, narrow 
cyclic model”). Habič notices that in some karst depressions (uvalas) the dolines are in 
fact secondary features, formed after the formation of the whole depression. In a small 
Contribution to the karst terminology, given in the appendix to the paper, Habič explains 
the term úlaka, a local expression from Notranjska region (“asymmetrical shallow uvala, 
in the foothill of steeply inclined hillsides or conical hills”). 
25 
In the paper about the relief of western Suha Krajina region, Habič (1988) gives the 
information (including morphometry) on 13 uvalas (“kraški doli – uvale”) of the region, 
stating that great number of uvalas distinguishes this area from other karst areas in 
Slovenia. The elevations of bottoms of these uvalas gradually decrease, following the 
decrease of water table level from Ribnica polje to the Krka valley. 
Gams (1974, 2004) in his monographs about Slovenian karst lists a great number of 
Slovenian uvalas, discussing at the same time their evolution and genetic factors. In a 
paragraph titled “Is uvala a young karst polje?” it is stated that the cyclic model is rather 
questionable (Gams, 2004). Uvala is defined as follows: “Karst surface depression 
bigger than a doline, with undulating bottom, which is usually not flooded, and not 
cultivated”. The author gives a series of examples of depressions in Slovenia which are 
considered uvalas, as well as those that trigger debates about their classification. 
Numerous limitations of the term “uvala” are outlined by Šušteršič (1986). Some of the 
opinions are too radical – for example, that after rejecting Cvijić’s cyclic model there are 
no grounds to retain any component of the whole terminology. Šušteršič states that the 
great problem related to uvalas is that their definition is in fact negative – karst 
depressions which are neither dolines nor poljes. He approves the Poljak’s (1951) 
definition of karst uvalas, considering it clear and correct, but reminds of a problem that 
they are only “a droplet in a flood of other different examples”. A very useful suggestion 
which evolved from these arguments is that “we first have to make an inventory of 
uvalas, and after that discuss about their genesis and classifications” (Šušteršič, 1986). 
Kunaver (1983) discusses the issue of “konta” – type of large karst depressions in Pre- 
Alpine plateaus in Slovenia, stating that they are uvala-like depressions. Kunaver 
mentions the opinions of previous researchers of high-mountain depressions, some of 
which have used the term uvala for those of irregular shape (e.g. Haserodt, 1965, who 
also analyzed their shapes and observed that their bottoms consist of a number of 
smaller flat-bottomed depressions and funnel-shaped dolines). Kranjc (2006) classifies 
kontas either as large dolines or as high-mountain uvalas. 
There is a very interesting paper by M. Frelih (2003), discussing differences between 
uvalas and poljes, through a case study of the depression Lučki Dol in Dolenjska region 
26 
in Slovenia. After a detailed analysis of geological, geomorphological, and hydrological 
characteristics, it is concluded that Lučki Dol is not an uvala, but a small karst polje. 
Brief terminological discussion on status of uvalas among karst depressions is given by 
Gostinčar (2009). She explains the reasons why she uses the term “kraška kotanja” 
(karst depression) instead of the term “uvala”: “This relief form (uvala) is defined 
morphologically, but not genetically. (...) Due to the fact that the term is used for 
genetically various relief forms, we have chosen another term, which has a 
morphological meaning, but does not have any genetic implication”. 
Bočić (2009) distinguishes particular type of fluviokarstic depressions which he calls 
“dolinaste uvale” (possible translation could be “valley-floor uvalas”). They are situated 
along dry valleys, or in reshaped blind valleys in fluviokarstic areas. 
In morphometric study of dolines of the Candaglia Plateau (Venetian Forealps), it is said 
that “the wide Candaglia depression was excluded from analysis because its form differs 
from other considered dolines. It is the large elongated uvala resembling in some 
characteristics a small polje” (Bondesan et al. 1992). Similarly, in some other 
morphometric studies of dolines, the uvalas and compound dolines are explicitly 
excluded from the investigation (Péntek et al., 2007). It is of course understandable that 
irregular features are excluded from particular studies which aim to define the rules of 
regularity, but on the other hand, this implies the need for particular studies of irregular 
forms as well. 
Nicod (2003a), in the discussion of special cases of poljes, states that many poljes are in 
incipient stage, and mentions blind valley and “uvala in extension” among examples. In 
his book on the Dinaric karst (Nicod, 2003b) he mentions uvalas within the chapter on 
terminology, as well as in the “small toponymic vocabulary” at the end of the book. 
Sauro (2003) discusses the uvala Agugliana in eastern Lessini mountains (Venetian 
Prealps), which has a floor in basalts and some characteristics of contact karst. 
Ravbar & Šebela (2004) discussed that the periodical lakes in Upper Pivka basin in SW 
Slovenia might be defined as „karst depressions – uvalas periodically filled with water“. 
Existence of “uvala-like depressions” in evaporites (salt diapirs of Zagros Mt, Iran) was 
reported by Bosák et al. (1999a). 
27 
Large shallow karstic depressions up to 1100 m long and 600 m wide in central Ebro 
basin (Spain) were identified as uvalas by Soriano and Simón (1995). 
Balák et al. (1999, 2003) refer to the uvala Hedvábná in the northern part of Moravian 
Karst, on the plateau above the caves Macocha and Amaterska. Later research of Balák 
indicate that Hedvábná could also be interpreted as unroofed cave (pers. comm. by A. 
Tyc), while Bosák et al. (1999b) suggest that this is a doline. 
Generally, there are numerous papers in which authors classify some of the studied 
features as uvalas, without detailed discussion about terminology (e.g. Nicod 1980; 
Salomon & Pulina 2005, Papadopoulou-Vrynioti 2004, etc.). 
28 
4. Methodology 
In the overall methodology of this study, it is possible to distinguish several 
chronological steps of work. Subsequent to checking and analyzing the most 
important literature references, large-scale topographic maps were used to identify a 
number of most conspicuous examples of uvalas in the study areas. Majority of the 
localities have been visited in the field, in order to get the idea on their forms and 
dimensions, and to carry out the necessary geomorphological observations and 
mapping where needed. Photo-documentation was made as well. Based on map 
analyses and fieldwork, the total of 43 examples of uvalas were selected for the 
research, keeping in mind to include a variety of cases, which differ by their 
dimensions, geological and topographical settings, as well as by morphological 
characteristics. Out of 43 examples, 12 were selected for detailed structural- 
geological field mapping applying the method of Čar (1982, 1986, 2001). Selection 
of these 12 examples was based on the diversity of uvalas and the accessibility of 
particular locations. Some interesting uvalas in the Dinarides had to be excluded 
from the detailed field survey due to the danger of the landmines. Digitizing of 
contours and creation of digital elevation models marked a starting point of digital 
processing, which subsequently included quantification of morphometrical 
parameters, creation of inclination maps and cross sections, statistical analyses, as 
well as formation of the geographical information system. 
The most important methodological issues are discussed more in detail in the further 
text. 
4.1. Cartographic input 
The basic input element of the whole study, both for field mapping and processing of 
digital data, have been topographic maps. Without doubt, the ideal option would 
have been to choose maps in the scale 1:5.000 or 1:10.000, which show a number of 
details in relief. These scales are, for example, a requirement in morphometric 
analyses of dolines (Bondesan et al., 1992). Unfortunately, it was very difficult to 
obtain such maps for all the studied areas. They either do not exist at all (for 
example, 1:10.000 maps in Serbia were made only for populated areas, and karst 
areas of our interest are unpopulated), or are very difficult to reach, “buried” in 
29 
cadastre offices and overwhelmed by bureaucratic procedures. The fact that the 
studied uvalas are dispersed all over the area of more than 100.000 square 
kilometres, in 5 countries, discourages all the attempts for obtaining 1:10.000 maps 
from numerous municipal cadastre offices. Therefore we decided that 1:25.000 maps 
are used in the study, except for the examples from Slovenia, where larger scale 
maps are easily available. Contour interval of 10 m is not the best solution, but it is 
the only possible in these circumstances. We are aware of the fact that even the 
elevation differences less than 10 m, which are in this case invisible, can 
significantly affect the morphometrical parameters. 
4.2. Definition of basic parameters 
The problem which occurs prior to digital processing and morphometric analyses is 
precise definition of parameters which will be either measured or calculated. 
4.2.1. Measured parameters 
4.2.1.1. Perimeter line 
Even in morphometric analysis of dolines, which are much simpler and much more 
regular forms than uvalas, there are some problems in definition of perimeter line 
(Bondesan et al., 1992). The perimeter of the highest closed contour is considerably 
smaller than the perimeter of the line that encircles the area morphologically 
influenced by the doline (a theoretical water divide, or topographical divide) (Fig. 
4.1). 
Fig. 4.1: Several ways of defining a perimeter line for a doline: 
dashed line – perimeter of the closed depression; dotted line – portion of slope 
influenced by the doline; dash-and-dot line – water divide 
(Bondesan et al., 1992; parts of Figures 1 and 11) 
30 
Perimeter line is for sure the most important among measured parameters of a 
depression, because almost all other measured and, subsequently, calculated 
parameters rely on it. This line is the very basic definition of a feature. When 
determining the size of the polje, its flat bottom (rather easy to delineate) is taken 
into account in most cases (e.g. Gams, 1978). In the study of dolines, questionable 
determinations of perimeter line are more common, but still relatively rare, so in 
methodological papers it is often suggested to leave the “difficult” examples out of 
the total examined population, if possible (e.g. Bondesan et al., 1992). Šušteršič 
(1994) also discusses the issue of doline perimeters, stating that this definition is 
crucial in the study of dolines. He advocates abandoning of both topographical divide 
and highest closed (“overflow”) contour as possible perimeter lines of dolines. 
Instead, he claims that in the field it is relatively easy to detect the perimeter line of 
the doline (“It is marked by an abrupt change of the slope, though small in its value, 
dividing the “normal karst surface” and the area influenced by slope processes...”; 
p.129). 
Fig. 4.2: Delineation of perimeter line (red line) for: a) dolines (sharp change of 
slope inclination), and b) poljes (flat bottom). Location of (a) is in Marinkovci, close 
to Bosansko Grahovo in Bosnia, while (b) is flooded Fatničko polje in Herzegovina 
The same author (Šušteršič, 1986) states that in delineation of a karst depression, one 
should take into account “the outmost limit of processes triggered by the depression 
formation”, or “the true karstic mass removal area”. 
Although this argumentation is highly convincing and clear in case of dolines, it is 
necessary to stress that for uvalas, it is very difficult to apply the same practice. In 
great majority of uvalas, it is impossible to notice the “line” of the abrupt change of 
31 
slope inclination. It may be visible only in a small number of cases, and only in small 
segments of the perimeter. Instead, in many cases the line of considerable change of 
inclination is at the same time a topographical divide of regional scale. The line of 
karstic mass removal area (in the sense of Šušteršič, 1986) is difficult to detect, and 
thus, being highly subjective, very questionable for statistical operation. If we 
express it as a number (exact length of perimeter), we have to give it a numerical 
justification (how we reached the value), which is almost impossible. 
At this initial stage of the research of uvalas, we do not have a solution for 
determining the exact line which encompasses the limit of depression-forming karst 
processes. Having that in mind, we have to discuss the other possibilities for uvala 
perimeter determination, being aware of their disadvantages, as well as certain 
advantages: 
a) highest closed contour (HCC) 
- disadvantage: length of HCC perimeter is usually too small to express the real 
size of a depression 
- disadvantage: association of “overflowing”, characteristic for fluvial system 
and not essential to karst (cf. Šušteršič, 1994) 
- disadvantage: shape of HCC perimeter is often more irregular than the overall 
perception of a depression 
- advantage: this is the only perimeter line (in case of uvalas) which can be 
defined completely objectively, and has a “mathematical justification”. Or, as 
explained by Waltham (1981), “At a minimum, the depression below this 
level must have been excavated and then transported away by the 
underground karst drainage”. 
b) topographical divide (only theoretically!) 
- disadvantage: this is the largest possible perimeter, usually with least 
irregularities, and most probably overestimating the “real” size of a 
depression 
- disadvantage: topographic divides have no importance for karst process 
(again, association with fluvial system, the principles of which are irrelevant 
in karst) 
- disadvantage: this method of determination is less objective than HCC 
method; some rules of “drainage area” delineation have to be overlooked 
32 
because of karstic morphology (e.g. areas with dolines), and sometime 
selection of ridges may be arbitrary (see next point). This introduces a touch 
of subjectivity, but only at some segments 
- advantage: area within the topographical divide is in majority of cases very 
close to overall perception of the uvala. The closest ridges are taken as 
divides; more distant higher ridges are chosen only if the area in-between is 
considerably and constantly inclined towards the depression. 
Despite many disadvantages and few advantages, highest closed contour and 
topographical divide have to be accepted as two variations of uvala perimeter 
(symbol Pc for HCC, defining minimal uvala area; and Pd for topographical divide, 
defining maximal uvala area), until a distinct method is developed for definition of 
true karst mass removal area. For each uvala in the analysis, almost all selected 
parameters are defined both taking the highest closed contour and the topographical 
divide as perimeter. The length of the each perimeter is always expressed as the 
length of its orthogonal projection. 
Fig. 4.3: Razdolje uvala (ID 20) defined by highest closed contour at 700 m a.s.l. 
(red line) and topographical divide (blue line). Pink dots mark the lowest points, at 
675 m a.s.l. 
33 
4.2.1.2. The lowest point 
On large-scale topographic maps, used in morphometric studies of dolines, the 
altitude of the lowest point within the doline is very often numerically indicated. 
Since only 1:25.000 topographic maps have been used in this study for great majority 
of case examples, no spot heights at the depression bottoms have been available. 
During the process of digitizing, we considered that the bottom of each depression is 
situated at the elevation which is lower than the lowest closed contour by half of the 
contour interval. This means that the elevation of the bottom points has always been 
set 5 metres lower than the lowest closed contour. Although this might not be true in 
reality, we considered that the possible mistakes would not affect the overall 
dimensions of the uvalas, taking into account their sizes which significantly exceed 
those of average dolines. 
23 out of 43 case examples have more than one lowest point. Therefore, in selection 
of parameters for morphometrical analysis, we had to skip all the parameters which 
are essentially related to the lowest point position. These parameters are axes of 
length and width (in Bondesan et al., 1992, marked LAXI and WAXI; and in 
Williams, 1972, marked L and W), the adjoining semiaxes, as well as the computed 
parameters which include any of these. 
4.2.1.3. Other measured parameters 
All the parameters of this category have been measured either from the digital 
elevation models, or from topographic maps 1:25.000, from which the models have 
been created. The method of DEM creation is described further in the text. In 
selecting the exact parameters for morphometric analysis, Bondesan et al. (1992) 
have been the principal reference. Greatest number of symbols is kept the same as in 
that reference, while some of the symbols have been changed due to some different 
characteristics between dolines and uvalas. Due to the above-mentioned problem of 
perimeter definition, all the parameters related to the perimeter have been split to two 
sub-categories: those referring to the highest closed contour, marked with letter c, 
and those referring to the topographical divide, marked with letter d. 
34 
Tab. 4.1: Measured parameters 
Parameter Explanation 
Pc perimeter (highest closed contour) 
Pd perimeter (topographical divide) 
Ac Ad 
planimetric area, bordered by the highest closed contour (Ac) and 
topographical divide (Ad) 
DMAXc DMAXd maximum diameter – linking two most distant points of the perimeter(s) 
DMNRc 
DMNRd 
minor diameter – longest segment linking two points of the perimeter(s) 
and perpendicular to DMAX 
DDIRd maximum diameter direction (azimuth); measured only for DMAXd 
V volume of the depression below the highest closed contour 
Emin elevation of the doline bottom 
Ec elevation of the highest closed contour 
Emaxd elevation of the highest point along the topographical divide 
Linear parameters are expressed in meters, surface parameters in square kilometers, 
and elevation parameters in meters above sea level. The symbol Emin is equivalent 
to FMIN from Bondesan et al. (1992). The volume has been calculated only for the 
part of depression below the highest closed contour, because topographical divide 
does not follow a single plane below which the volume could be calculated. 
4.2.2. Computed parameters 
Similarly as for the measured parameters, most of the computed ones have been split 
to two sub-categories due to dual perimeter definition. Most of the parameters have 
been taken from Bondesan et al. (1992). Instead of elongation ratio RL/W, which 
includes axial parameters referring to a single bottom point, we have used the 
relation DMAX/DMNR, marked with ELONGc and ELONGd. Elevation difference 
between the lowest point and the highest closed contour is marked HUV instead of 
HDOL. 
35