Karren is used today as a generic term for typical sculpturing features on surfaces of exposed solu- ble rock. as a whole, their outstanding variety of shapes constitutes the kind of solutional exokarst- landforms of smaller size, spanning from milli- metres to more than 10 metres. But on the other hand, quite large extensions of rocks sculpted by karren spread over many square kilometres show- ing in many cases a characteristic pattern of fur- rows and grooves, separated by sharp ridges or crests, that stands out in the landscape. 
older references on karren description (Heim, 1878; chaix, 1895; eckert, 1902) were in the begin- ning related geographically to the alpine karsts from glattalp-Muotatal (schwyz, switzerland), Désert de platé (savoie, France) and gottesack- erplateau (allgäu, germany) respectively. terms as Karrenfeld, Karren, lapiaz and lapiés, that are today present in karst descriptions, appear there- fore in the literature, at the end of the 19th century, as a particular expression of high mountain karst. later on, in parallel with growing speleologi- cal research in europe, the words lapiés and kar- ren were early incorporated as synonyms through the karst literature after the Martel ̓s (1921) and cvijić ̓s (1924) publications, including also several mid-mountain locations as Var (provence, France) and Velebit (Dalmatia, croatia). But subsequently, especially under the influence of new research developed by Bögli (1951, 1960a) in the classical 
area of glattalp-Muotatal, the international lit- erature on karst geomorphology (trimmel, 1965; Monroe, 1970; Jennings, 1971; sweeting, 1972) favoured progressively the change from lapiés to karren, even though introducing new connota- tions in the term. indeed sweeting (1972) explains that “the name karren was originally used to de- scribe solution runnels cut into limestones, but it is now used for the whole complex of micro-forms that occur on outcrops of karst limestones”. More precisely, White (1988) introduces his section on solutional sculpturing pointing out that “direct rainfall, sheet wash, channelized flow, and perco- lating flow under various kinds of mantle materi- als produce a myriad of small sculpturings on the bedrock surface of soluble rocks”, and then states that “these forms, as a class, are called karren, a german term that has come into general usage in english”. looking back today over the evolu- tion of karren terminology, the choice made dur- ing the seventies of an anglicized version of the Bögli’s terms seems to be successful in avoiding the uncontrolled burst of new terms. 
Karren landforms develop not only on lime- stone outcrops. They occur in bare carbonate, gyp- sum and salt rocks (Figures 1, 2, 3) or under soil cover. The presence of karren is widespread wher- ever karstic rocks are exposed, but sometimes many significant – but not especially conspicuous – forms are ignored or neglected. right up for the 
KarrenFielD lanDscapes anD Karren lanDForMs 
Angel GINÉS 
13 
1 
14Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing 
present time, the history of karren and karrenfield description has been strongly biased towards the most striking karren landforms: for instance, ril- lenkarren and spectacular solution runnels (Fig- ure 4), as well as the scenic karrenfield landscapes of alpine and tropical environments (Figures 5, 6), are very much better documented than rainpits and monotonous karrenfield surfaces related to arid environments. 
according to a. ginés (1995) and Fornós and ginés (1996), karren features are, probably even more than dolines, the most widespread karstic landform. This is obviously unquestionable if the term karren turns to be applied to any small-sized solutional sculpturing, as it is done in the more recent literature, because nearly every karstic ter- rain exposed to surface erosion contains karren forms. some of them are even microscopic solu- tional and biokarstic features related to the highly specific limestone weathering processes. others remain hidden under soil or buried by clastic sed- iments, as happens with the typical subcutaneous karren features or cryptolapiaz. Finally, there is a great variety of karren forms – the better known, being exposed to open air so that their current growth and development remain basically under the control of atmospheric precipitations – which become integrated as complex karren assemblages into larger karstic features called karrenfields; that is, the former Karrenfelder. in many cases the role of such karrenfields in the autogenic recharge of karst aquifers could be even more important than karst depressions or dolines. 
classification of karren landforms is obvious- ly an open debate. since it is a matter of natural forms – and therefore it is characterized by inher- ent difficult description and intermingling origin – several different criteria can be considered as sound bases for classification. probably the better option is to move from one classification to an- other depending on the approach to the problem that is being studied. one useful analysis of kar- ren landforms we are suggesting here relies on a three-level approach, based on the following scale of decreasing size and complexity: karrenfield 
Figure 1: Rillenkarren features developing on micritic limestones at Serra de Tramuntana karrenfields (Mal- lorca, Spain). 
Figure 2: Rillenkarren features developing on gypsum blocks, after one century of exposure to rainfall, at the Minoan Knossos Palace (Crete, Greece). Width of view is 15 cm. 
Figure 3: Rillenkarren features developing on salt rock at Cardona mountain (Catalonia, Spain). 
landscapes, karren assemblages and elementary karren features. 
Karrenfield landscapes 
interest in karrenfields started in the second half of 19th century, probably due to the increased ap- preciation of the wilderness and scenic values of alpine landscapes. significantly, the two oldest german descriptions of karren areas appeared in journals edited by alpine societies (schweizer al- penclub and Deutscher und Österreichischer al- penverein) and both include the word Karrenfeld in their titles. ancient literature on karren land- forms was clearly caught by the description of bi- zarre shapes and impressive landscapes. The most conspicuous karren landforms were reported dur- ing this time in the geographical literature, with special emphasis on rillenkarren, rinnenkarren, kamenitzas and trittkarren-features. in this way, the term karrenfeld became progressively associ- ated with high mountain landscapes. 
additional descriptions of bare limestone out- crops gradually demonstrated the existence of large areas of karren landscapes in the form of the so-called limestone pavements of the British isles as well as by occupying many barren and defor- ested limestone mid-mountains around the Medi- terranean basin. Their particular scenic value fo- cused again the interest on the strange forms, but at the same time these descriptive studies allowed to some kind of wider generalization promoting the use of a revisited concept of karrenfield as it is implicitly postulated in sweeting (1972). 
all through the seventies and the eighties a remarkable number of tropical and equato- rial karst settings have been described over the world; namely in new guinea (arête and pinna- cle karst of Mount Kaijende), northern australia (chillagoe, Queensland), Borneo (gunung Mulu, sarawak), southern china (stone forest of lunan) and Madagascar (Bemaraha tsingy), among oth- ers. Many of them are in fact giant karrenfields, as assumed in Ford and Williams (2007). once again 
Figure 4: Conspicuous solution runnels on the sides of a jagged limestone pinnacle, 8 metres tall, called Es Ca- mell de Lluc (Serra de Tramuntana, Mallorca, Spain). 
Angel Ginés, Karrenfield landscapes and karren landforms 
Figure 5: A typical mountain-karrenfield, with plenty of wall solution runnels related to snow melting, at 4,500 metres a.s.l. in Yulong mountain (Yunnan, China). 
Figure 6: Extremely dissected pinnacles and pillars in the subtropical karrenfield type-locality of Lunan Stone Forest (Yunnan, China). 
15 
16Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing Table 1: Classification of karren forms. Yellow areas enclose elementary karren features. Green areas enclose complex large-scale landforms, namely karren assemblages and karrenfield types (after Ginés 2004, slightly modified). 
SOLUTIONAL 
AGENT KARREN FORMS SYNONYMS BIOKARSTIC BORINGS 
WETTING IRREGULAR 
ETCHING TINY WATER 
FILMS MICRORILLS RILLENSTEINE STORM SHOWERS RAINPITS SOLUTION PITS 
DIRECT RAINFALL RILLENKARREN SOLUTION FLUTES 
CHANELLED WATER FLOW 
SOLUTION RUNNELS RINNENKARREN WALL KARREN WANDKARREN DECANTATION RUNNELS 
MEANDERING RUNNELS MÄANDERKARREN STANDING 
WATER KAMENITZAS SOLUTION PANS 
SHEET WASH WATER FLOW 
SOLUTION BEVELS AUSGLEICHSFLÄCHEN 
TRITTKARREN HEELSTEPS COCKLING PATTERNS 
SOLUTION RIPPLES 
SNOW MELTING 
TRICHTERKARREN FUNNEL KARREN SHARPENED EDGES LAME DENTATES 
DECANTATION RUNNELS MEANDERING RUNNELS ICE MELTING MEANDERING 
MÄANDERKARREN RUNNELS INFILTRATION GRIKES KLUFTKARREN 
SOIL PERCOLATION WATER 
RUNDKARREN ROUNDED RUNNELS SMOOTH SURFACES SUBSOIL TUBES SUBSOIL HOLLOWS 
CUTTERS 
BODENKARREN, SUBCUTANEOUS KARREN 
COMPLEX PROCESSES 
UNDERCUT RUNNELS HOHLKARREN CLINTS FLACHKARREN PINNACLES SPITZKARREN 
PINNACLE KARRENFIELD LIMESTONE PAVEMENT 
STONE 
KARRENFELD FOREST ARÊTE KARST 0-1mm 1mm-1cm 1-10cm 10cm-1m 1m-10m 10-100m 100m- 
1km 1km- LAPIÉS 
these impressive labyrinths of pinnacles and verti- cal pillars are mainly appreciated in the geomor- phological literature by their striking landscapes rather than by being extreme examples of karren- fields. nowadays, it is not enough to describe in a detailed manner such spectacular landscapes: fur- ther studies on the role of karrenfields in karst hy- drology as well as on the genesis and development of the continuum karrenfield-epikarst call for a new approach to this topic. Having this in mind, probably it could be useful to redefine and enlarge the term karrenfield in order to embrace whatever large surface of exposed soluble rock, sculpted by karren and showing topographic characteristics comprised between two significant end members 
Angel Ginés, Karrenfield landscapes and karren landforms 
represented by limestone pavements and stone forests (table 1). 
in his “glossary of Karst terminology”, Mon- roe (1970) defines Karrenfeld as “an area of lime- stone dominated by karren”. More especially, Bögli (1980) states that “karren fields appear as bare karst and consist of the sum of exposed and half-exposed karren, and occasionally also of cov- ered karren which have become exposed”; moreo- ver, he points out that “they attain the size of a few hectares to a few hundred square kilometers”. ginés (1999a) suggests attaining a minimum of 50% of exposed bare rock – extended over large limestone outcrops – to be considered karren- fields; but obviously there exists a clear hydro- 
Figure 7: The most significant karren assemblages from the mid-mountain karst of Serra de Tramuntana (Mallor- ca, Spain) usually include rillenkarren, trittkarren-heelsteps and cockling patterns from which collected water is drained into wider solution runnels. 
17 
18Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing 
logical continuity along exposed and soil-covered rocks and – following these pathways downwards – subsoil karren features appear as direct links to- wards the most efficient epikarst drains. since the complexity of karst subsurface poses many chal- lenges to understanding the transition between karren landforms and the epikarst (Williams, 1983; Klimchouk, 2000c; Jones et al., 2004; Wil- liams, 2008), special attention must be paid in the future to describe in detail this subcutaneous part of the exokarst. The growing interest on subsoil karren assemblages (slabe, 1999) could focus ad- ditional research on the overall evolution of kar- renfields and epikarst. 
Karren landform assemblages 
Karrenfields are in fact major recharge areas feed- ing the epikarst, but at the same time karrenfields are vast bare rock areas dominated by little-scale karren sculpturing. Filling this remarkable size- gap, in his explanation on “the genetic system of karren forms”, Bögli (1980) states an intermedi- ate stage of integration gathering the so called sin- gle karren forms into greater complex karren forms and indicating clints and pinnacles as examples of such level of classification. indeed, limestone pavements in alpine or glaciated karst are char- acterized by a clint and grike topography, defined initially as Flachkarren (Bögli, 1951, 1960a), in the same manner than intertropical stone forests are characterized by a pinnacle and trench topogra- phy, defined initially as spitzkarren (Bögli, 1951, 1960a). For this reason, i personally think that the old distinction between Flachkarren and spitz- karren yet remains a very useful criterion, espe- cially suitable for landform modelling. 
clints and/or pinnacles become dissected and sculpted by characteristic karren assemblages (Figure 7) whose distribution patterns over the rock faces have not been sufficiently studied until recently (tóth, 2007). on the one hand, it can be expected that association of karren features reflects the many factors that interact in the par- 
Figure 8: Funnel shaped trichterkarren from an alpine limestone outcrop at 2,050 metres a.s.l. in the Vallon des Morteys (Fribourg, Switzerland). Width of view is 15 cm. 
Figure 9: Sharpened edges, topped with their charac- teristic flat facets, are found in many alpine karrenfields like this karren-wall at 1,750 metres a.s.l. in Bödmeren (Schwyz, Switzerland). 
ticular shaping of different homogeneous rock outcrops subjected to the agents that cause kar- ren development. on the other hand, increasing knowledge on karren assemblages could provide information on the genetical processes involved in the formation of each type of elementary kar- ren features, particularly on the base of their frequency of appearance as well as on their cor- relation (positive or negative) with other elemen- tary karren features (ginés, 1996a). For instance, there can be found in mountain or cold climate areas typical karren assemblages related to snow melting, that are characterized by trichterkarren (Figure 8) and sharpened edges (Figure 9) as diag- nostic features (perna and sauro, 1978). reshap- ing of subsoil karren after deforestation and rock exposure to direct rainfall also produces a definite assemblage of forms showing vertical gradation downwards, from the top of the rising rocks to the soil surface. 
table 1 identifies as follows the main solutional agents responsible for karren growth: biokarstic corrosion, wetting by dew, tiny water films drawn by capillary tension, direct rainfall, channelled water flow, sheet wash water flow, short but in- tense storm showers, still-stand water, snow melt- ing, glacier ice melting, direct infiltration and slow soil water percolation. it appears that many of them are strongly controlled by environmen- tal factors, mainly climate-dependent conditions. This explains most of the hydrological integration, from the upper part of the rock outcrops down- wards, shown by several types of karren assem- blages (e.g. from the splashing of raindrops to the collection of water into channelled water flow). even, on the contrary, the apparent lack of hydro- logical connection between karren features that is exhibited by some karren assemblages related to arid or semiarid climates indicates juxtaposi- tion of etching elements rather than efficient water drainage. coastal influence, wind orientation, sun exposure, frost action, dampness, frequent dew formation, etc. could favour or hinder the devel- opment of specific karren assemblages. an envi- ronmental and statistical approach to the karren 
Angel Ginés, Karrenfield landscapes and karren landforms 
assemblages along climatic gradients and/or be- tween different lithologies is therefore justified, taking into account the complex frame of factors determining the array of forms able to result over- printed on the rock. 
Elementary karren features 
Karren is a complex group of small to medium- sized karstic landforms showing a great variety of characteristic shapes. some of them can be con- sidered as elementary karren features, since they seem associated to definite genetic factors and they become frequently integrated in wider-scale karren assemblages. The bewildering diversity of karren is difficult to summarize. a brief descrip- tion of the most documented elementary karren features is stated below, and is presented as a sim- plified diagram in table 1: Biokarstic borings: nanokarren features pro- duced or promoted by microorganisms (bac- teria, cianobacteria, algae and fungi), lichens or roots. pits, boreholes, trenches and tunnels, generally smaller than 1 mm in size are their most common appearances through micro- scopic examination with seM. Irregular etching: nanokarren and microkarren features constituted by a wide variety of pitting and differential, non-oriented, etching forms, commonly showing protrusions and hollows lesser than 1 cm. rock surfaces affected by these rough shapes show no clear directional trends and are characterized by a chaotic and coarse microtopography. Microrills (= Rillensteine): Microkarren features 
characterized by rock surfaces showing sever- al different patterns formed by tiny channels and/or micro-spikes, rarely surpassing 1 mm in width. They have been typically described as about 1 mm wide rills, round bottomed and packed together with characteristic tight- ly sinuous to anastomosing plan view patterns on gentle slopes, becoming more parallel and straighter with increasing slope. 
19 
20Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing Rainpits (= solution pits): small, hollowed cup- 
like karren features, subcircular in plan and nearly parabolic or tapering in cross section, whose diameter ranges from 1 cm to 5 cm, and exceptionally exceeding 2 cm in depth. Fre- quently appear clustered in groups and can co- alesce to give irregular and carious appearance to the rock surfaces. Rillenkarren (= solution flutes): small, straight, narrow, closely packed, parallel solutional fur- rows, that head at the crest of bare rock slopes and extinguish downslope. Their dimensions in limestone outcrops are typically 1.2–2.5 cm in width, 2–6 mm in depth and 10–30 cm in length. individual flutes are parabolic in cross-section and are separated by sharply pro- nounced cusp lines. in plan view, they may form a simple suite of parallel flutes showing remarkable regularity of form and dimension. Their development to either side of a crest often produces a typical herringbone pattern. Solution runnels (= Rinnenkarren): Mesokar- 
ren features consisting of linear channels or furrows that generally show increased width and depth downslope. Threads of runoff water, pouring down the flanks of the rocks, are col- lected into channels to create solution runnels which width and depth range from 5 to 50 cm, being very variable in length (commonly from 1 to 10 m, but in some cases exceeding 30 m long). owing to the great diversity of topographic conditions and the kind of water supply feed- ing their channelized flow, they have a remark- able variety in cross section and plan pattern (including tributaries). Wall karren (= Wandkarren): straight furrows that are often found on sub-vertical outcrops as a result of water flowing down rock walls. They are in many cases real macrokarren features because they can attain lengths close to 100 me- tres. There is frequent overlapping between wall karren and some types of decantation runnels. Decantation runnels: channels generated by 
water released steadily, that start from an ups- lope point-located store (e.g. a patch of moss) or 
from a diffuse or linear source (e.g. a bedding plane) situated upwards. generally their cross- sections are largest close to the input of water and diminish downslope. Meandering runnels (= Mäanderkarren): small winding channels that are cut directly into the rock surface or within a larger runnel. This spe- cial kind of karren channels exhibits meander forms with typical undercutting and slip-off slopes. There is frequent overlapping between meandering karren and some types of decanta- tion runnels. Kamenitzas (= solution pans): Dish-shaped de- 
pressions, 1 cm to 0.5 m deep, 5 cm to 5 m wide and mostly elliptical or circular to highly irreg- ular in plan. usually they have flat and nearly horizontal bottoms that are floored by a thin layer of soil, vegetation or algal remains which decay enhances further dissolution. Their bor- ders are frequently overhanging and may have small overspill outlets. Solution bevels (=Ausgleichsflächen): Flat, smooth surfaces, 0.2 to 1 m long, usually found as plane sub-horizontal belts developed below the level of rillenkarren-flutes extinction. Trittkarren (= heelsteps): conspicuous karren fea- 
tures that form arcuates headwalls, which flat floors are open in downslope direction. The sin- gle trittkarren consists of a flat tread-like sur- face, 10 to 40 cm in diameter, and a sharp back- slope or riser, 3 to 30 cm in height. Their typical appearance is as groups of heel prints excavated as steps on the rock outcrops. They seem to be the result of complex solutional processes in- volving both horizontal and headward corro- sion generated by the thinning of water sheets flowing upon small slope falls. Cockling patterns: solutional concave shapes undulating the rock surfaces randomly or, in some cases, producing a regularly crinkled pat- tern and a characteristic horizontally-lined ap- pearance to the rock slopes. Solution ripples: Wave-like forms, transverse 
to downward water movement under gravi- ty. Their rhythmic forms suggest that periodic 
pulses of flow or chemical changes are impor- tant in their development. Trichterkarren (= funnel karren): concave kar- 
ren forms that resemble trittkarren in shape and dimensions, differing from such karren type in their much rounded cross section which lacks the characteristic horseshoe appearance and the stepped pattern. There is frequent over- lapping between genuine trichterkarren and trittkarren, but the former seem to be exclu- sively associated with snow melting. Sharpened edges (= lame dentate): Mesokarren features delimiting a sharp and straight edge on the flanks of steep rocks. Their upper part shows a characteristic and almost triangular flat facet. They seem to be exclusively associated with snow melting. Grikes (= Kluftkarren): Deep clefts, from 1 cm to 0.5 m across and up to several metres deep. They are one of the most typical mesokarren features, normally from 1 m to 10 m in length, formed through the simple solutional enlarge- ment of joints or cracks. Their linear trends are determined by major structural directions as joint sets or faulting. owing to the fact that such slots cut in the bedrock are merely the visible surface expression of the fissures criss- crossing the karstifiable rocks, grikes constitute a significant component of the epikarst. Rundkarren (= rounded runnels): channels or furrows developed beneath a soil cover, which troughs and ribs become smoothed by the more active corrosion associated with soil wa- ters that produces their characteristic rounded cross-sections. Subsoil smooth surfaces (= subcutaneous karren forms): a whole array of characteristic rounded and smooth rock surfaces appear clearly relat- ed to subsoil corrosion. smoothing and bleach- ing of subsoil karren-forms is evident when it is compared with the sharpening and grey ap- pearance of exhumed karren forms. subsoil smoothing can be considered a consequence of specific nanokarren features developed in con- tact with the sponge action of acidic soil water. 
Angel Ginés, Karrenfield landscapes and karren landforms 
Subsoil tubes (= subcutaneous karren pipes): per- 
forating tubes and rock holes, formerly filled with soil, which diameter range from a few cen- timetres to less than 1 m. They show rounded cross sections as well as branching and complex tridimensional patterns that penetrate deep- ly into the rock. subsoil tubes are a significant part of the epikarst in many well developed karrenfields. Subsoil hollows (= subcutaneous hollow-forms): subsoil hollows showing different shapes and sizes are frequently exposed in road cuts and quarry walls. They are also common at the foot of karren pinnacles. in addition to pock- ets, niches and recesses, great subsoil wells and small subsoil pitting and scallop-like features are frequently found. Cutters: great solution crevices similar to grikes but generally larger than 1 m in wide and filled with regolith or soil. They appear much wid- ened at the top and tapering to narrow cracks with depth and are generated by vertical solu- tion along fractures beneath a thick soil. Undercut runnels (= Hohlkarren): Mesokarren 
furrows transformed by organic debris or par- tial soil filling because their side walls have been hollowed under by enhanced biogenic carbon dioxide concentration. typical bag-like cross sections, wider at the bottom than at the top, are generated in this way. Clints (= Flachkarren): tabular intervening blocks or slabs isolated by grikes. They are flat or gently inclined outcropping rocks which become divided into straight-sided blocks by the solutional widening of fissures. These bare plane surfaces of limestone, generally parallel to the bedding, are the main constituent of limestone pavements. Pinnacles (= Spitzkarren): Vertical solution along joints and fractures lowers the intervening rock flanks and produces isolated spires or pinna- cles that can reach a few metres or tens of me- tres in height. usually the side walls are deep grikes with runnels cutting across one anoth- er to form sharp ridges and peaks. They could 
21 
22Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing be considered as a particularly mature form of karren and in many cases are the result from sharpening of subsoil pinnacles after being ex- humed by soil removal. This is necessarily a simplified overview on the elementary karren features that are enclosed in Table 1 (based in Ginés, 2004), and corre- sponds to some extent with the so called single forms from Bögli (1980). It stands out that some of these elementary karren features accumulate a very uneven amount of bibliographical references (for instance, many references about rillenkarren in comparison with very few on trichterkarren). Furthermore, some of them can be considered as the end members from a continuum of related forms (this is the reason for the choice of the com- plementary term runnel, which embraces a wide array of forms, including the formerly spelled Rinnenkarren, Wandkarren, Mäanderkarren, Rundkarren and Hohlkarren as well as many decantation forms). Finally, there are elementary karren features easy to delimit (as, for example, the rainpits), but many others show clear overlap- ping (this seems to be the case for the transitional forms between trittkarren and trichterkarren). 
Figure 10: Winding rib remnants that are exclu- sively found between some rillenkarren flutes developed on salt rock (Cardona, Catalonia, Spain). Width of view is 12 cm. 
A broad discussion about so complex terminol- ogy would be tedious in this merely introductory chapter. During the seventies, the wide use of the terminology adapted from Bögli (1951, 1960a) into the international karst literature proved to 
Figure 11: Eogenetic karren formed on Miocene reef rocks of south-eastern Mallorca (Balearic islands, Spain). Recent soil removal allows us to recognize the charac- teristic differences existing between the upper rough and grey formerly exposed rock and the smooth and whitish appearance of freshly exhumed subsoil sculp- turing. Width of view is 1.5 m. 
Figure 12: Great subsoil- shaped pinnacles arise after iron mining in the palaeokarst of Cerro del Hierro (Seville province, Andalusia, Spain). 
be a successful decision. But today, in my opinion, 
carried out by petterson (2001) and Dreybrodt and such tendency has outlived its usefulness. For ex- 
Kaufmann (2007) on the solution by flowing water ample, and from a strictly personal point of view, 
films on sloped blocks. experimental work in the let me suggest avoiding the future expansion of 
laboratory, using plaster of paris (artificial gyp- germanized new terms as recently occurred with 
sum) block-models, were previously initiated with the excellent paper from simms (2002) on lacus- 
success by glew and Ford (1980) for rillenkarren, trine röhrenkarren. 
and subsequently were developed by Dzulynski et al. (1988) and slabe (2005), trying to embrace also Looking forward to karren research the kluftkarren, solution runnels and subcutane- ous stone-teeth formation. Furthermore simula- strategies 
tion of rillenkarren flutes by slabe (2005) has been especially successful in obtaining by means of among the major issues faced by the researchers 
plaster models the expected downward sequence on karren landforms in the next years are: the use 
on the typical karren assemblage consisting of ril- of modelling techniques for a better explanation 
lenkarren, ausgleichsfläche and solution runnels. of the genesis of specific elementary karren fea- 
There is an increasing literature on morphom- tures; the accurate morphometrical description 
etry of elementary karren features though not all of the most significant karren landforms; and the 
the measurements of karren types are substanti- application of statistical methods in order to com- 
ated by large sampling nor are they easily com- pare karren locations differing in lithology and/or 
parable with another karren locations. Valuable climate conditions. 
field data on rillenkarren are gathered in Belloni The formation of the different types of karren 
and orombelli (1970), lundberg (1977a, b), Hein- features can be largely understood in terms of the 
emann et al. (1977), Dunkerley (1979), goudie et mobility of solutes along the rock surfaces. This 
al. (1989), stenson and Ford (1993), Mottershead approach constitutes the base for the experiments 
(1996a) and ginés (1996b), while measurements 
Angel Ginés, Karrenfield landscapes and karren landforms 
23 
24Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing of clints and grikes are documented in goldie and cox (2000). The references on morphometry of rainpits are limited to lundberg (1977a) and ginés (1998b), and only scant quantitative data are re- ported from meandering runnels in Zeller (1967), Hutchinson (1996) and Veress and tóth (2004). Morphometric characteristics of trittkarren-trich- terkarren features are discussed by Vincent (1983a) on the base of six morphological variables. Belloni and orombelli (1970) provide also measurements of kamenitzas and solution runnels. in this way, an important recent trend in exokarst studies lies in the greater application of morphometric tech- niques to karren descriptions. Further research would be encouraged as long as available meas- urements of elementary karren forms on different karstic locations continue to grow. a combined and cautious use of morphometry and terminolo- gy is recommended in order to clarify and simplify the overwhelming amount of karren terms. 
it has long been recognized that several fac- tors may control karren development: lithology, topography, climate, biological activity and time. The effects of climatic differences on karren devel- opment tend to be apparent at a global overlook, both at the scale of karrenfields and at the scale of individual elementary karren features. Most of the diversity in karren landforms can be easily explained as a direct consequence of variation in 
precipitation and temperature. correlation with macroflora is not quite congruent because karren is obviously defined as predominantly bare rock- surfaces and landscapes. But correlation with weathering and soil-forming processes could be useful. topography would be significant, espe- cially regarding soil removal and exposure to sun radiation. Furthermore, it can be expected that lithology influences the nature and rate of kar- ren growth in two major ways: mineralogy and texture. correlations between forms and environ- mental factors along gradients as well as multifac- tor analysis including rock properties (Figure 10) have presumably good application to karren re- search owing to such complex causation. statisti- cal methods (e.g. principal component analysis) and integrated geomorphological and ecologi- cal studies (e.g. transects) are being introduced gradually with this purpose, as suggest the con- tributions from goudie et al. (1989), ginés (1996a, 1999a) and Veress et al. (2001a). Finally, time is also important in relation to karren because these landforms are subjected to evolution at different chronological scales, ranging from decades or centuries of deforestation and subsequent soil re- moval (Figure 11) to very old burying under sedi- ments for millions of years until produce in some cases palaeokarst ore-deposits (Figure 12). 
pHYsics anD cHeMistrY oF Dissolution on suBaerialY eXposeD soluBle rocKs BY FloWing Water FilMs 
Wolfgang DREYBRODT and Georg KAUFMANN 
2 
Karren is the generic term for dissolution features on exposed soluble rock surfaces. Because of their variety of shapes and also their regularity karren have been a fascinating object of interest for ge- omorphologists. although a large body of obser- vations and descriptions of karren has been accu- mulated, knowledge on the physical and chemi- cal processes on their formation by dissolution is scarce. in this paper we will focus on processes occurring on bare rock surfaces such as limestone or gypsum exposed to the atmosphere, and cov- ered by flowing water films. two basic ingredients control the dissolution process, the hydrodynam- ics of thin water films flowing down inclined sur- faces, and the dissolution taining rainwater on limestone kinetics or of gypsum the co2-con- rock surfaces. after discussion of these two topics, we will use this for an interpretation of the data of glew and Ford (1980), who performed experimen- tal simulations on the formation of rillenkarren on inclined surfaces of plaster of paris exposed to artificial rainfall. 
using these results an interpretation of existing field data on lengths of rillenkarren is presented. 
also recent data by petterson (2001) on dissolu- tion on rillenkarren from plaster of paris will be discussed. Finally the dissolution kinetics of lime- stone will be used to explain surface denudation on bare limestone surfaces. 
The fluid dynamics of water films on smooth and rough surfaces 
When rain with intensity q (cms-1, 1 mm/hour = 2.8 ·10-5 cm s-1) falls onto an inclined smooth sur- face with slope angle γ, a thin layer of water is es- tablished (see Figure 1). its flow rate Q in cm3/s per unit width is given in cm2/s. after distance x ́ = l down the surface of the rock Q is 
Q = x ⋅ q = l q cos γ , (1) 
The thickness h (in cm) of the water film is re- lated to flow Q (Myers, 2002) by 
Q = ρ 3gh η 3 
sin γ , (2) 
sin γ , (2) 
X q 
Q h 
g 
X Figure 1: Water film on inclined rock surface. 
25 
26Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing where g is earth’s gravitational acceleration, ρ is the density of water, and η its viscosity. By using eqns. 1 and 2, we obtain the film thickness 
h = 3 3 η 
q i ρ g tanγ 
. (3) 
For rainfall intensities of 1 mm/hour onto a surface sloping with 45° and at a distance l = 50 cm, a fairly thin film of h = 3.6·10-3 cm develops. For 40 mm/hour rainfall intensity as used by glew and Ford (1980), the film thickness h is 1.2·10-2 cm. The flow velocity u (in cm s-1) is obtained from u·h = Q by inserting eqns. 2 and 3 and one finds 
u = 3 ρ gQ 2 sin γ 3 η = 3 ρ gq 2 l 2 cos 2 
γ sin γ 3 
η . (4) note that the velocity increases with flow dis- tance l. assuming a rainfall of 10 mm/hour, a flow distance of 1 m, and a slope angle of 45°, the veloc- ity is 2.1 cm s-1. if rainfall is reduced to 1 mm/hour one finds 0.5 cm s-1. These velocities are of impor- tance because they give the time of residence dur- ing which a water parcel can dissolve bedrock. 
When the surface is rough a correction factor must be introduced (Myers, 2002), which is given by 
f c =     1 − 0.25    k h 
   1.28 
,     
(5) 
where k is the roughness of the surface and h the film thickness of the layer on a smooth surface, as given by eqn. 3 (phelps, 1975). This dimensionless factor relates the flow velocities u smooth to the rough surfaces respectively: 
and ur of the 
u r = f c ⋅ u . (6) 
Because u·h = Q the film thickness values are related byr h = 1 f c 
h . (7) 
For k/h = ≈ 0.4, and flow 2, a velocities reasonable number, we obtain are lower. Film thickness fc values are higher by a factor of 2.5. 
Dissolution kinetics 
Gypsum 
By use of rotating disc experiments Jeschke et al. (2001) have found that the surface reaction rates of gypsum (in mmol cm-2 s-1) are given by R s = k s (1 − c s / c eq ) = α s ( c eq − c s ) (8) 
with α s = k s / c eq =6.5·10 -3 cm/s. surface Here, and cs cm-2s-1. The spect to gypsum is the calcium-concentration at the the equilibrium rate is constant concentration 15.4·10-3 is ks mmol = 1.1·10-4 mmol cm-3c. eq cawith 2+ re- and transported so42--ions released from the mineral surface are away from the surface into the solu- tion by molecular diffusion. Therefore concentra- tion gradients exist and the surface concentration ctransport by s differs from rate the RD concentration by c in the bulk. The molecular diffusion is given 
R D = k D (1 − c / c eq ) = α D ( c eq − c ) (9) 
with αD = k D / c eq where average kD concentration is the transport constant and c is the of the bulk solution. since due to one finds mass an conservation effective rate law RS must (Dreybrodt, be equal to 1988). 
RD, 
R = k eff (1 − c / c eq ) (10) 
with 
k eff 
= k s k s D 
, D ⋅ k + k 
or R = α eff ( c eq − c ) with 
α eff 
= α s α s ⋅ α D 
+ 
α 
D 
. 
When ks >> kD, keff becomes close to kD and rates are controlled by diffusion. on the other hand if ks << kD, keff becomes close to ks and the rates are surface controlled. in the region where ks and kD are of similar magnitudes both processes control dissolution. 
For a laminar water film of thickness h, kD is given by (Beek and Muttzall, 1975) 2 / D eq k Dc h = (11) 
or 2 / D D h = α , 
where D is the coefficient of diffusion (1·10-5 cm-2 s-1). For h = 0.01 cm one obtains αD = 2·10-3 cm s-1 and the rates are controlled by diffusion. However, raindrops impinging on the water film may cause mixing, which could increase the effective diffu- sion constant. only a factor of 10 suffices to obtain surface control and a value of αeff ≈ 7·10-3 cm s-1. 
to convert the rates from mmol cm-2 s-1 into retreat of rock in cm/year for gypsum one has to multiply by a factor of 2.3·106. 
Limestone 
Water films running down rock surfaces under natural rainfall conditions have a comparative- ly small depth of a few tenths of a millimetre. in contrast to gypsum, where dissolution rates are determined by surface reaction and molecular diffusion, the situation on limestone is more com- plex. Figure 2 schematically depicts three regimes of dissolution rates. For highly undersaturated solutions, 0 < c ≤ capp, rates are high and decline steeply with slope α1 to an apparent equilibrium concentration capp = 0.3·ceq, where ceq is the true equilibrium concentration with respect to calcite. The values of α1 are almost independent on the film thickness h for 0.005 cm < h < 0.03 cm, and α1 = 5·10-4 cm s-1 (Kaufmann and Dreybrodt, 2007). to a good approximation the rates found by theoretical modelling can be expressed by 
Wolfgang Dreybrodt and Georg Kaufmann, Physics and chemistry of dissolution on subaerialy exposed soluble rocks by flowing water films 
110 1 2 3 ) .u. a(e tarn oitulossidcapp cs ceq 
Ca  concentration Figure ing water. 2: Dissolution Three regimes rates of of limestone very fast (region by CO21), -contain- moder- ate (region 2), and inhibited dissolution rates (region 3) are clearly distinguishable. Only the fast dissolution rate in region 1 is relevant in this paper. 
1( ) I app R c c = − α (12) 
for 
0.3 c ≤ ceq . 
For higher calcium concentrations a second lin- ear region with significantly lower slope α2 arises, until close to equilibrium in region 3 for c ≥ csw, above the switch concentration csw = 0.9ceq inhibi- tion occurs and the rates are controlled by slow surface reactions. 
The dissolution rates in regions 2 and 3 are well understood (plummer et al., 1978; Buhmann and Dreybrodt, 1985; svensson and Dreybrodt, 1992). 
Three basic chemical reactions control the dis- solution of caco3: 1. 2 
3 3 H CaCO Ca HCO + ← + − 
→ + + 
2. 2 
2 3 3 3 2 H CO CaCO Ca HCO ← + − → + + 
3. 2 2 2 
3 2 3 2 3 CaCO H O Ca CO H O Ca HCO OH ← + − ← + − − 
→ → + + + + + 
For all three reactions co2 dissolved in the solu- 
27 
28Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing tion must be hydrated into carbonic acid, which rapidly reacts to H + + HCO 3 − . 
4. H 2 O + CO 2 ←→ H 2 CO 3 5. CO 2 + OH − ← → HCO 3 − 
The pH-values of the solution in region 2 are be- tween 7.5 and 8.3. For such pH-values conversion of and cofor 2 is slow (usdowski thin films below conversion limits the 1982, Dreybrodt 1988) 0.02 cm control rates. For film thickness by co2- 
between 0.01 cm up to 0.04 cm slope values are of about magnitude α2 = The reason 3·10-5 cm s-1, lower by about for than the α1 high = 5·10-4 cm s-1. 
rates in region one order 1 are re- actions (1) and (3). When no calcite has yet been dissolved the initial pH of the solution in equi- librium with reaction (1) is covery 2 in fast the protons atmosphere are is 5.7. since rapidly con- sumed by dissolving calcite. 
Furthermore dissolution of calcite produces oH- ions. Therefore pH increases to values of about 11. Because of the high concentration of oH-, increasing conversion ca-concentration of co2 is fast pH by reaction drops, 5. With and con- takes sequently over slow in controlling conversion the of rates. co2 as by a reaction conclusion (4) 
we state that for low concentrations c the rates are given by the relation 
12(0.3 ( ); 0 0.3 ); 0.36 0.9 . = αα (13, R c eq − c < c < c eq c eq − c c > < c 
eq 
14) 
Experimental determination of dissolution rates in region 1 
When a thin water layer of width W flows down a smooth, plane limestone surface with inclination angle γ it dissolves calcite and the concentration c(x) of calcium along its flow path increases. The amount of calcite dissolved during one second between positions – c(x))·dx·W. Due to x mass and x conservation + dx is given this by αmust 1(capp 
be concentration equal with Qfrom totaldc, x to where x + dc is the dx, and total flow rate in cm3 s-1. From this a increase Qdifferential total in is the 
equation is found 
dc dx 
= α Q 1 
total ⋅ W ( c app − c ). (15) 
its solution is c ( x ) = c app    1 exp α Q 
1 x , −    −       
(16) 
where width of Q = the Qtotalfilm. 
/W is the amount of flow in one cm 
to We this use end, eqn. we 16 have to determine constructed α1 experimentally. a channel of 5 cm width and 1.2 m length by employing acryl rims fixed to a plate of limestone. The inclination is γ = 3.2°. at the end of the channel a funnel of acryl-glass channels the water into a hole from where it runs into a bottle. The experiment is il- lustrated in Figure 3 (at the top), which provides a view from above. to guide the water into a stable film the channel at its upper end is blocked by a piece of acryl-glass, which leaves a narrow space of a few tenths of a millimetre between the lime- stone surface and its lower plane face (see Figure 3, below). Distilled water in equilibrium with the is pCOintroduced 2 in the atmosphere into by use of a peristaltic pump the upper compartment, and a film of constant thickness moves down in laminar flow at ambient temperature of 20°c. This film is established by drawing down the water along the limestone surface by use of a wet paper strip as wide as the film is desired to be. The water film does not touch the acryl walls but is kept by sur- face tension. it does not change its shape, even when its depth varies by a factor of three. The sur- face of the film is absolutely plain as can be seen by a mirror like reflection of light. The flow rate Q is measured by collecting 10 ml of water at the out- let hole at the end of the channel, and measuring the this time sample needed. is then The measured calcium for concentration various values cend of of Q. Furthermore, water in equilibrium with atmo- spheric pCO2 and calcite is used to measure ceq. The 
calcium concentrations are determined by mea- suring electrical conductivity, which for such low concentrations is linear with calcium concentra- tion. The experiment was performed at 25°c. 
eqn. 16 can be rewritten to − ln     α 1 
total 1 − c c 
end 
app 
    
(17) 
Figure 4 shows the plot of the experimental data in terms of ln(1-ccan be fitted with a straight cline eq sonable = 0.17 mmol/cm3. one agreement finds α1 = 2.6·10to end/cappline ) From the versus slope by using 1/Q0.129 ctotalapp of . = This the 0.3 
-4 cm s-1, which is in rea- the theoretical predictions of α1th = 5·10-4 cm s-1 and capp 
= ⋅ ⋅ Q 
l W 
. th = 0.36·ceq. 
Dissolution on bare rock surfaces 
When rain falls onto an inclined surface the flow 
3.2° 
Figure 3: Experimental set up to measure limestone dis- solution rates in region 1 (top and side view). Length l of channel 120 cm, width of channel 5 cm, average width W of water film 4 cm. 
acryl glass 
limestone 
water (film) 
Wolfgang Dreybrodt and Georg Kaufmann, Physics and chemistry of dissolution on subaerialy exposed soluble rocks by flowing water films 
to peristaltic pump 
support 
rate downstream increases (see Figure 1). if at x’= 0 the flow given by 
rate is Q0; then at a later position x’ it is 
Q Mass = Qconservation 0 + q x’cosγ = demands Q0 + q’x’. that 
(18) 
W ( Q 0 
+ q ' x ') c + W Xα ⋅ ( c eq − c ) dx 
' 
= 
(19) 
= W ( Q 0 
+ q ' x ' + q ' dx ')( c + 
dc 
), 
where c is the average concentration at position x’, and W is is a correction the width of the factor considering film. ᾶ ≈ the α· roughness fα, where of fα the rock surface. if one assumes that the rock sur- face consists of small half spheres densely packed, instead of a smooth plane, the surface area avail- able for gives an dissolution estimation on will the increase order of by magnitude fα = 2. This of fat α. equation 19 states position x’ + dx’ that the outflow is given by the of calcium inflow at posi- tion x’ plus the amount of calcium ions dissolved per time between x’ and x’ + dx’. neglecting terms with dx’·dc one finds a differential equation 
0 
' (20) Q dx + q ' x ' = Xα 
( c eq 
dc − c ) − q ' c , 
3.0 
ceq = 0.56 mmol/L 2.5 
T = 20° C 
) c/c-1(nI-ppa2.0 1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.0 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 
1/Qtotal (s/cm3) Figure 4: Calcium concentration versus inverse of flow rate flow for rate experimental of the film. The data straight (squares). line Qis total a least is the square total 
fit to the data. 
29 
30Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing with solution 
( ') ' 
1 (1 ' 0' ) ' c x = q α X 
+ c eq α X 
' .     − − + q Q 
x q 
q + α X     
(21) 
For large values of x’ the concentration ap- proaches the valuec ∞ = αX 
q ' +α X 
c eq . (22) 
90% of this value is reached at a distance 
' ' 0.9 0 ' 10 ' Xα 1 . x = Q q 
    (23) 
For immediately. Q0 = 0 the Therefore concentration dissolution c∞ is rates established are uni- form downstream if one assumes that ᾶ is inde- pendent of the thickness of the water sheet. This is not true for gypsum. a reasonable approximation is to use average values. For gypsum α is maximal 7.1·10-3cm s-1 if the rates are controlled by surface reactions and at a sheet thickness of 0.1 mm it is 1.56·10-3cm s-1 (see eqn. 10). at a sheet thickness of 0.5 mm one finds α = 3.8·10-4 cm s-1. 
Rillenkarren 
Experiments on formation of rillenkarren on gypsum 
glew and Ford (1980) experimentally simulated the formation of rillenkarren on gypsum by ex- posing inclined surfaces of plaster of paris to a rainfall intensity of 38 mm/hour, which lasted for 500 h. They obtained well developed rillenkarren. Their average length from the crest to the “aus- gleichsfläche” was dependent on the angle of in- clination, as shown in Figure 5. Ford and glew ar- gued that the “ausgleichsfläche” could form only when the water film exceeds a critical thickness which should be higher than the roughness k + hof c, 
the rock. With this assumption by use of eqns. 1 and 2 one finds 
q q −     
3 l = 3 ρ η 
g q h c tan γ . (24) 
Therefore, by plotting l versus tan γ one should find a straight line. This indeed is the case for the glew and Ford ̓s (1980) data, as shown by Figure 5. The slope of this line is 14 cm, from which one finds a critical thickness sumes a smooth surface. For hc = 7.7·10-3 cm if one as- a rough surface with k = measured hc one finds a value of 10-2 cm. glew and Ford a value below (1.5 ± 0.5)·10-2 cm, which is in good agreement. They also measured disso- lution rates of 4·10-3 cm/h. For their experimental data The one amount finds cof ∞ ≈ flow 0.66 leaving ceq from a rock eqn. of 17. 
width W at x’ is equal to the amount of rainfall which falls to 
·x the which area W·x. is dissolved it carries from away the the rock’s mass surface of rock q· area c∞ Wx’ = Wx/cos γ. converting the mass of dissolved material to its volume one finds the retreat of rock R D = c ∞ ⋅ q ⋅ cos γ / ρ g , (25) 
With where the ρg = 2.3 g/cm3 is the density of gypsum. experimental conditions of glew and Ford reasonably one finds well Rinto D = their 2.7·10data -3·cos set. γ (cm/h). However, This it rep- fits 
2520I h tgneI1510500.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 tan g 
Figure 5: Length of experimental rillenkarren versus slope, tan γ. The squares are experimental data from Glew and Ford (1980). The line represents eqn. 24 with hc=7.7.10-3 cm. 
resents a lower limit because one assumes laminar flow. splashing raindrops may disturb this flow and cause mixing of the solution by which the ef- fective diffusion constants increase. a factor of 10 is sufficient to rise c∞ to 0.9 ceq. 
in a recent work petterson (2001) has exposed rillenkarren channels modelled from real lime- stone rillenkarren by plaster of paris, to artificial rain of 115 mm/hour intensity. By using an optical technique he measured the thickness of the lami- nar flowing water films along the karren rills. The thickness of these films, measured at a distance of 5 cm to 40 cm from the upper edge, range from 0.2 mm up to 0.8 mm, when the karren model was 
Wolfgang Dreybrodt and Georg Kaufmann, Physics and chemistry of dissolution on subaerialy exposed soluble rocks by flowing water films 
2520 Istria, Croatia 
15) mc(h tgnel020 
) mc(h tgnel15101050 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 45 Mallorca 
) mc(h tgnelSurprise valley, Canada 
5A = 15.0 cm, R = 0.45 
00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 2.0 302010A = 13.8 cm, R = 0.29 
00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 
Svalbord marbles, Norway 
20 
) mc(h tgnel15105A = 9.8 cm, R = 0.4 
A = 16.5 cm, R = 0.78 
00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 
50403525155 
25 
1.8 
Figure 6: Length of natural rillenkarren on limestone versus slope tan γ. From J. Lundberg and A. Ginés, personal communication. The straight lines are fits to l = A . tan γ. 
tilted by 30°. Water samples collected from the karren at various distances from the crest were used to measure the calcium concentration pro- file along the karren. petterson found an almost linear increase from 75 mg/l of calcium at 5 cm to a value of 105 mg/l at 40 cm. The average value was 90 mg/l ± 15 mg/l. 
With an average film thickness of 0.5 mm one finds ᾶ = 7.6·10-4 cm s-1. With a rainfall intensity of 115 mm/h = 3.2·10-3 cm s-1 by use of eqn. 22 one obtains a value c∞ = 118 mg/l. in view of the ap- proximations this can be regarded as good agree- ment to experiment and proves our theoretical considerations. 
31 
32Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing Interpretation of field data of rillenkarren 
a large body of data has been collected, which re- lates the lengths of rillenkarren to the slope of the rock surface where they grow. From eqn. 24 one expects a linear relation of length and slope. 
l = A ⋅ tan γ (26) 
with A = ρg 3 η q h c 3 
. 
Figure 6 shows average lengths of rillenkarren versus slope (tan γ) for several areas (ginés and lundberg, personal communication, 2006). The straight line represents a least square fit by the re- lation l = const·tan γ to the data points with γ ≤ 64° (tan γ ≤ 2). 
although the scatter of points, which could be caused by differing values of precipitation q at dif- ferent sites and times is significant one finds a = 12.6 ± 3 cm for all plots. From this by use of eqn. (26) one obtains Figure 7 shows hc3the /q = (3.9 ± 0.2) ·10-4 cm2s. 
relationship of length with mean annual temperature as reported by lund- berg and ginés (personal communication, 2006). The data can be fitted by a relation l = 0.5T + 12.6 (cm), where T is in °c. The variation of l in tem- perature could result from the temperature de- pendence of η which can be presented with an ac- curacy within 2% by the empirical relation 
1/ η = 53.8 + 2.76 T    cm g 
s    , (27) 
that is valid between 0°c and 25°c. 
introducing this into eqn. 26 one finds using hc3/q = 6.11 ·10-4 cm2s and tan γ = 1 
l = 12 + 0.52 ⋅ T [ cm ]. (28) 
dependence The value of of hlength c3/q is close on to that slope in found from the the previous ex- ample. 
as a final example we discuss the data present- ed in Figure 8 which relates the average lengths of 
35 
30 
) mc(L h tgnel0-5 25201510 
L = 12.6 + 0.5 T 5-10 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 mean annual temperature T °C Figure 7: Length of natural rillenkarren on limestone ver- sus mean annual temperature. From J. Lundberg and A. Ginés, personal communication. 
rillenkarren in serra de tramuntana as a function of altitude above sea level, taken from lundberg and ginés (personal communication, 2006). 
There is a clear decrease of length with altitude h, which can be caused by two reasons. First there is a linear relation between altitude and tempera- ture. The up most abszissa shows the correspond- ing temperature given by 
T = 17 – 0.0065 h (°c), (29) 
where the altitude h is in m. 
Furthermore mean annual precipitation qav is related to altitude h by 
qav = 461 + 0.4h [mm/year]. (30) 
see upper abscissa in Figure 8. 
We now assume that the actual rainfall to the rock is related to qav by q = fq·qav, where fq is a con- stant. 
Both q and viscosity η depend on altitude. using eqns. 26, 27, 29 and 30 one can calculate the length as a function of altitude. With hc3/q as a fit- ting parameter one obtains the curve in Figure 8. The curve underestimates the large lengths, but shows the general trend. Whether it is a reason- able estimation must be judged from the value 
of hc3/q(h). if one assumes that 1000 mm/year correspond to an average actual precipitation of 10 mm/hour one obtains hc= 0.005 cm and cor- respondingly hc3/q(h) = 6.7·10-4 cm2s. This value is also close to those found in the previous examples. assuming an average actual precipitation of 10 mm/h dominant in the formation of karren one finds hc = 0.0059 cm from the length-slope rela- tion and hc = 0.0065 cm from the length-temper- ature relation. 
in all three examples we have assumed an av- erage precipitation of about 10 mm/hour dur- ing the formation of rillenkarren. This is a value, which seems possible. For higher precipitation the length would be smaller and would be overprint- ed by lower precipitation yielding longer karren. at low precipitation rates (1mm/hour) the karren become very long (2 m) and will form very slowly, such that they may not be detected. 
in summary, glew’s and Ford’s idea that karren length is determined by a critical thickness hc of the down flowing water film can be used to ex- plain field data. one should keep in mind that at a precipitation rate of 10 mm/h a film thickness of 0.006 cm is attained after 27 cm on a smooth rock surface inclined by 45°. 
We do not know at present the physical reason, why this critical thickness avoids further growth of rillenkarren. This requires experimental obser- vations of flow rates and chemical composition of the water flowing on natural karren on limestone during rain storms of various intensities. 
Denudation rates in the field 
Gypsum 
Denudation rates on subaerial exposed gyp- sum samples have been reported by cucchi et al. (1996). in an observation station close to tri- est (italy) with a yearly rainfall of 1,350 mm they found 0.9 mm/year as an average during an obser- vation time of eight years. 
at rainfall intensities of 40 mm/hour the solu- 
Wolfgang Dreybrodt and Georg Kaufmann, Physics and chemistry of dissolution on subaerialy exposed soluble rocks by flowing water films 
temperature °C 
17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 
500 600 700 800 900 40 
precipitation (mm/year) 
30 ) mc(h tgnel20rillenkarren theory 
of Serra de Tramuntana, Mallorca 
1000 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 altitude (m a. s. l.) 
Figure 8: Length of natural rillenkarren on limestone (Mallorca) versus altitude above sea level. From J. Lund- berg and A. Ginés, personal communication. The curve represents the fit discussed in the text. 
tion running off the rock has a concentration of 0.5 ceq. at lower rainfall intensities of 4 mm/hour one finds c = 0.9 ceq. Therefore it is reasonable to take an average value c = 0.75 ceq for all the water during one year’s rainfall. From this one finds a denudation rate of 1 mm/year. 
Limestone 
For dissolution under linear kinetics with a rate law 
( ), eq R c c = − α (31) 
the time t, which is needed until a volume ele- ment with initial concentration zero attains con- centration of 0.63 ceq is given by 
/ T h = α . (32) 
For limestone with a film thickness of 0.2 mm one finds T1 = 10-2/ᾶ1 = 20 s to attain c = 0.64capp. in the slower region 2, ᾶ2 = 2·10-5 cm s-1 and the time to reach c = 0.63ceq is T2 = 500 s. under natural rainfall flow velocities are on the order of 1 cm s-1. Therefore dissolution will be effective only in region 1. even when the water dissolved limestone 
33 
34Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing in region 2, the dissolution rates were about two orders of magnitude lower. in other words, all the water, which falls to the rock surface, will leave it with concentration region 1. 
c∞ derived from dissolution in 
With ᾶ1 = 10-3 cm s-1 one finds c 10 3 
10 3 2.8 10 5 p cos c app , ∞ = − + ⋅ − 
− ⋅ ⋅ γ 
⋅ (33) 
where p is the rainfall intensity in mm/h. 
at low slope angles (cos γ ≈ 1) and for rainfall intensities of at 10 mm/h, intensities of cucchi et 40 1 cal. ∞ mm/h, mm/h = (1996), 0.24 cc∞mmol/l, ∞= = by 0.97 0.14 using cmmol/l. 
app and = micrometers, 0.29 for extreme mmol/l. 
measured surface denudation rates on a huge number of limestone samples with slope angles of about 15 degrees in the karst of triest. They found average dissolution rates sampled over eight years of 0.015 ± 0.01 mm/year. at an average rainfall of 1,350 mm/year in this region one needs an average run-off number. concentration a closer inspection c∞= 0.97 of the ceq to distribution explain this of rainfall-depth distribution is therefore necessary to verify this number. anyway, our findings sup- port that denudation on bare rock by the dissolu- tional action of rainwater is caused by fast dissolu- tion in region 1 of Figure 2. 
We have performed a first attempt to measure concentrations of rainwater flowing from the sur- face of a karren formation of limestone from li- pica, slovenia, exhibited in front of the postojna cave. after two days of heavy rainfalls, cleaning the rock from dust, water was collected during a medium strong rainfall of a few millimeters/h by use of an aluminum foil attached to the rock. Fig- ure 9 shows the experimental situation. The water had flown on top of the formation, which exhib- its only a slight inclination of about 10° degree for about one meter, then down one half meter, almost vertically, where it was channelled by the foil and collected into a beaker. This flowpath is depicted by the grey line. Measures were taken to prevent dilution of the sample by rainwater dripping into it. in parallel a sample of rainwater was collect- 
ed. The specific conductivities were measured in the field. The conductivity of rain water was 6 μs/ cm, whereas the water from the karren exhibited 57 μs/cm. analysis for calcium in the lab yielded a value of 0.25 mmol/liter, 38% of the saturation value of 65 mmol/liter at 10°c, the temperature during collection of the sample. This result is in good agreement to what one expects from eqn. 33. 
Discussion and conclusion 
We have presented some basic principles of flow dynamics of thin water films that can approxi- mate flow on natural rock surfaces under rainfall conditions. although these approximations are crude they can be used for realistic estimations. 
to understand the formation of geomorpho- logic features on rock surfaces basic knowledge of the dissolution rates by flowing water sheets is needed. Water in equilibrium with the pCO2 of the atmosphere dissolves limestone quickly up to a concentration of capp ≈ 0.3ceq. For higher concen- trations the dissolution rates drop rapidly. The time to reach the concentration capp under natural rainfall conditions is on the order of 10 seconds, sufficiently short, that all dissolution will be af- fected in this regime of concentrations. even if the solution would reach concentrations higher than capp, then dissolution rates drop to such low values that they become insignificant. We have presented experimental data, which confirm this behaviour. it is also possible to understand from these kinet- ics denudation rates of limestone measured in the field.For gypsum dissolution rates are controlled by mixed kinetics of surface reactions and molecular diffusion. Therefore, the rates become dependent on the thickness of the flowing water sheet. it is possible, however, to predict denudation rates on gypsum, as obtained from field data. Furthermore experimental findings on rillenkarren can be ex- plained. 
it should be noted that we have neglected tem- perature dependence and have used 20°c as stan- 
Figure 9: Karren formation, from which water was collected. The grey line marks the flow path. The water was collected at the end of this line. 
dard. since many of the constants used depend on 
geneous environment channelling can occur and temperature, however, some temperature depen- 
parallel flow paths can arise, where the flow rates dence on the denudation rates is expected. in view 
are higher. For limestone then the concentration of the many approximations this is not of high significance. 
cingly ∞ decreases and dissolution rates correspond- increase. in gypsum the solution is close to We have not addressed the issue of rillenkar- 
saturation and therefore the amount of dissolved ren formation. at present one may only speculate. 
rock is proportional to the volume of the flowing The surface of the rocks acts to flow like a two- 
water. one therefore could imagine that rillenkar- dimensional porous medium. in such an inhomo- 
ren could only originate at rough rocks. This issue 
Wolfgang Dreybrodt and Georg Kaufmann, Physics and chemistry of dissolution on subaerialy exposed soluble rocks by flowing water films 
35 
36Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing can be handled experimentally by simulating kar- ren formation experimentally on polished and rough samples of plaster of paris. 
an object of further research should be to mea- sure flow velocities on limestone surfaces under natural conditions in dependence of rainfall in- tensity, and also to take samples of the water at various locations on that surface to obtain calci- um concentrations. such experimental data could 
be of utmost use for a better understanding. one of the purposes of this work is to stimulate such research. 
Acknowledgement 
We thank Joyce lundberg and angel ginés for providing their field data in Figures 6, 7 and 8. 
Karren features in many environments are cov- ered with a variety of organisms, and many au- thors have suggested that microorganisms, plants and animals may contribute to surface weather- ing of limestone and other soluble rocks and the development of karst features. in this chapter i re- view the evidence for biological contributions to karren development, starting with a consideration of the types of organisms found on soluble rock surfaces. 
Organisms found on limestone surfaces 
Most bare rock surfaces are discoloured by a layer of microorganisms, which together make up a bi- ofilm. such biofilms contain a mixture of micro- organisms, including fungi, cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) and lichens as well as associated extracellular products which create a slimy surface. Biofilms have been observed on many limestone surfaces, creating a grey to black patina where they are dominated by cyanobac- teria and fungi and a multicoloured patchwork where dominated by lichens. 
Figure 1 shows a characteristic biofilm on a limestone surface. such biofilms can be several millimetres thick. research by Viles et al. (2000) illustrates the speed at which surfaces can become 
colonized by biofilms. on terrestrial limestone surfaces on aldabra atoll, indian ocean, they found that a cyanobacteria-dominated biofilm recolonized cleared squares on the surface within 16 years at many sites. colonization was found to be rather patchy, however, with some particularly dry or hard sites experiencing very little recolo- nization even after over a decade. Many biofilms growing on carbonate rocks or building stones are highly biodiverse, as indicated by the findings of tomaselli et al. (2000) from a survey of european buildings. 
Higher plants can also be key components of rock surface flora, although their growth is in many cases limited by the absence of soils. lime- stone pavements, for example, often contain a wide range of plants, many endemic to karst areas and of great conservation value (Ward and evans, 1976; Webb, 1995). animals also commonly range over and inhabit bare limestone surfaces, espe- cially along coastal exposures where a whole suite of sessile and motile animals have been found to occur. some animals are capable of extracting nutrients directly from the rock surface, whilst others make use of the rock surface biofilm as a source of food. 
organisms inhabit a range of rock surface niches, as shown in Figure 2. The terminology presented in Figure 2, which derives from the work of golubić and others, has been applied 
BioKarstic processes associateD WitH Karren DevelopMent 
Heather VILES 
37 
3 
38Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing Figure 1: Mixed cyanobacterial biofilm on Quaternary age limestones from Aldabra Atoll, Indian Ocean. Width of view is 1 m. 
Figure 2: Rock surface niche terminology (from Golubić et al., 1981). 
mainly to microorganisms but can also be ap- plied to higher plants and animals. at the sim- plest level organisms growing on a rock surface are termed “epilithic”. Those that live under the surface are referred to as “endolithic”. There are 
epiliths 
euendoliths chasmoendoliths 
cryptoendoliths 
several different types of endolithic niche. organ- isms which actively penetrate into the surface are called “euendolithic” whereas those that inhabit preformed fractures and cavities connected to the surface are called “chasmoendolithic” and those 
that live in a subsurface layer within pores etc. are called “cryptoendolithic”. Finally, organisms which live under stones on the surface are called “hypolithic”. 
The community of microorganisms, plants and animals found on bare limestone surfaces and the niches that they inhabit, varies according to climate and the nature of the environment. in particular cases carbonate island terrains support unusual plant and animal communities, such as those on aldabra atoll dominated by the giant tortoise Geochelone gigantea. in general the major controls are light and rainfall levels. on terrestrial karst surfaces, for example, there are gross differ- ences between temperate, semi-arid and humid tropical communities. studies from around the world indicate fairly similar biofilm communi- ties across most environments, although the arid and cold extremes are characterized by unusual 
Heather Viles, Biokarstic processes associated with karren development 
and often species-poor assemblages. coastal limestone exposures support a diverse suite of organisms tolerant of marine conditions includ- ing gastropods and algae, but with few lichens or higher plants. Finally, rock surfaces in cave en- vironments are populated by highly specialized communities – especially in areas well away from light where non-phototropic organisms domi- nate. Viles (1995) proposed that at the macroscale across a gradient of decreasing rainfall, biofilms would change from being dominated by epilithic forms to endolithic ones. 
at the more local level, rock surface communi- ties are influenced by smaller scale variations in light and water availability. For example, on many inland limestone scarp slopes water flow paths be- come concentrated in some areas, producing fer- tile grounds for thick, rich biofilms (often called Tintenstriche, because they look like a streak of ink 
Figure 3: Lichens growing on marble in the central Namib desert. The west-facing slopes (left side of image) are characterized by luxurious lichen growths, and the east facing ones with thin crustose forms. 
39 
40Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing running down the scarp face). in other drier areas biofilms are thinner and less species rich. simi- lar microenvironmental differences are found in arid terrains. on marble exposures in the central namib desert, in southern africa, for example, well developed lichen communities with foliose and fruticose forms common are found on the west-facing slopes which receive high amounts of fog, whereas on the east-facing slopes which expe- rience the full force of the desiccating east winds only a thin cover of crustose lichens is found (see Figure 3). endolithic forms are found more com- monly on the harsher, east-facing surfaces. Both plants and rock-dwelling animals will tend to in- habit depressions and fractures within the rock surface, where there is more moisture, shade and soil development. 
Weathering and erosive action of organisms on limestone surfaces 
it has commonly been found that the microorgan- isms, plants and animals inhabiting karst terrain play active roles in denuding the surface. Both bi- ophysical and biochemical processes are involved, and organisms inhabiting both epilithic and en- dolithic niches can cause weathering and erosion. looking firstly at biofilms, many studies have shown the biochemical weathering effect of epi- lithic biofilms that produce acid exudations which can contribute to calcite dissolution. When bio- films are removed from limestone surfaces the un- derlying surface is often found to be etched and pitted (Viles, 1987). euendolithic microorganisms produce similar biochemical weathering, but in this case focused on producing the holes and tun- nels which the organisms then inhabit. in some cases a networks of euendolithic boreholes is pro- duced stretching several millimetres into the rock. This produces an altered near surface layer with high porosity. cryptoendolithic biofilms may also contribute to exfoliation of limestone surfac- es, as suggested recently for the Hirao-dai karst in Japan (Darabos, 2003). Many organisms pro- 
duce quite complicated effects. For example, fungi have been found to produce spicily etched calcite as well as sparmicritization in experiments by Jones and pemberton (1987). some lichens, for ex- ample, produce different patterns of etching and boreholes under different parts of the thallus as evidenced by studies from Jerusalem which indi- cate pinhead pits caused by apothecia or perithe- cia of endolithic lichens and microgrooves formed by dissolution at the meeting point of lichen thalli (Danin et al., 1983). Figure 4 shows fungal hyphae from the base of crustose lichens growing on mar- ble in the central namib desert boring their way into the rock. lichens can also have a biophysical weathering effect on limestone surfaces, as dem- onstrated in the pioneering experiments of e. Jen- nie Fry in the 1920s (e.g. Fry, 1927) and more re- cently by Moses and smith (1993). lichens are ca- pable of absorbing an enormous amount of water relative to their size and weight, and on wetting and drying of lichens partially attached to lime- stone through hyphae at the base of the thallus considerable stresses are put onto the limestone, causing flaking and granular disintegration. sim- ilar biophysical effects have been ascribed to chas- moendolithic cyanobacteria which can expand by 300% on wetting and dislodge calcite crys- tals from the sides of fissures (Danin and cane- va, 1990). Many organisms can produce both bio- chemical and biophysical effects as evidenced by studies on lichens from the genus Xanthoparmelia growing on sandstone in arizona (paradise, 1997). paradise found that biophysical weathering domi- nated under the centre of the lichen cortex, with biochemical weathering predominant towards the edge of the thallus. synergistic associations of biological weathering processes with dissolution and physical weathering may also occur. papida et al. (2000), for example, found enhanced physical weathering of limestones to occur under experi- mental conditions when inoculated with mixed microbial populations, in comparison with fresh limestone samples. 
plant roots can have endolithic growth forms, producing tunnels in limestone surfaces through 
biochemical and biophysical processes. pioneer- ing experiments carried out in the 19th century by Julius sachs indicated the efficacy of roots from plants such as Phaseolus multiflora (bean) etching into polished marble surfaces. recent attempts to reproduce such experiments have met with mixed success, however (Mottershead and Viles, 2004). several studies have shown that plants are capa- ble of taking up calcium and magnesium from limestone and other rock surfaces and soil miner- als through biochemical activity in the roots and rhizosphere and thus may play a role in sculpting both bare and subsoil limestone surfaces (Hins- inger et al., 2001). 
animals actively denude limestone surfaces through a range of biochemical and biophysical processes. Many gastropods, for example, can graze effectively on rock surface biofilms and 
Heather Viles, Biokarstic processes associated with karren development 
remove particulate limestone along with the bio- film. Detailed experimental studies by andrews and Williams (2000) on the chalk shore platforms along the south coast of england found a consid- erable amount of calcium carbonate within limpet (Patella vulgata) faecal pellets, which appeared to have come from limpets grazing on algae. Vis- ible limpet grazing trails were found on the chalk surface, emanating from the “home scar”. The “home scar” also appears to be excavated by a combination of physical and chemical processes by the limpets themselves, perhaps enlarging a pre-existing depression within the chalk surface. limpets here are thought to be responsible for 12% of downwearing of the platform in areas they frequent, and 35% or more where population den- sities are very high. similar processes are carried out by a range of rock-dwelling organisms, largely 
Figure 4: Fungal hyphae from crustose lichens boring into marble, central Namib desert. Scale bar = 50 microns. 
41 
42Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing on coastal limestone exposures, although stanton (1984) and others have found distinctive hollows that appear to be produced by terrestrial gastro- pods. 
Biochemical attack on limestone surfaces can occur without direct involvement of organisms. For example, many reports have been made of the chelating and dissolving effect of a range of 
organic acids which may be produced in soils and by decaying organic material (see the early work of Murray and love, 1930). trudgill (1985), for example, illustrates the highly corrosive nature of water acidified as it flows over tree bark pro- ducing characteristically polished and weathered limestone surfaces under trees. animal urine may also dissolve calcite, producing runnels. it 
Figure 5: The impacts of rock wallaby urine on limestone surface biofilms, Napier Range, NW Australia. Width of view is 7 m, on the upper edge. 
can also have an indirect effect on the weather- ing of limestone surfaces, as evidenced in Figure 5 which shows the defoliating impact of rock wal- laby urine on limestone surface biofilms from the napier range in nW australia. 
although a wide range of biochemical and bio- physical processes capable of effecting weathering and erosion can be identified, it must also be re- membered that organisms can protect limestone from other agents of denudation as has been found for other rocks (e.g. Kurtz and netoff, 2001; Miku- las, 1999). Biofilms, for example, act to bind sur- faces together and absorb incoming rainfall and runoff thereby reducing the inorganic dissolution. until the community decays and dies the under- lying surface is protected. lichens act in a similar fashion, acting as a net agent of protection even whilst producing fungal boreholes at the base of the thallus, but contributing to dramatic episodic surface removal as they decay. some lichen spe- cies decay from the centre, with large sections of the thallus peeling away bringing with it portions of the underlying rock. recent studies by carter and Viles (2003) indicate the general protective role played by black lichen-dominated biofilms on limestone used as a building material. in field and laboratory experiments a cover of epilithic lichens (Verrucaria nigrescens) was found to retain mois- ture and dampen thermal stresses at the limestone surface thus reducing the potential for weathering. rock surface dwelling biofilms may also contrib- ute to surface protection through biomineraliza- tion processes, as found by rodríguez-navarro et al. (2003) in an experimental study. The bacte- ria Myxococcus xanthus was found to be able to produce a protective and consolidating carbonate matrix on stone samples under laboratory condi- tions. 
Biokarst and karren 
Biokarst refers to karst landforms created, or influ- enced to a significant degree, by biological proc- esses. in turn, the processes involved in the forma- 
Heather Viles, Biokarstic processes associated with karren development 
tion of such landforms are often called biokarstic. Biokarst features can be erosional or depositional, or involve a combination of the two processes, and are commonly found on exposed limestone sur- faces in a range of environmental settings (Viles, 1984). an early paper by Jones (1965) describes many of the erosional features found on limestone pavements as being at least partly biokarstic in or- igin. organic-rich soils cause accelerated dissolu- tion here, and endolithic lichens on clint surfac- es produce roughened surfaces from dissolution. More recent work has identified suites of small- scale karren along coastal areas as being biokarst (e.g. schneider and torunski, 1983). 
if organisms commonly inhabit limestone sur- faces on which karren features are developed, can an explicit link be made between some of the bio- chemical and biophysical processes reviewed in the previous section and the production of kar- ren? if so, then karren may be at least partly bi- okarstic in nature. at the simplest level, the near ubiquity of biofilms on limestone surfaces (in non-soil covered terrain) and the importance of organic acids in most soils suggest that both bare and soil-covered karren are influenced by organic processes. However, it has so far been found to be difficult to prove a strong link between organic processes and the development of karren features. some progress has been made with experimental studies, for example the work of Fiol et al. (1996) on the influence of rock surface microorganism communities in rillenkarren development. Their investigations showed that mechanical detach- ment of small particles is a key process in the development of rillenkarren, caused by raindrop impact which is enhanced in areas where endo- lithic cyanobacteria have previously corroded the surface. 
in some cases highly unusual karren features have been identified which appear to owe their origin dominantly to biological processes, such as phytokarst. The classic phytokarst landscape is that described by Folk et al. (1973) at Hell, grand cayman island. Here, a series of limestone pinna- cles in a low-lying swampy environment have been 
43 
44Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing blackened and dissected in a random spongework pattern which Folk et al. ascribe to the action of cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). Figure 6 shows similar randomly sculpted forms from aldabra atoll. Jones (1989) has provided further detailed microscopic observations of this phytokarst and illustrated the variety of weathering roles played by the cyanobacteria and fungi dominated bio- films. on hard dolostones, epilithic microflora dominates, whereas on softer limestones a diverse endolithic flora is found. another commonly iden- 
Figure 6: Phytokarst pinnacle from Aldabra Atoll. 
tified type of phytokarst are the light-orientated erosional pinnacles found in the lit zone of many cave entrances (as reported by Bull and laverty in 1982 in Mulu, Borneo, for example, and some- times given the alternative name of photokarren). However, making a convincing process/form link between biofilm processes and phytokarst has proved to be difficult and there may be a range of controls operating at different scales (Viles, 2001). indeed, taboroši et al. (2004) propose that much karren on young island karst is better called “eo- 
genetic karren” rather than “phytokarst” as it is probably polygenetic in origin and the heterogene- ous nature of the young limestones exerts a major control on the resulting karren forms. 
in other cases, process/form links may be easier to prove. some interesting work has been done by simms (1990) on coastal phytokarst or photokar- ren in ireland. He finds ample evidence of light orientated pinnacles adjacent in ancient cave pas- sages. The photokarren develop near unroofed sections where light can enter. simms notes that scallops, formed when the caves were active, are well preserved in other parts of the caves despite the ingress of seawater today. This implies that seawater is not having a direct dissolutional effect, and thus the creation of the photokarren is the only form of weathering occurring today. 
Issues for further work 
Most surfaces on which karren features are devel- oped are exposed to biological influences. How- ever, it is difficult to prove whether such biological influences are a necessary part of karren forma- tion, or whether they have little real impact. in- deed, some authors have argued in the past that biological processes act to degrade karren features produced by inorganic dissolution processes. Fur- ther information on rates of biological weather- ing may help resolve some of the questions about the role of biokarstic processes. it is difficult to assess the speed at which biological weathering 
Heather Viles, Biokarstic processes associated with karren development 
and bioerosion occur, especially as they are often highly spatially and temporally patchy. Danin (1983), however, used information on the depth of pits occupied by cyanobacteria on dated walls in Jerusalem to estimate an annual biological weath- ering rate of 0.005 mm per year, which probably exceeds the rate of dissolution in this semi-arid area. More recent work in Jerusalem and rome indicates pitting of marble by cyanobacteria from the genus Myxosarcina to be occurring at the rate of 0.025 mm per year (Danin and caneva, 1990). 
one key issue in assessing the role of organ- isms in karren formation is that of temporal scale. are organisms permanent enough features of the rock surface environment over the timescales of karren formation? another issue is spatial scale. Many of the biological processes take place at the sub-millimetre scale, whereas karren features de- velop over the centimetre to metre scale. even if biological processes play a role in karren develop- ment, other factors undoubtedly exert larger scale controls (such as jointing). Thus, it is probably more accurate to say that biological processes con- tribute to the formation of many karren and other karst landforms. Whether they can be seen to play the dominant or decisive role is perhaps much less important. 
The debate over biokarst draws attention to the many, diverse ways in which biological processes influence karst features and furthermore the large role that organisms play in the global carbon- ate cycle (schneider and le campion alsumard, 1999). 
45 
The experimental modelling of rock features in plaster helps reveal the manner of their forma- tion, the development of individual rock features in nature, and their connections in rock relief. it also helps us distinguish the proportion and significance of the legacy of various factors that participated in the formation of rock relief and indirectly therefore the various periods of its de- velopment. 
limitations do exist regarding either the size of the models or the more rapid solubility of plaster compared to carbonate rock. primarily, we can follow the manner of the shaping of soluble stone in various conditions and the development of the rock relief on it; however, the direct comparison of individual rock features on plaster and on rock is more difficult, especially due to their size. as a rule, features on plaster are smaller (slabe, 1995b). The rapid solubility of plaster influences their fre- quently jagged form and rough surface. experi- ments on the formation of subsoil rock features must be interrupted and models must be taken apart since this is the only way to observe their continuous development. However, the experi- ments continue to confirm that their use is help- ful.industrial plaster (caso4 x 2 water) is used in the experiments. in one litre of water, 2.5 grams of gypsum are dissolved at 20°c (Klimchouk, 2000a). 
The chapter presents the latest findings of ex- periments in the formation of subsoil rock relief and plaster blocks exposed to rain. 
Previous experiments described in the literature 
pluhar and Ford (1970) studied the formation of flutes (rillenkarren) using hydrochloric acid on a dolomite block. However, when they covered the dolomite with a layer of quartz sand, only micro pits developed. 
glew (1976) and glew and Ford (1980) studied flutes with experiments exposing plaster surfaces inclined from 22.5° to 60° to artificial rain. They determined that flutes develop where the layer of water flowing off an inclined surface is thin and does not prevent the direct impact of raindrops on the rock. under a thicker layer of water, how- ever, a smooth rock surface develops. The length of the flutes is related to the inclination of the rock surface and their cross-sections have a parabola shape, the shape that most efficiently directs the erosive action of raindrops along the axis of the flute.Dzulynski et al. (1988) used modeling to study the formation of karren, exposing a fissured piece of plaster to artificial rain. They studied karren shaped by rainwater as well as subsoil karren. 
Karren siMulation WitH plaster oF paris MoDels 
Tadej SLABE 
47 
4 
48Karst Rock Features • Karren Sculpturing They were interested in the dissection of the plas- ter into channels that developed along the fissures, the formation of the protuberances between them, and the influence of the level of water surround- ing them on their development. Thicker columns formed when the plaster was crisscrossed by only a few fissures, and when the network of fissures was dense, the columns were thinner. They de- termined that the amount of rain influences the speed of the dissolution of the plaster but not the form of the artificial karren. Karren that devel- oped on plaster covered with sand was similar to that which developed on bare plaster, and only the columns were less sharply dissected. on the walls of a small model of uncovered karren, it was possi- ble to discern vertical channels at the end of lapies wells (karrenröhren) and funnel-shaped recesses on their tops with channels underneath them. 
experiments with plaster have been employed in researching cave rock features as well. scal- lops were studied by rudnicki (1960), curl (1966), goodchild and Ford (1971), and allen (1972). such experiments helped Quinif (1973) explain the formation of ceiling pockets, ewers (1966, 1972, 1982) study the development of the net- work of original watercourses through rock, and lauritzen (1981) study above-sediment channels. tućan (1911) exposed limestone and dolomite to hydrochloric and nitric acid and established that their surfaces were similar as on the karst surface, of course with characteristic differences between limestone and dolomite. trudgill (1985) describes the smoothing of rock surfaces due to exposure to acidic waters. He proved his findings through laboratory experiments using acids and scanning rock surfaces with an electron microscope. 
experimental research (slabe, 1995a, b) on cave above-sediment ceiling channels and anastomoses, below-sediment flutes, various types of scallops and the influence of rock and hydraulic conditions on their size and shape, and ceiling pockets that occurred due to the percolation of water through fissures helped a great deal in conceptualizing their development and the diverse formation of karst caves. 
Recent experiments 
Experimental formation of subsoil karren 
some of the findings from the experiments de- scribed below are presented in detail in Zeitschrift für geomorphologie (slabe, 2005). 
i attempted to verify the descriptions of various subsoil features (see chapter 11) with experiments on the formation of subsoil karren. 
We sliced a plaster cube into small columns with six-centimetre square cross-sections and heights of 30 centimetres (Figure 1). The separated columns were placed tightly side by side in a large bucket and covered with soil. We drilled small holes in the bottom of the bucket and then filled it with water. We provided a continuous supply of water to keep the surface of water five centime- tres above the surface of the soil. slowly, the water started to percolate through the soil and then flow through the holes in the bottom of the bucket. after the experiment, which with breaks lasted almost 400 hours, the columns were eighteen to twenty-seven centimetres tall (Figure 2). 
The upper two thirds of the walls of the col- umns are eroded with tiny features, the traces of the percolation of water through the alluvium and its flow along the contact point between plaster and alluvium. 
The entire surface of the peak section of col- umns is minutely eroded with micro recesses (Fig- ure 3a). The micro recesses are up to two centime- tres in diameter, although the majority is smaller. it appears they are the consequence of the con- stant percolating of water through the most per- meable layer of soil. as a rule, epikarst rock fea- tures (see chapter 11) have this sort of roughness on rock covered with soil where the contact with the rock is loose. 
The larger recesses found as a rule in the middle of columns (Figure 3b) have relatively smooth sur- faces. i called recesses of this type ‒ incomparably larger, of course ‒ subsoil scallops (slabe, 1998). 
along fissures or other weak spots in the rock, individual deeper semicircular or channel-shaped 
Figure 1: Plaster block from which stone forest devel- oped. 
Figure 2: Subsoil stone forest in plaster. 
recesses often occur in many cases that can in time grow into subsoil tubes. 
Channels (see chapter 11) whose diameters 
ranged from one to three centimetres formed on the walls of the lower sections of the columns (Figure 3c). The locally flooded zone, which devel- oped because the quantity of water flowing along the contact was greater than the quantity that could flow out of the perforated bottom of the bucket, reached the upper level of the channels. This margin is often marked by notches (see chap- ter 11). This subsoil formation of karren is charac- teristic of the alluvium-covered and periodically flooded valley systems of the lower karst regions in southern slovenia and the estavelle mouths on cerkniško polje. 
on the lower surfaces of the columns (Fig- ure 3c), including those cut in half horizontally, there are distinctive networks of above-sediment anastomoses (slabe, 1995a). The channels compos- ing them have omega-shaped cross-sections with diameters measuring up to three centimetres. The networks have several stories. 
angular and square cross-sections were only 
Tadej Slabe, Karren simulation with plaster of Paris models 
49