----------------------- Page 1-----------------------


----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

         KARSTOLOGY 

        KARSTS, CAVES AND SPRINGS 

Elements of Fundamental and Applied Karstology 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

     KARSTOLOGY 

            KARSTS, CAVES AND SPRINGS 

Elements of Fundamental and Applied Karstology 

                                Éric Gilli 
                         Professor of Karstology 
                            Paris 8 University 
                               Saint-Denis 
                                  France 

                         Translated from French by 
                             Chloé Fandel 
              Department of Hydrology & Water Resources 
                          University of Arizona  
                               Tucson, AZ  
                                   USA 

                                    p, 

                   A SCIENCE PUBLISHERS BOOK 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

Originally published in France as : Karstologie - Karsts, grottes et sources, by Eric GILLI 

DUNOD Editeur, Paris, 2011, 256 p., Coll. « Sciences Sup » 

CRC Press 
Taylor & Francis Group 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300 
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 

© 2015 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business 

No claim to original U.S. Government works 
Version Date: 20150406 

International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4822-4316-1 (eBook - PDF) 

This  book  contains  information  obtained  from  authentic  and  highly  regarded  sources.  Reasonable  
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot  
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and  
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication  
and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any  
copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any  
future reprint. 

Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced,  
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or  
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information stor- 
age or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 

For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copy- 
right.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222  
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that pro- 
vides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photo- 
copy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged. 

Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are  
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 

Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at 
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com 

and the CRC Press Web site at 
http://www.crcpress.com 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

                                   Preface 

As I tagged along with a high school friend, one winter Sunday in 1974, to explore La  
Ratapignata, a small cave near Nice, France, I would never have imagined that our ﬁ rst  
foray into the subterranean world would be my ﬁ rst step into the realms of exploration,  
science, and university study. This textbook offers an explanation of the karst landscape  
built on more than three decades of ﬁ rsthand scientiﬁ c adventures. But many others  
had a hand in shaping my understanding, and here I thank them: Yves Créac’h for his  
scientiﬁ c approach to caving and his appreciation for ﬁ ne surveys; Claude Chabert for  
his philosophy of travel; Christian Mangan for his innate understanding of geology  
in the ﬁ eld; Jacques Mudry for his attentive listening and oft-renewed support; Jean  
Nicod, who set many people on the path to becoming karstologists and to whom I owe  
my decision to pursue a career in academia; Claude Rousset for his support during  
both of my theses; Robert Thérond, indefatigable geologist who welcomed me at  
EDF (Électricité de France) to write a speleology thesis. They share my passion for  
karst, and their presence can be felt written in between the lines of this book. I wish  
to give them credit here.  

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

Time discloses the truth (Seneca) 

         to my son Paul 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

                                  Contents 

Preface                                                                                   v 

Dedication                                                                               vii 

   1.  Introduction and Deﬁ nitions                                                        1 
       1.1  Karst, Karstic, Karstology                                                     1 
       1.2  The Karst Region in Slovenia                                                   2 
       1.3  Deﬁ nitions                                                                    3 
       1.4  Components of the Karst Landscape                                              4 
       1.5  The Great French Karst Regions                                                 6 
       1.6  Worldwide Distribution of Karst                                                6 

   2.  The History of Karstology                                                           9 
       2.1  Precursors                                                                     9 
       2.2  Contributions from Speleology                                                 10 
       2.3  French Karstology and the Climate Paradigm                                    12 

   3.  Carbonate Rocks                                                                    13 
       3.1  Deﬁ nition                                                                    13 
       3.2  REVIEW: The Origins of Carbonate and Calcium                                  13 
       3.3  Limestone                                                                     15 
       3.4  Chalk                                                                         18 
       3.5  Dolomitic Rocks                                                               19 

   4.  Limestone Dissolution                                                              20 
       4.1  The Water Cycle, the CO2 Cycle, and the Carbonate Cycle                       20 
      4.2  The Solubility of Limestone                                                    21 
      4.3  Factors Affecting Karstiﬁ cation                                               22 

   5.  The Surface Components of Karst                                                    29 
      5.1  The Epikarst                                                                   29 
      5.2  Lapies                                                                         30 
      5.3  Karst Corridors                                                                37 
      5.4  Dolines                                                                        37 
      5.5  Poljes                                                                         40 
      5.6  Dry Valleys                                                                    42 
      5.7  Canyons, Pocket Valleys, Blind Valley and Karst Windows                        42 
      5.8  Springs, Tufa, and Travertine                                                  43 

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

x   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

   6.  Landscape Types                                                                 47 
      6.1  The Role of Climate                                                         47 
      6.2  Karst in Temperate and Mediterranean Regions                                47 
      6.3  Karst in Cold Regions                                                       47 
      6.4  Karst in Tropical Regions                                                   49 
      6.5  Karst in Arid and Semi-arid Regions                                         51 

   7.  Speleogenesis and the Endokarst                                                 53 
      7.1  The Inﬁ ltration of Aggressive Water                                        53 
      7.2  The Spatial Organisation of Discontinuities                                 54 
      7.3  Speleogenesis, or Cave Formation                                            58 
      7.4  Vauclusian Springs                                                          71 
      7.5  Hypogenic Caves                                                             71 
      7.6  Great Caves                                                                 73 
      7.7  Underground Sediments                                                       76 

   8.  Evolution of Karst Landscapes and Paleokarsts                                   84 
      8.1  Variations in Climate and Paleogeographic Evolution                         84 
      8.2  Polyphase Karst                                                             87 
      8.3  Paleokarst                                                                  88 

   9.  Parakarsts and Pseudokarsts                                                     90 
      9.1  Parakarsts                                                                  90 
      9.2  Pseudokarst                                                                 92 

  10.  Speleology and Study of the Endokarst                                           95 
      10.1  Precursors to and Origins of Speleology                                    95 
      10.2  The Speleology Community                                                   95 
      10.3  Methods in Speleology                                                      96 
      10.4  The Impacts of Speleology on Water Quality in Wells in                    102 
           Karst Aquifers  

  11.  Karst Aquifers                                                                 104 
      11.1  Particular Characteristics                                                104 
      11.2  Geometry of the Aquifer and Surrounding System                            104 
      11.3  Behavior of a Karst System                                                106 
      11.4  Quantitative and Qualitative Consequences                                 108 
      11.5  Circulation in Hydrothermal Systems                                       109 

  12.  Aquifer Characterization                                                       110 
      12.1  Geometry of Karst Systems                                                 110 
      12.2  Data Collection                                                           111 
      12.3  Data Analysis                                                             114 
      12.4  Tracer Tests in Karst Systems                                             118 
      12.5  Modeling Outﬂ ows                                                         123 

  13.  Water Use and Management                                                       124 
      13.1  Water Management                                                          124 
      13.2  Surface Water Management                                                  124 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

                                                                           Contents   xi 

     13.3  Using Water Resources                                                     126 
     13.4  Quantitative Management                                                   130 
     13.5  Qualitative Management                                                    136 

  14.  Coastal and Submarine Karst Aquifers                                          139 
     14.1  Morphology                                                                139 
     14.2  Coastal and Submarine Karst Aquifers                                      140 
     14.3  Deep Submarine Karst                                                      147 
     14.4  The Study and Management of Coastal Aquifers                              149 

  15.  Development in Karst Regions                                                  153 
     15.1  Sub-soil Anomalies                                                        153 
     15.2  Hydrologic Problems                                                       155 
     15.3  Karstic Subsidence and Drawdown                                           160 
     15.4  Location, Detection, and Remediation of Cavities                          162 

  16.  Tourism                                                                       172 
     16.1  Touristic Regions                                                         172 
     16.2  Karstic Trails and Itineraries                                            173 
     16.3  Tourist-accessible Caves                                                  174 
     16.4  Developing Caves for Tourism                                              176 

  17.  Mineral Resources                                                             179 
     17.1  Karstic Traps                                                             179 
     17.2  Hydrocarbons                                                              181 

  18.  Hydrothermal and Geothermal Processes                                         188 
     18.1 Hot Springs                                                                188 
     18.2  Natural Climate Control                                                   189 

  19.  The Study of Paleoenvironments                                                191 
     19.1  Karstic Archives                                                          191 
     19.2  Dating Methods in Karstology                                              193 
     19.3  Environmental Factors                                                     199 
     19.4  Records of Deformation                                                    201 
     19.5  Applications in the Study of Paleoclimate                                 208 

  20.  Geodesy and Rock Deformation                                                  210 
     20.1  Value of Karst Systems                                                    210 
     20.2  Rock Mechanics                                                            213 

  21.  Paleontology, Archaeology, and Biology                                        217 
     21.1  Traps and Conserving Environments                                         217 
     21.2  The Quercy Phosphorites                                                   217 
     21.3  “Cavemen”                                                                 218 
     21.4  Isolation and Genetic Divergence                                          219 
     21.5  Extremophiles                                                             219 

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

xii  KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

  22.  Conclusion                                                             221 

Bibliography                                                                  223 

Index                                                                         233 

Color Plate Section                                                           237 

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

                                           11 
       Introduction and Deﬁ nitions 

1.1 Karst, Karstic, Karstology 

The word karst, of Slovenian origin, indicates a particular type of landscape that  
occurs in carbonate rocks that have been shaped by water. Typical features in karst  
areas include closed depressions, caves and sinkholes, rivers that disappear into the  
ground, and large springs around the periphery of the area. Karst zones are present on  
approximately 50% of land in France, 20% in USA and make up almost 15% of rock  
outcrops in the world. These areas are home to 1.5 billion people. 
     In the French academic world, karstology is not taught as its own subject, and is  
instead traditionally studied as a sub discipline of geography, although it is relevant to  
other areas such as geology, hydrogeology, civil engineering, paleontology, archeology,  
and climate science. As a result, the word karst can have several meanings. It is a  
model for the geographer, an aquifer for the hydrogeologist, and a simple hole for the  
geotechnical engineer or the quarry-worker. 
     The goal of this book is to highlight the wide range of approaches to a subject  
deﬁ ned in three different dimensions: the surface, the world below ground, and time.  
A few examples illustrate the importance of karst. Almost half of France relies on  
karst hydrogeology for its water supply. The majority of discoveries about prehistoric  
humans have been made in caves. The largest pools of petroleum lie in cavities in  
carbonate rocks. Changes in the climate have been recorded for millions of years  
in cave speleothems. In the  ﬁ eld of geotechnical engineering, karstic cavities and  
groundwater are a source of great worry for development companies. Large-scale civil  
engineering projects (high-speed railways, dams, tunnels, etc.) often face difﬁ culties  
related to karstology, and geotechnical engineers’ lack of knowledge of the ﬁ eld is  
often surprising. 
     From  a  more  recreational  point  of  view,  karst  areas  are  known  for  their  
extraordinary scenery. In France, the Vercors, the Verdon, the Causses, the Cévennes,  
the Calanques.… Abroad, Ha Long Bay, the Yunnan Stone Forest, the towers of Guilin,  
and the Tsingy of Madagascar, among others. The numerous caves that have been  
made accessible to tourists draw millions of visitors every year. 

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

2   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

     Many books and movies pull their characters into the mysterious depths of a cave.  
Lastly, caves, springs, and underground rivers, populated by fairies, dragons, elves,  
djinns, or other fantastical beings are the center of many myths, legends, and religions. 
     This book is therefore intended for a wide audience, including both professionals  
and well-informed amateurs, who wish to understand how karst landscapes and caves  
come into being. It may also be relevant to engineers responsible for development  
projects in karst areas. 
     The scope of the concepts addressed extends far beyond the French border, but  
the examples used here come primarily from France.  

1.2 The Karst Region in Slovenia 

The Karst, or Kras, region after which karst is named lies to the north of Trieste.  
It is a landscape of wooded plateaus, with complex topography and many closed  
depressions, caves, and sinkholes. The bedrock, when visible, is often sculpted into  

                              N 

                                                                  LJUBLJANA 
                               10 km 

                                           SLOVENIA 
          Gorizia       Nova Gorica 

                                                 Predjama 

   ITALY                       K                Postojnska jama  
                                    R                         POSTOJNA 
               Timavo                     A 
               spring                Sezana    S 

                             Trebiciano       Divaca         P 
                                                              i 
                                                  R           u 
                                                    e         k 
                                                     k 
                  TRIESTE                   Skocjanske  a      a 

                                              jame 

                                                CROATIA 

                                                                                 E. Gilli 

                       Figure 1. Map of the Slovenian Karst (or Kras). 

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

                                                                   Introduction and Deﬁ nitions       3 

picturesque shapes. Streams are uncommon, and quickly disappear into the ground.  
Large underground rivers have been found there, such as the Reka in the Skocjan caves,  
or the Pivka in the Postojna caves. The latter are a popular tourist attraction, drawing  
several hundred thousand visitors each year to see the grottoes or the Predjama castle,  
built into the mouth of a vast limestone cave.  

Figure 2. Predjama castle in classic Karst (Slovenia). The castle is partially built into the entrance of a cave. 

1.3 Deﬁ nitions 

1.3.1 Geomorphology 

The strict deﬁ nition of karst is as follows: 

A  surface  and  subsurface  landscape  created  by  water  dissolving  carbonate  rocks  
(limestone and dolomite).  
      A wider deﬁ nition includes all soluble rock types that water can inﬁ ltrate into,  
dissolve below ground, and create durable cavities in. This requires on the one hand that  
the rock have a mechanical resistance great enough to prevent the immediate collapse  
of cavities, and on the other hand that there be a path for the dissolved minerals to  
exit the system. These concepts are important, as they differentiate karst from other  
landscapes. Some forms of surface dissolution can in fact be observed in most rock  
types, particularly in intertropical zones where basalt and granite weather easily. In  
these cases, however, the effects of water do not extend to great depth, because the  
products of collapse or alteration quickly ﬁ ll any cavities as they are created. 

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

4   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

     Non-carbonate rocks such as gypsum, salts, and certain sandstones are soluble and  
can therefore form comparable landscapes. The word karst is then sometimes used,  
but the term parakarst is preferable. Finally, the action of warm water in periglacial  
regions can open cavities and create thermokarsts. Chapter 9 is dedicated to these  
types of landscapes.  

1.3.2 Hydrogeology 

Karst being a result of water’s effects at the surface and below ground, it can also be  
approached from a hydrogeological standpoint. Karst, from this angle, is a limestone  
unit where the surface hydrographic system is partially or completely sunk below  
ground, and travels through the limestone, forming aquifers that feed springs. Together,  
the zone of inﬁ ltration, the aquifers, and the springs make up a karst system.  

1.3.3 Thermodynamics 

Karst can also be approached from a thermodynamic angle, by considering the energy  
required for its creation. Water sculpts rock at the surface, inﬁ ltrates below ground,  
shapes the bedrock, and then emerges in springs. Karst is therefore a dynamic system,  
to which thermodynamic laws apply. Fluids transfer mechanical and chemical energy  
in a resistant environment, where this energy is dissipated. The system is driven by  
the kinetic energy of water due to its hydraulic gradient, and the chemical energy  
associated with the dissolution of limestone (Mangin, 1975). At the most basic level,  
the whole system depends on the sun, which drives the water cycle: caves, a key part  
of the karst landscape, are therefore indirectly created by the sun! 

1.3.4 Civil Engineering 

Finally, it is common practice among civil engineers to label as karst any cavities  
encountered on construction sites or in boreholes. This is a terminological error and  
is to be avoided. Civil engineering nevertheless holds signiﬁ cant economic value, and  
part of this book is dedicated to “karst” as deﬁ ned by geotechnical engineers.  

1.4 Components of the Karst Landscape 

The  shapes  that  can  form  in  karstic  topography  are  immensely  varied,  but  the  
characteristic components of Slovenian karst are generally as follows: 

   •  Picturesque water-sculpted rock formations, karren or lapies. 
   •  Closed depressions (dolines, sinkholes, poljes). 
   •  Presence of caves and caverns. 
   •  Streams frequently disappearing below ground. 
   •  Few springs, but often with very high discharge. 

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

                                                                   Introduction and Deﬁ nitions      5 

      The relative frequencies of these components can vary, and some may be absent,  
depending on the nature and structure of the rock and on the climate. Additional  
features may appear as well, such as turrets, mogotes, pinnacles, giant chasms, or  
tsingys, characteristic of intertropical zones (see chap. 6). 
      A karst zone may be easily identiﬁ ed by looking for these indicator formations  
on a topographic map. 

Figure 3. Caussols karst plateau (Alpes-Maritimes, France). (A) doline ﬁ eld; (B) caves and caverns;  
            (C) polje (closed depression and stream); (D) river disappearance below ground. 

      Karst topography is made up of a surface component, the exokarst (or karst sensu  
stricto) and a subsurface component, the endokarst, which contains caves and caverns.  
While, like other landscapes, exokarst may be studied from the surface or from space,  
through either direct observation or remote sensing, the endokarst remains invisible.  
Part of it is, however, accessible via caves and caverns, the realm of speleology. But  
endokarst must not be simplistically deﬁ ned as only caves, for these represent only  
the karstic cavities accessible to humans. For the remainder, information comes only  
through indirect methods, such as geophysical sensing, geodesy, and hydrogeological  
studies. Our gains in knowledge therefore depend on technological advances.  

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

6   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

1.5 The Great French Karst Regions 

                                                                                     2 
Karstic surfaces (chalk included) cover approximately 170,000 km  of the French  
territory, or around 30%. Counting karst formations that do not outcrop but are present  
at  depth,  half  of  France  is  affected  by  karstic  phenomena  (Renault,  1992). Water  
resource management is therefore highly dependent on karstology. 

Several speciﬁ c types may be deﬁ ned: 

    •  chalky karsts (Normandy, Paris Basin, Aquitaine Basin), 
    •  karsts in limestone plateaus (Jura, Vercors, Chartreuse, Causses and Cévennes,  
       Provence limestone, Lot and Dordogne), 
    •  mountainous karsts (Pyrénées, Marguareis, Bauges, Savoie, etc.), 
    •  submarine karsts (Provence and Corsica). 

Figure 4.  Map of the principal carbonate rock outcrops in France (after Ford and Williams, 2007).  
Areas affected by karstiﬁ cation are more widespread, given that many carbonate units outcrop either only  
                                          partially or not at all.  

1.6 Worldwide Distribution of Karst 

The following map shows the world’s great karst regions. They make up approximately  
15%  of  dry  land,  and  are  more  common  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  but  their  
distribution in Antarctica is unknown (Bini et al., 2003).  

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

                          Kentucky                                               KARST                Ukrain  

             Florida 
                                                                                                                                   Shillin 
         New 
         Mexico 
                                                                                                                                     Ha Long 

                                                                                                                                         Mulu 

                                                                                                                                                           I 
                                                                                                                                                           n 
                                                                                                                                                           t 
                                                                                                                                                           r 
          Yucatan                                                                                                                    New                   o 
                                                                                                                                                           d 
                                                                                                                                                           u 
                                                                                                                                     Brittany              c 
                                                                                                                                                           t 
                                                                                                                                                           i 
                                                                                                                                                           o 
                                                                                                                                                           n 
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                           a 
                                                                                                                                                           n 
                    Roraima                                                                              Ankarana         Nullarbor 
                                                                                                                                                           d 
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                           D 
                                                                                                     Bemaraha 
                                    Patagonia                                                                                                              e 
                                                                                                                                                           ﬁ  
                                                                                                                                                           n 
                                                                                                                                                           i 
                                                                                                                                                           t 
                                                                                                                                                           i 
                                                                                                                                                           o 
                                                                                                                                                           n 
                                                                                                                                                           s 
Figure 5. Map of the planet’s principal carbonate outcrops (after Ford and Williams, 2007). Pure limestone is in black and other carbonate rocks are in gray. Non-   
                                                            outcropping units are not shown.                                                                7 

----------------------- Page 21-----------------------

8   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

     The most spectacular topographies occur near the intertropical zones, particularly  
in southern China, but gigantic underground networks can be found at higher latitudes.  
Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, for example, is the longest cave in the world with over  
640 km of underground passageways.  

----------------------- Page 22-----------------------

                                               22 
           The History of Karstology 

2.1 Precursors 

Humans have inhabited karst areas since prehistoric times, when springs and caves  
offered water and shelter. The puzzles of karst have therefore been the subject of  
investigation for a long time, and it is difﬁ cult to pinpoint the birth of karstology. A  
cuneiform text, carved around 840 B.C. at the entrance of the Tigris Tunnel (Lice,  
Turkey), describes the Assyrian king Shalmaneser III’s visit to a few hundred meters  
of  the  underground  segment  of  the Tigris  River  (Seneca  cites  this  same  visit). A  
bronze plaque, discovered in the king’s palace and now housed in the British Museum,  
describes this excursion and shows percolating water’s role in stalagmite construction  
(Hill and Forti, 1997). This is the ﬁ rst known text describing karstic phenomena.  
      In Antiquity, karst areas being common around the Mediterranean, Greek and  
Roman philosophers and engineers took an interest in the unusual phenomena they  
found there. Their conceptions of the water cycle drew primarily on karst models:  
vast abysses, disappearing rivers and seas, deep caverns in the heart of the mountains.  
Plato’s writings on the origin of springs (4th century B.C.) indicate that a relationship  
had been discovered between springs and disappearing rivers (katavothrons), as well  
as dolines. Strabo (1st century B.C.) mentions a link between the Reka’s disappearance  
(Slovenia) and Timavo Spring (Italy). Seneca (4 B.C. to 65 A.D.) suggests in “Natural  
Questions–Volume III” that rock might turn into water in the subterranean caverns that  
feed surface streams. His model can be taken to suggest that dissolution is responsible  
for cave formation. 
      In Roman times, spring catchments such as the Fontaine d’Eure one, feeding  
Nîmes via the Pont du Gard aqueduct, or the Zaghouan Springs (Tunisia) one with a 100  
km-long aqueduct, as well as development around poljes (see chap. 13.1), demonstrate  
an already well-established analysis of karst systems and of their usefulness as drinking  
water sources. 
      In a 10th century Arabian encyclopedia, the “Epistles of the Brethren of Purity”  
(Rasa’il Ikhwan al-Safa’), a compilation of works by Ismaili scholars, caves and their  
subterranean bodies of water are described. 
                                                                               
      The study of karst landscapes in China began in the 17th century (Hu, 1991).  
During this time period, the geographer Xu Xiake travelled southern China for over  

----------------------- Page 23-----------------------

10   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

thirty years with a naturalist’s keen eye. He visited and described a multitude of caverns  
and constructed theories on cave formation, but he also took an interest in exokarst  
and created a classiﬁ cation system for the landforms created by surface erosion. His  
geographic text “Xu Xiake’s Voyage” was published in 1642. This enormous work,  
spanning 10 volumes, can be considered the ﬁ rst treatise on karstology.  
     In Europe, caves are described in 1665 in Kircher’s “De Mundus Subterraneus”.  
In France, Bernard Palissy, although better known for having rediscovered the secrets  
of enamel, also took an interest in groundwater, and in 1580 he published “On Waters  
and Fountains,” in which he showed that springs were fed by water that ﬁ ltered through  
cracks and openings in the earth. His observations linked the plumes of water vapor,  
exhaled by certain caves in the Pyrénées, to inﬁ ltrating water. An enigmatic book  
titled “Underground World” is said to have been written by Gaffarel in 1654, but only  
the summary has been found and whether or not the book actually existed remains  
unknown. From the 18th to the 19th century, many western writers took an interest  
in caves and in limestone landscapes, but only within the context of their general  
studies and without an overarching vision. Naturalists most often undertook these  
investigations, and daringly explored several caves and sinkholes. The Austrian Empire  
encompassed several karst zones, and the House of Habsburg tasked mathematician  
Johanes Antonius Nagel (1748) with the study of poljes and their ponors in order to  
put them to agricultural use. Between 1778 and 1789, Hackuet published a series of  
books in which he laid the foundations of karstology. He is considered the forerunner  
of European karstology.  
     In the 19th century, the natural phenomena of the Karst region in Slovenia were  
rigorously studied. In 1841 an engineer, Lindner, looking for the underground path  
of the Timavo in order to supply water to Trieste, found an opening, 329 m below the  
surface, in the Trebiç chasm, overlooking the subterranean river. But at the time, no  
pumps existed capable of lifting water to such a height, so he was unable to complete  
his project. Adolph Schmidl studied the Piuka’s subterranean paths, and published in  
1854 “Die Grotten und Höhlen von Adelsberg, Lueg, Planina und Laas.” It is the ﬁ rst  
European text devoted entirely to caves and underground rivers.  
     In 1873, E. Tietze ﬁ rst uses the word karst to describe the landforms near Trieste.  
The ﬁ rst general descriptions of classic karst are the work of the Serbian geographer  
Jovan  Cvijic  (1865–1927)  who,  by  publishing  “Die  Karstphänomenen”  (1893),  
spread the scientiﬁ c usage of the word “karst” which is now universally recognized.  
He explained how dissolution is responsible for shaping the topography and creating  
dolines, and established a nomenclature for different landforms. Although several  
other authors made additional contributions, Cvijic, given the magnitude of his work  
(60 volumes and publications) is considered the father of European karstology.  

2.2 Contributions from Speleology 

In France, as early as 1856, Abbot Paramelle, based on extensive research in the  
department of Lot, linked surface topography to underground water ﬂ ow, and laid the  
foundations of applied karst hydrogeology. At the end of the 19th century, E. A. Martel,  
a self-taught geographer with a passion for karst landscapes, published numerous texts  

----------------------- Page 24-----------------------

                                                                        The History of Karstology        11 

on the caves and karsts of France. His 1888 exploration of Bramabiau Cave, following  
the underground path of Bonheur River, is considered the birth of speleology, with  
the use of specially adapted, transportable, and reusable caving equipment. He visited  
all of Europe, crisscrossed the Americas and Asia Minor describing their karst areas,  
and published a sizeable body of work with twenty-one major texts: “Les Cavernes”,  
“Les Abîmes”, “La France ignorée”, “Les Cévennes”, and “Causses majeurs” to name  
only the most well-known. He set many people on career paths following his, and  
many French geographers, geologists, and speleologists continued in his footsteps,  
publishing a plethora of further studies.  

Figure 6. Simpliﬁ ed cross-section of the Padirac Cave by E.A. Martel, father of French speleology. 

      The  complicated,  heavy,  and  costly  equipment  used  in  the  19th  century  was  
gradually simpliﬁ ed over time. Scientiﬁ c speleology, carried forward by E. Fournier,  
F. Trombe, B. Géze, Ph. Renault, P. Dubois, H. Paloc, J. Choppy, and many others,  
contributed to understanding the link between surface karst and the endokarst.  
      Understanding of karst as a whole has beneﬁ ted greatly in the past few decades  
from  the  development  of  speleology  and  its  techniques.  For  example,  the  advent  
of  nylon  rope  and  of  single-rope  climbing  techniques  (SRT)  enabled  signiﬁ cant  
                                                                       
advances in exploration in the second half of the 20th century. This opened access to  
the endokarst to anyone motivated by research interests or exploration. France is now  
home to approximately 20000 spelunkers, including many institutionally afﬁ liated  
researchers and many self-taught practitioners.  
      Similarly,  our  understanding  of  submerged  areas  has  expanded  thanks  to  the  
constant progress being made in cave diving and in current technology, including  
rebreathers and gas mixtures, which now allow divers to explore for several kilometers  
into aquifers up to depths of 300 m! 
      The democratization of speleology and of travel and the search for new territory to  
explore have led speleologists into most of the karst areas on the planet, often paving  
the way, thanks to their observations and publications, for new areas of research in  
karstology. Today, resting on the shoulders of several generations of karstologists,  
speleologists, and hydrogeologists, karstology beneﬁ ts from a global understanding of  
the processes associated with karstiﬁ cation. Interdisciplinary research is also making  
forays into biology, and it is likely that the next few decades will yield surprising  

----------------------- Page 25-----------------------

12    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

information on the role of microorganisms in cave formation and in the concretion  
processes responsible for the formation of stalagmites and stalactites.  

2.3 French Karstology and the Climate Paradigm 

There is long-standing debate in the karstology community (Renault, 1992) concerning  
whether karst topography is shaped by climate, or instead by a cyclical erosional model  
described by Davis (1899), beginning with orogenesis and ending in a peneplain. This  
model shaped the evolution of French geomorphology (De Martonne, 1909) and was  
applied to karst by Cvijic (1893) and Chabot (1927). For karst systems, Davis (1930)  
described speleogenesis and outlined a bi-cyclical model that was then taken up by  
British geomorphologists. A French school of karstology arose following in Corbel’s  
(1954) footsteps and based on the creation of climatic geomorphology by Tricart and  
Cailleux (1955), with a particular emphasis on climate. The leader of this school, J.  
Nicod, helped a number of karstologists begin their careers: R. Maire, J.N. Salomon,  
Ph. Audra, J.J. Delanoy, and J. Rodet, among many others, including the author. 
      Today, the debate seems closed, since according to Davis himself, the bi-cyclical  
model applies rather to tabular karst. And although climate plays a primary role in the  
formation of karst topography, since it determines the amount of water in the system  
and its physical and chemical properties, alone it cannot explain the extraordinary  
variety of landforms in existence, for example, the gigantic hypogenic voids found in  
New Mexico, independent of climate (cf. chap. 7). Modern karstology, as it becomes  
more interdisciplinary, appears to be moving away from paradigms and towards a  
more ﬂ uid conception of karst, in which karst landscapes can be attributed to a number  
of different mechanisms, in highly variable natural settings. The different models  
proposed are in fact complementary.  
      In France, karstology is a dynamic ﬁ eld, although, for several reasons, including  
the attachment of physical geography to Humanities and the fact that speleology is  
considered as a sport, it has encountered difﬁ culties in establishing itself as a separate  
ﬁ eld, like oceanography or volcanology. The various aspects of karstology are taught  
separately in the academic world, and there is no institution speciﬁ cally dedicated to  
karstology, as there are in Guilin (China), Postojna (Slovenia), and Carlsbad (USA).  
And yet it is a ﬁ eld that concerns a signiﬁ cant portion of the French landscape.  

   The Davis bi-cyclical model (after Chapuis and Nardy, 1986) 

   In geomorphology, the classic Davis model (1850–1934) states that a landscape evolves  
   as  water  cuts  into  a  terrain  undergoing  tectonic  uplift,  with  a  juvenile  phase  where  the  
   hydrographic network incises into the landscape and results in deeply entrenched rivers,  
   a mature phase with regressive erosion, captures, and concentric erosion, and  ﬁ nally a  
   peneplain phase where the topography has become totally ﬂ at. 

   In karst areas, however, Davis suggests a bi-cyclical model, with a ﬁ rst cycle in which caves  
   form below the water table in the karst aquifer, followed by a second, either synchronous or  
   subsequent cycle, where tectonic uplift lowers the water table. The caves, emptied of water,  
   then evolve sub-aerially with the deposition of speleothems.  

   Davis, aware of the impossibility of applying this model to all karst, considered it valid only  
   in tabular karst. 

----------------------- Page 26-----------------------

                                              33 
                        Carbonate Rocks  

3.1 Deﬁ nition 

Carbonate rocks are composed of minerals characterized by the presence of the CO32–  
ion. The most common of these minerals are calcium carbonate, Ca2+ CO32– (calcite  
and aragonite) and calcium and magnesium carbonate, (Ca, Mg)2+ CO32– (dolomite). 

Calcium carbonate is found primarily in one of two mineral forms:  

   •  calcite (rhombohedral), is the more stable form,  
   •  aragonite (orthorhombic), commonly found in animals where it forms the shells  
      of many invertebrates, is less stable and usually gradually transforms into calcite.  

     An important feature of carbonates is how common they are compared to other  
minerals such as silicates. Carbonate rocks comprise a vast family including limestones,  
marls,  and  dolomites,  and  make  up  approximately  20%  of  the  sedimentary  rocks  
found on the planet. Most sedimentation occurs in submarine environments, and the  
presence of carbonates is therefore dependent on the physical and chemical properties  
of the surrounding seawater. 

                                      Table 1. carbonate rocks. 

  Rock type        Pure         Marly        Marl     Calcareous     Calcareous    Conglomerate 
                 limestone     limestone                  clay       sandstone 

   % CaCO         > 95%        95 to 65%    < 65%        < 50%        variable         variable 
           3 

3.2 REVIEW: The Origins of Carbonate and Calcium 

Calcium carbonate formation requires water, and it is usually a byproduct of living  
organisms. The  Mars  exploration  missions  therefore  included  scientiﬁ c  protocols  
intended to conﬁ rm the presence of water and of life on the Red Planet by looking  
for carbonates. The rock samples analyzed by the robot Phoenix in 2008 (Boynton  
et al., 2009) contained 3 to 5% calcium carbonate, suggesting that water was present  
in the past.  

----------------------- Page 27-----------------------

14    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      Ca++ is one of the most common ions in ocean water, with a current concentration  
of 400 mg.L–1 . It enters the system from the leaching and hydrolysis of minerals in  

basalt (anorthite, CaAl Si O , and augite, (Ca,Na)(Mg,Fe,Al)(Si,Al) O ). 
                              2   2  8                                                    2  6 
      Atmospheric CO2(g), emitted by volcanic degassing, dissolves in water (CO2(aq))  
                                                                                              +               – 
where it is hydrated and forms carbonic acid, which dissociates into H  and HCO3    
(hydrogen carbonate) ions, then into the carbonate ion CO32– which, combined with  
Ca2+, forms calcium carbonate. 

This reaction can written as follows: 
                           Ca++ + 2HCO –  CaCO  + CO                     + H O.  
                                             3               3        2(aq)    2 

      Note that CaCO  precipitation releases CO .  
                           3                                  2 
      Carbonate rocks could therefore have been present on Earth only once water,  
basalt, and CO , were all present, something that would have occurred only after the  
                    2    
temperature dropped below 100°C, around 4 billion years ago. 
      Calcium carbonate can form by simple chemical precipitation, which is what  
appears to have been the norm until the Precambrian (Ridgwell and Zeebe, 2005),  
but the vast majority of carbonates form with the assistance of biological processes.  
Living organisms in the water take up CO  in carbonate form (dissolved and ionized  
                                                       2  
into CO32–), as well as Ca2+ ions in order to build their tests, shells, or skeletons. It  

should be noted that the oceans are currently supersaturated in CaCO  (Morse and  
                                                                                              3 
He, 1993) given that, in order for calcite or aragonite to form, precipitation must be  
initiated by a nucleus. 
      The  equilibria  described  above  are  dependent  on  temperature  and  pressure.  
Solubility increases as temperature decreases or as pressure increases. There is therefore  
a certain depth, called the “carbonate compensation depth” (CCD) or lysocline, beneath  
which carbonates dissolve rapidly unless the sedimentation rate is high enough to  
bury them quickly and isolate them from water. The CCD is currently estimated to  
be between 1000 m in cold waters and 5000 m in the tropics.  
      Figure 7 shows present-day carbonate deposits under the oceans. 
      The oldest known biogenic carbonates are the Warrawoona stromatolites, which  
have  been  dated  to  3.5  billion  years. They  are  made  up  of  successive  layers  of  
carbonate sediments, presumably built up by bacteria or cyanobacteria (blue-green  
algae) extracting CO  from the water.  
                           2 
      The organisms responsible for the creation of stromatolites were very common  
up until the Cambrian, building thick limestone beds (3000 m in the Anti-Atlas in  
Morocco). Today, they have been replaced by other species of builders. Their closest  
living relatives are now found only in a few places, primarily in Australia.  

3.2.1 The Carbonate and CO2 Cycle 

The  formation  reactions  for  CaCO   show  that  it  is  a  stable  form  of  CO  . This  
                                                 3                                                    2 
stabilization is not permanent, since the reaction as a whole relies on several equilibria  
that can shift either towards the consumption or the degassing of CO  (cf. dissolution  
                                                                                          2 
chapter).  

----------------------- Page 28-----------------------

                                                                                                                             Carbonate Rocks                    15 

                                                                     e 
                                                                    g 
                                                                    d 
                                                                    i 
                                                                    r 
                                                                      
                                                                    c 
                                                                   i 
                                                                   t 
                                                                   n 
                                                                   a 
                                                                  l 
                                                                  t 
                                                                  A 
                                                                   - 
                                                                  d 
                                                                 i 
                                                                 M 

Figure 7. Deep marine sedimentary deposits with more than 40% calcium carbonate (after Archer,  
1996). The largest deposits are found in the warm waters of the southern hemisphere. The presence of  
sediments in the north Atlantic is due to the mid-Atlantic ridge, which has an elevation higher than the  
                                                          carbonate compensation depth.  

                                         Figure 8. Stromatolites in Shark Bay (Australia). 

3.3 Limestone 

Limestone can contain up to 65% CaCO , it effervesces when it comes into contact with  
                                                                            3 
HCl (10%), and it can be scratched by steel. Limestones are immensely variable, and  

----------------------- Page 29-----------------------

16   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

several classiﬁ cation schemes have been proposed based on the origins or the structure  
of the rock, which often consists of distinct fragments, or allochems (shells, grains,  
debris) held together by a ﬁ ne-grained matrix (micrite) or crystalline cement (sparite). 
     The nature and thickness of the deposits are highly variable, from small, thinly  
bedded  limestones  to  massive,  poorly  stratiﬁ ed  blocks  such  as,  for  example,  the  
Urgonian-facies Cretaceous limestones of France. 

3.3.1 Limestone Classiﬁ cation Based on Origin 

3.3.1.1 Detrital biogenic limestone 

The allochems are bioclasts, tests, shells, or skeletons from marine organisms that,  
once dead, settle to the ocean ﬂ oor. The smaller particles are often rapidly dissolved  
once they reach the carbonate compensation depth. 

These are classiﬁ ed based on what type of fragments they are made up of: 

   •  Lumachels : contain a signiﬁ cant accumulation of bivalve or gastropod shells. 
   •  Nummulitic  limestones :  made  up  of  giant  foraminifer  tests,  common  in  the  
      Tertiary. 
   •   Crinoidal limestones: made up of crinoid debris. 
   •  Lithographic limestones : very ﬁ ne-grained, and as a result were used in the past  
      as printing plates. 

3.3.1.2 Bioconstructed limestone 

These  are  limestones  built  by  colonial  organisms  like  corals. The  rock  may  be  
highly porous if construction was recent. Corals build at shallow depths, since the  
zooxanthellae that they shelter in a symbiotic relationship to provide part of their  
sustenance, require sunlight. The creation of coral reefs depends on variations in sea  
level (isostasy, glacial rebound, glacioeustasy, tectonics, etc.). As soon as the reef  
rises above sea level, karstiﬁ cation begins. This makes for an ideal setting in which  
to study juvenile karst.  
     Certain types of coral form limestone at great depth, but little is known about them.  

3.3.1.3 Limestone of chemical origin 

This type of limestone forms as a result of CaCO3 precipitation in a supersaturated  
solution. It is primarily found on continental masses (cf. 3.3.3). 

3.3.1.4 Limestone of chemical and detrital origin 

This type of limestone forms by concentric chemical precipitation around a nucleus  
(sand or bioclast) that is periodically lifted into suspension by currents. When many of  
these grains accumulate, the result is a carbonate rock with a granulated appearance,  
made up of many small spheres, termed either an oolitic or a pisolitic limestone.  

----------------------- Page 30-----------------------

                                                                              Carbonate Rocks      17 

3.3.2 Limestone Classiﬁ cation Based on Structure 

3.3.2.1 Folk (1959) 

Folk categorizes allochems as follows: 

    •  intraclasts, angular rock fragments;  
    •  ooids, spherical structures (ooliths or pisoliths); 
    •  bioclasts, fossils or animal debris; 
    •  peloids, ovoid structures (fecal pellets, algae bundles…); 
       and orthochems as follows (the matrix binding the grains together); 
    •  micrite, ﬁ ne-grained microcrystalline base; 
    •  sparite, crystals. 

      Rocks are named according to the matrix type preceded by preﬁ xes characterizing  
the allochems. For example: oosparite, or biomicrite.  

3.3.2.2 Dunham (1962) 

Dunham takes into account the relative proportions of allochems and of the matrix: 

    •   crystalline limestone: the sedimentary structure is not visible, 
    •  mudstone: primarily made up of micrite with less than 10% of fragments, 
    •  wackestone: at least 10% fragments (but not grain-supported) ﬂ oating in micrite, 
    •  packstone : grain-supported, with pore spaces ﬁ lled with micrite, 
    •  grainstone : grain-supported, with pore spaces ﬁ lled with sparite, 
    •   boundstone: original organic structures remain.  

3.3.3 Continental Limestone and Limestone Crusts 

The vast majority of limestone deposits form in marine environments, but deposition  
does occasionally occur on the continents. 

3.3.3.1 Lacustrine limestone 

In  areas  where  carbonate  rocks  are  abundant,  lakes  can  serve  as  a  depositional  
environment for calcareous mud formed by the precipitation of CaCO3 caused by  
CO  consumption by algae during photosynthesis. This process can be observed in  
    2 
the present day in Annecy Lake and Bourget Lake (France) (Vatan, 1967). 

3.3.3.2 Tufa and travertine 

These are chemical deposits downstream of springs or in shallow streams, where  
precipitation caused by CO  degassing is made possible by high-turbulence zones.  
                                  2 
They can form thick, stratiﬁ ed deposits as in the Antalya region (Turkey), where they  
can be up to 270 m thick (Burger, 1992) (cf. chap. 9). As they are deposited, tufa and  
travertine usually trap vegetation, giving them a high porosity.  

----------------------- Page 31-----------------------

18    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

3.3.3.3 Limestone crusts 

In arid regions, precipitation or capillary action can mobilize carbonates and result in  
their deposition within certain soil horizons or at the top of the water table, creating  
crusts of varying thickness, which can then be secondarily affected by karstiﬁ cation. 

Figure 9. Limestone crust that was ﬁ rst exhumed then subjected to karstiﬁ cation (Southern Tunisia). 

3.4 Chalk 

Chalk is a soft porous rock formed by the accumulation of coccoliths, granules 2 to 10  
μm in diameter created by planktonic algae, coccolithophores and foraminifers. It is  
generally very pure (over 90% CaCO ). Chalk is characteristic of shallow depositional  
                                              3 
environments (< 300 m). 

Figure 10.  The chalk cliffs of Etretat (Normandie, France).  The arch is a vestige of a karst system  
                                     running parallel to the coastline. 

----------------------- Page 32-----------------------

                                                                                Carbonate Rocks       19 

3.5 Dolomitic Rocks 

This is a family of carbonate rocks containing a more or less signiﬁ cant proportion  
of dolomite, a calcium and magnesium carbonate (Ca, Mg)CO . In outcrops, these  
                                                                                3 
rocks often look like elephant skin. They do not  ﬁ zz in the presence of 10% HCl.  
When altered, dolomites result in a characteristic ruined-castle-like topography, while  
producing sand made up of dolomite crystals, which are less soluble than calcite  
crystals.  
      Dolomitization  can  be  primary,  when  carbonate  rocks  form  in  an  evaporitic  
environment, or secondary, during diagenesis, due to the circulation of magnesium- 
rich ﬂ uids. Dolomites may comprise only one part of a limestone unit.  
      The family of dolomitic rocks includes everything between pure limestone and  
pure dolostone, depending on the percentage of mineral dolomite.  
      Since  dolomitization  is  only  rarely  complete,  the  dissolution  of  CaCO3  in  a  
dolomitic rock results in voids that may give the rock a very high porosity.  

                                        Table 2. Dolomitic rocks. 

       Rock            Limestone      Dolomitic limestone      Calcareous dolostone        Dolostone 
   % (Ca,Mg)C03          < 10%             10 to 50%                 50 to 90%               > 90% 

        

----------------------- Page 33-----------------------

                                                  44 
                   Limestone Dissolution 

4.1 The Water Cycle, the CO  Cycle, and the Carbonate Cycle 
                                               2 

The three primary agents of karstiﬁ cation are water, rock, and carbon dioxide gas (CO ).  
                                                                                                         2 
The latter plays an important role in the overall dissolution reactions for limestone.  
      The study of atmospheric CO  sequestration in oceans, living organisms, and  
                                             2 
rock is a highly relevant subject today, due to its importance in the study of climate  
change. Over the course of geologic time, the composition of the atmosphere has  
varied considerably. The appearance of life caused a drop in CO  due to carbonate  
                                                                                    2 
precipitation  and  an  increase  in  O   due  to  photosynthesis,  while  creating  organic  
                                              2 
matter. These variations are only long-lasting if the resulting materials, carbonates  
and organic matter, are buried. Changes in equilibrium can result in movement in  
the opposite direction. Anthropogenic actions such as burning fossil fuels (coal and  
petroleum) and decreasing global photosynthesis can therefore alter the composition  
of the atmosphere.  
      In this time of concern over the role of anthropogenic CO  in climate change and  
                                                                               2 
in the greenhouse effect, the role of carbonate rock, a stable form of CO , takes on  
                                                                                               2 
particular importance. Oceans play a major role in trapping and releasing this gas, and  
as a home for organisms that can draw calcium, oxygen, and CO  from the water in  
                                                                                    2 
order to synthesize calcite and aragonite, the two crystalline forms of CaCO .  
                                                                                                  3 

Qualitative element: Foraminifer and echinoderm tests and skeletons, bivalve and  
gastropod shells, and polyp exoskeletons are primarily made up of CaCO . 
                                                                                              3 

Quantitative element: 1 metric ton of CaCO  corresponds to 430 kg of trapped CO .  
                                                          3                                               2 
Tests are under way in Icelandic basalts and in peridotites in Oman, with pressurized  
water and CO  being injected at depth in order to cause a reaction with the rock,  
                   2 
turning it into CaCO . 
                           3 

----------------------- Page 34-----------------------

                                                                                Limestone Dissolution          21 

4.2 The Solubility of Limestone 

4.2.1 Solubility of Calcium Carbonate, CaCO3 

The two crystalline forms of calcium carbonate, calcite and aragonite, are water-soluble  
only  in  small  amounts:  14  mg.L–1  at  25°C,  however,  other  chemical  mechanisms  

involving CO  allow a considerable increase in the amount of CaCO  that can be  
                   2                                                                            3 
dissolved.  

4.2.2 The Role of CO 
                                 2 

The overall reaction depends on the formation of calcium hydrogen carbonate (or  
calcium bicarbonate), which has a high solubility. This reaction involves CO , which is  
                                                                                                     2 
highly water-soluble. It is present in the natural environment in varying concentrations:  

                            Table 3. CO  concentration in different environments. 
                                         2 

                    Environment                                   CO  concentration (% volume) 
                                                                      2 

                     Atmosphere                                                   0.03 
                     Organic soil                                                  2 
             Conﬁ ned cave atmosphere                                              10 

4.2.3 Formation of Calcium Hydrogen Carbonate 

Several steps can be described in a simpliﬁ ed manner: 
    •  Ionic dissociation : CaCO  ↔ Ca2+ + CO 2– 
                                          3                   3 
    •   CO  dissolution : CO  (g) ↔ CO  (l) cold-favored reaction 
            2                      2               2 
    •   CO  (l) hydrolysis : CO  (l) + H O ↔ HCO – + H+ 
            2                         2          2               3 

    •   Calcium hydrogen carbonate formation:  

                                   –       +       2+         2–                     2+ 
                           HCO       + H  + Ca        + CO       ↔ (HCO ) Ca 
                                   3                         3                3 2 

      Calcium  bicarbonate  is  approximately  ten  times  more  soluble  in  water  than  
calcium carbonate. Thanks to this intermediary step, it is therefore possible to dissolve  
300 mg.L–1 of CaCO  at room temperature. 
                            3 
      This reaction, however, depends CO  going into solution in water according to  
                                                        2 
Henry’s Law, [CO ]            = K  pCO 
                         2 aq      o       2  
      where K  is the temperature-dependent coefﬁ cient of solubility, and pCO  is the  
                  o                                                                                      2 
partial pressure of CO . 
                              2 
      CO  can therefore be divided into dissociated (or aggressive) CO  and CO  in  
           2                                                                                    2            2 
equilibrium.  
      Most of the above reactions are chemical equilibria dependent on temperature and  
on the presence of other ions in the solution. These reactions can therefore shift either  
in the direction of carbonate dissolution or in the direction of carbonate precipitation,  
depending on the environmental parameters and particularly on the partial pressure  
of CO . 
        2 

----------------------- Page 35-----------------------

22    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

4.2.4 Roques’ Curve 

Roques’  curve  (1964)  describes  whether  or  not  a  calcium  bicarbonate  solution  is  
saturated or not as a function of pH. 

            1000 

 CaCO 
        3                                                       oversatured water 
                                                                            ated water 
 content 
  mg.L-1 

                                aggressive water 
             100 

                                                                                                      10° 
                                                                                                      15° 
                                                                                                      20° 
                                                                                                      25° 

              10 
                   6              6,5              7               7,5              8              8,5 

                                                     water pH   

                                       Figure 11. Roques’ curve. 

4.2.5 Dissolution Kinetics 

Some steps in the overall reaction are slow, and the three components, rock, water, and  
atmosphere, must be in contact for a long enough time to allow the entire dissolution  
reaction, the slowest reaction determining the speed of the overall reaction. It is rapid  
at the water/atmosphere interface and slow at the water/rock interface. 
      For example, equilibrium between CO (g) and HCO  is established in only a few  
                                                     2                3  
seconds (Dreybrodt, 1988), while the release of CO  is slower (Roques, 1964). 
                                                                 2 
      Equilibrium between water and calcium carbonate, on the other hand, is very  
slow to occur, ranging from a few hours to several months depending on the nature  
of the rock (Bakalowicz, 1979). 

4.3 Factors Affecting Karstiﬁ cation 

4.3.1 Theoretical Factors 

Understanding the evolution of the properties of water percolating through a limestone  
structure is indispensible to understanding speleogenesis. From its formation in the  
atmosphere to its exit from the system through a spring, a single droplet of water  
interacts with many different environments: the atmosphere, the soil and the biosphere,  
the rock, the subterranean atmosphere, the water in the aquifer, and the water from  
other aquifers.  

----------------------- Page 36-----------------------

                                                                             Limestone Dissolution         23 

      The following table (Table 4), based on the reactions described above, shows the  
factors that favor and that inhibit dissolution, as a function of the temperature and  
partial pressure of CO . From these one can deduce the geographic areas favorable  
                             2 
to karstiﬁ cation.  

                          Table 4. Factors favoring dissolution and precipitation. 

 Factors favoring dissolution                         Factors favoring precipitation 
 Cold                                                 Heat 
 Acidic environment                                   Basic environment 
 High CO2                                             Ventilation 
 Abundance of water                                   Aridity 
 Long contact time                                    Short contact time 

      Gombert (1995) undertook a theoretical description, deﬁ ning the MPD (maximum  
potential dissolution in mm/1000 yrs) based on effective precipitation, the partial  
pressure of CO , and the various constants for calcium-carbonate equilibrium. His  
                    2 
analysis considered 226 climate stations. The resulting theoretical values were lower  
than the speciﬁ c ablation calculated or measured through different methods (Table 5,  
Table 6). Tropical and equatorial zones showed the highest MPD.  

           Table 5. Maximum potential dissolution based on climate zones, after Gombert, 1995. 

  Climate type                                  MPD mm/1000 yrs                   Surface covered (%) 
 Desert                                                  3.4                                 23 
 Mountainous                                            50.9                                  5 
 Polar                                                  42.5                                 15 
 Cold                                                   29.4                                 19 
 Cold temperate                                         36.6                                  6 
 Warm temperate                                         31.9                                  4 
 Mediterranean                                           8.8                                  2 
 Subtropical                                           21                                     9 
 Tropical                                               92.7                                  8 
 Equatorial                                             88.2                                  9 
 Average                                                40.6                                100 

4.3.1.1 Favorable geographic regions 

    •  Intertropical rainy zones: Abundant vegetation favors the production of CO  and  
                                                                                                        2 
       of humic acid. Thick soils increase the contact time between the three phases.  
       Rainfall is high.  
    •  Mountainous  or  periglacial  zones :  Low  temperatures  are  favorable  for  the  
       dissolution of CO . Water is abundant during snowmelt, and the snowcap favors  
                              2 
       long contact between the three phases.  

----------------------- Page 37-----------------------

24    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      Ta ble 6. Relationship between climate, calcium carbonate concentration, and karstic ablation.  

 Region                           Rainfall       CaCO  concentration in          Speciﬁ c karstic ablation  
                                                        3 
                                                     springs (mg.L–1               3    –2   –1           –1 
                                                                      )         (m .km    .yr  or mm.ka    ) 
 Periglacial zones 
 Lapland                             7000                   200                              400 
 Mountainous regions 
 Arres d’Anie (France)               2500                   120                               95 
 Vercors (France)                    1700                   190                              120 
 Temperate regions 
 Kentucky (USA)                      1000                                                     25 
 Dorvan (France)                     1600                   220                               81 
 Mediterranean regions 
 Vaucluse (France)                   1500                   200                               45 
 Gran Sasso (Italy)                   950                                                     93 
 Vence (France)                      1000                   200                               35 
 Dry tropical zones 
 Ankarana (Madagascar)               1400                   187                              110 
 Humid tropical zones 
 Papua New Guinea                    6000                   183                              320 
 Mulu (Sarawak)                    10000                    110                              520 

4.3.1.2 Unfavorable geographic regions 

    •  Arid zones. Rain is rare, vegetation is minimal, and high temperatures favor  
       evapotranspiration. CO  is quasi-nonexistent.  
                                      2 
    •  Arctic zones. The temperature prevents water circulation, vegetation is absent,  
       and CO  is therefore rare. 
                 2 

4.3.2 The Concept of Karstic Potential 

The amount and aggressiveness (as a function of dissolved CO ) of water inﬁ ltrating  
                                                                                  2 
into limestone is highly variable. This deﬁ nes a potential for karstiﬁ cation (Mangin,  
1975), where the amount of water and the hydraulic gradient, which is set by the  
morphology,  determine  the  mechanical  energy  of  groundwater  ﬂ ow,  and  where  
dissolved CO  determines the available chemical energy. In their absence, the potential  
                 2 
for karstiﬁ cation is non-existent. Pure water can only dissolve a small amount of  
CaCO . Similarly, without an outﬂ ow, the solution would quickly become saturated.  
        3 
      This karstic potential is closely linked to climatic conditions, which determine  
the amount of available water and CO . Opposing this potential is the resistance of the  
                                                 2 
environment, which is a function of the rock type and of the openness of discontinuities,  
and therefore is dependent on lithology and tectonics.  
      One question in particular divides karstologists: which factor, climate or structure,  
plays the primary role in the development of karstiﬁ cation. The primary factor is in  
fact water, the availability of which determines the amount of CaCO  leaving the  
                                                                                              3 
system, as shown in Table 5.  

----------------------- Page 38-----------------------

                                                                          Limestone Dissolution        25 

Figure 12. Dolomitic stumps indicate several meters of ablation in the Caussols (Alpes-Maritimes). 

Figure 13. Corrosion of a limestone slab. A trail blaze in waterproof paint has protected the underlying  
limestone from dissolution of about 1 mm over 30 years. Photo taken on a trail midway up a mountain in  
                                        a Mediterranean climate.  

----------------------- Page 39-----------------------

26    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

4.3.3 Speed of Dissolution and Karstic Ablation 

Dissolution carries CaCO  out of the system. Erosion is barely perceptible to humans,  
                                 3 
on the order of a few 1/100ths of mm by year at our latitudes. Its intensity can be  
determined by weighing slabs of limestone that are placed on the surface, or buried  
in  the  soil,  in  order  to  measure  the  amount  of  weight  lost,  or  by  using  stainless  
steel markers and thickness gauges. Examining the rate at which dates carved into  
tombstones disappear is another method of quantifying dissolution.  
      Speciﬁ c  karstic  ablation  is  the  relationship  between  the  volume  of  limestone  
taken out of the system and the surface area of the affected region. It is expressed in  
   3     2 
m /km /year or in mm/ka. It takes into account all dissolution, at the surface and at  
depth, and its value is therefore greater than that calculated from the single sheet of  
limestone that is eroded at the surface.  
      It can be estimated based on the amount of CaCO3 exiting the system at springs,  
simply by taking the product of the total runoff and of the average CaCO  concentration.  
                                                                                          3 
A precise result, however, must take into account variations in concentration as well  
as the magnesium present in dolomite.  
      It should be noted that some of the limestone exits the system as a solid, and that  
some of it may also come from the leaching of soils bordering the karst area under  
study. This calculation is therefore quite complex, and the resulting values are generally  
signiﬁ cantly higher than the MPD. 

4.3.4 Speciﬁ c Factors 

The overall reaction involves a series of reactions and equilibria, such that various  
factors can shift the reaction in either direction. 

4.3.4.1 Presence of pyrite: FeS2 

The hydrolysis and oxidation of pyrite create sulfuric acid. 

                                FeS  + H O + 2O  ↔FeO + H SO 
                                     2      2          2                2    4 

                                                                                            + 
      The presence of H SO  in the solution results in the appearance of H  ions, shifting  
                             2    4 
the reaction in the direction of dissolution.  

4.3.4.2 Presence of hydrogen sulﬁ de: H S 
                                                          2 

As with pyrite, the hydrolysis and oxidation of H S enables sulfuric acid formation. 
                                                                2  

                                          H S + 2O  ↔H SO   
                                            2          2      2    4 

                  H SO  + H O + CaCO  ↔CO  + CaSO  2H O (gypsum) 
                     2    4     2              3         2           4     2 

      Limestone,  when  subject  to  this  acidic  attack,  undergoes  neoformation  and  
becomes gypsum. The consequences of this process in speleogenesis are explained  
further in chap. 7.5. 

----------------------- Page 40-----------------------

                                                                                Limestone Dissolution          27 

                                   – 
4.3.4.3 Presence of OH  ions  

Many types of cement used in construction cause an increase in the pH of water,  
shifting the reaction in the direction of precipitation. This can result in the formation  
of stalactites or of crusts on the cement in areas where water circulates.  

4.3.4.4 Dissolution by mixing 

Different  environments  with  different  physical  and  chemical  parameters  shift  the  
equilibrium  of  the  reaction  towards  either  dissolution  or  precipitation. When  two  
different  bodies  of  water,  both  saturated  in  CaCO   but  each  with  its  own  unique  
                                                                      3 
chemistry, come together, they can become aggressive by increasing the ionic strength  
of the solution (Bögli, 1980). 

The ionic force, I, expresses the overall ion concentration of a solution: 

                                                      1 
                                               I  =     ÂC z 2 
                                                               i i 
                                                     2 
                                                          i 

from which I = 2 [(Ca)+(Mg)+(SO )] + 0,5 [(Na)+(K)+(Cl)+(HCO )+(NO )] 
                                               4                                           3         3 
        
      The solubility of calcite is a function of the square root of the ionic strength  
(James, 1992). 

      CaCO3 in mg.L-1    

      2500 
                                                         salt water 
                                                         total concentration > 30 g.L-1 

      2000 

      1500 
                   brackish water 
                   8 g.L-1 <  total concentration  < 23 g.L-1 

      1000 

       500 
                                                      percolation water 
                                                      total concentration < 2g.L-1 

                       0,1       0,2       0,3        0,4       0,5       0,6        0,7       0,8      0,9 

                                                   ionic strength 

Figure 14.  Variations in CaCO  concentration as a function of the ionic strength for the caves of  
                                    3 
                                 Nullarbor (Australia) (after James, 1992). 

----------------------- Page 41-----------------------

28     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

   Everyday karstiﬁ cation 

   Calcium carbonate dissolution/precipitation reactions can be found in everyday life:  

   The white spots that appear on glasses as they dry are rings of calcite precipitated as water  
   evaporates. 

   The white ring that often forms around faucets is a calcite deposit formed when the tap water,  
   carrying CaCO , emerges into a better-ventilated environment, allowing CO  (pressurized  
                      3                                                                          2 
   at 10 bars in the pipes) to degas. The deposits are thicker on hot-water taps, as the heat  
   favors precipitation. The scale that forms on heating elements or on the inside of hot-water  
   pipes forms by the same mechanism. 

   Marble or limestone ﬂ oors losing their polish, although partially due to foot trafﬁ c, is also a  
   result of successive washings, which gradually dissolve the surface. Carbonated beverage  
   spills accelerate the process, since the CO  increases the water’s acidity and the  ﬂ oors  
                                                          2 
   therefore dissolve even more quickly. 

   Similarly, the rugosity that develops on marble statues and monuments is the beginning of  
   karstiﬁ cation. 

----------------------- Page 42-----------------------

                                             55 
           The Surface Components  
                                     of Karst 

5.1 The Epikarst 

All carbonate rocks exposed to the elements are subject to erosion by water, which can  
carry varying amounts of CO . In coastal intertropical zones for example, karstiﬁ cation  
                                 2  
begins on coral reefs as soon as they emerge due to eustatic (Bourrouilh-le-Jan, 1992)  
or tectonic (Gilli, 1995a) variations.  
     The rind along the surface and edges of a rocky massif are characterized by the  
rock decompressing and creating discontinuities (bedding or unloading joints). This  
distinct part of the landscape forms the epikarst. Its development can be assessed via  
the study of talus slopes and quarry walls, as well as by the use of ground-penetrating  
radar (Al Farhes, 2002). The bedrock in this zone may be exposed, or it may be covered  
with a variable thickness of soil. The degree of vegetative cover may vary as well.  
Water-driven erosion will therefore occur both on the rock surface, but it can also  
penetrate several meters into the rock as water ﬁ lters in through discontinuities. The  
water can come into contact with the rock either through direct runoff, or by saturating  
the soil which forms a compress on the rock. 
     The resulting weathering and erosion create a great variety of shapes, sculpted  
by various factors: 

   •  Structural factors: the nature of the rock, the number of discontinuities. 
   •   Topographic factors: elevation, relief. 
   •  Pedologic factors : the nature and thickness of the soil. 
   •  Meteorological factors : temperature, and the type, quantity, and distribution of  
      precipitation. 
   •  Biological factors : the nature and density of vegetation, the presence of micro- 
      organisms. 

     This list highlights the importance of climate, which determines the signiﬁ cance  
of most of these factors.  

----------------------- Page 43-----------------------

30   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

     The  general  appearance  of  a  limestone  outcrop  depends  on  the  relationship  
between dissolution and other types of surface weathering: frost wedging, thermoclastic  
weathering, gravity, pressure release,... 

        SUPERFICIAL 
        DEPOSIT 
                                           shaft 

        EPIKARST 

                                                        caves 

         MASSIVE LIMESTONE  

Figure  15.  Radar  cross-section  showing  the  development  of  the  epikarst  on  the  Hortus  Causses 
                                   (after Al Fares et al., 2002). 

5.2 Lapies 

5.2.1 Ordinary Lapies 

 Lapies or karren, are small-scale (millimeter to several-meter) weathering formations  
found at the surface or beneath the soil cover. The resulting shapes vary greatly, and  

----------------------- Page 44-----------------------

                                                                The Surface Components of Karst            31 

include  acorn  cups,  bowls,  ﬂ utes,  clints  and  grikes,  perforations,  needles,  blades,  
etc. They  range  in  scale  from  a  simple  roughening  of  the  rock  surface  to  rocky  
needles several meters tall, such as the pinnacles of Mulu (Malaysia) or the Tsingy  
of Madagascar. Areas with a high density of lapies are called lapies or karren ﬁ elds.  

                                        solution  
                                        runnels                       grikes          micro  
         cryoclastic  lapiés                                          (fissure        conduits 
                                                   foot               lapiés) 
                                                   prints 
                                                                                                needles  
                                                                                   karst  
   meandering                                                                      corridor 
   rills 

                                                                                                  clint 

                                                    kamenitza 

  Figure 16. A few examples of common lapies formations (after Collignon, 1988 and Nicod, 1970). 

      Lapies  have  been  the  subject  of  several  studies  (Cvijic’,  1893;  Bögli,  1980;  
White, 1988) and have given rise to several classiﬁ cation systems depending on their  
shapes. Nicod (1972) and Salomon (2000) proposed a classiﬁ cation based on what  
processes created the lapies, creating distinctions between sub aerial lapies, covered  
lapies, and biological lapies. 

5.2.1.1 Sub aerial lapies 

These are a result of the direct action of rain or snow. 

    •  Lapies caused by runoff over solid rock  
       These consolidate runoff channels, which then develop in different ways based on  
       the steepness of the slope, forming sinuous meanders called runnels in low-relief  
       area, and verticals ﬂ utes often called rillenkarrens on limestone walls. They can  
       also be caused by snowmelt and form “footprints”, a process involving laminar  
       water ﬂ ow beneath a cover of snow, described by J. Choppy (1992a).  

    •  Grikes 
       These fracture lapies form when water and snow, by widening pre-existing cracks,  
       sometimes down to a depth of several meters, emphasize the underlying tectonic  
       canvas.  

----------------------- Page 45-----------------------

32    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 17. Meandering runoff karren on a subhorizontal Urgonian limestone slab (Platé plateau)  
(photo M. Delamette). The runoff, fed by snowmelt at 2250 m, is channeled towards a joint in the rock,  
                                      where it trickles downwards. 

Figure 18. Grikes. Discontinuities in the rock are widened by dissolution. The snow trapped in these  
                fractures is protected from sunlight, which limits how much it sublimates. 

    •  Limestone pavements  
       In areas with a high concentration of cracks and joints, dissolution along joints  
       and cracks can produce slabs called clints. It may forms karst features that look  
       like man-made pavements. 

----------------------- Page 46-----------------------

                                                          The Surface Components of Karst       33 

   •  Snow pits  
      These form in topographic depressions, where snow is partially protected from  
      incoming solar radiation. The accumulation of snow forms névés, and their slow  
      melting can create wells at their base, which favor even more accumulation. The  
      resulting residual snow accumulation can dissolve the underlying rock, forming  
      cylindrical wells with vertical solution ﬂ utes caused by snowmelt runoff. 

   •  Humus pits.  

     These are a result of downward weathering by accumulations of organic material  
rich in humic acid. 

5.2.1.2 Lapies formed beneath a cover (humus, soil, or permeable geologic  
          formations)  

These  are  sometimes  called  rundkarren. The  overlying  cover  becomes  saturated  
with water and forms a kind of “compress” that allows for long time contact with  
the bedrock. If in addition the cover material is partially organic, it produces CO2  
and humic acid, both of which accelerate weathering. This type of lapies is generally  
characterized by gentle, rounded forms.  

5.2.1.3 Lapies formed by biological processes 

Kamenitzas, or solution pans, are small, ﬂ at-bottomed depressions with an overhanging  
lip and an overﬂ ow channel. The overhang around the edge of the solution pan is a  
result of microbial action by communities of microorganisms that develop on the  
bottom of the depression. Additionally, sediment deposition can make the  ﬂ oor of  
the solution pan, halting vertical growth and encouraging lateral expansion instead. 

Figure  19.  Juvenile  (left),  and  mature,  organic  material-ﬁ lled  (right)  solution  pans  in  Caussols  
                                        (Alpes-Maritimes). 

5.2.2 Superimposed Lapies 

In most cases, the features described above occur superimposed over each other. For  
example, when a karst surface that had previously been evolving beneath some sort  

----------------------- Page 47-----------------------

34    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

of cover is suddenly denuded, the rundkarren will quickly be sculpted into a different  
shape as sub-aerial sharpened features form on the rock surface. Rundkarren at the  
surface therefore indicate recent denudation.  

5.2.3 Lapies and Climate 

Lapies shape the bedrock to different degrees of intensity in different climatic zones. It is  
easy to observe that the rate of incision is essentially tied to the amount of precipitation.  
At middle latitudes, the most striking relief is generally found in mountainous regions  
where there is greater precipitation and where the snow cover permits longer contact  
times between the bedrock and the cold snowmelt water. The most spectacular karren  
are found in humid intertropical zones. In these areas, karstiﬁ cation was constant over  
the course of thousands of years, since rainfall remained high even during glacial  
phases. At higher latitudes, the advancing ice prevented water circulation and in some  
cases destroyed pre-existing lapies. 

5.2.4 Megalapies, Tsingy, and Stone Forests 

In  areas  of  intense  karstiﬁ cation,  the  bedrock  can  be  incised  to  depths  of  several  
meters to several tens of meters, creating a landscape where lapies reach spectacular  
dimensions. This is referred to as megalapies. They can also be found in dolomitic  
zones, where the sandier components of the rock are washed away by runoff, leaving  
behind the less soluble rock. Montpellier le Vieux, on the edge of the Causse Noir (or  
Black Causse), is a region of massive, ruiniform dolomites that includes picturesque  
megalapies like the “Gate of Mycenae”. The area has been developed for tourism with  
the construction of a walking trail, a via ferrata, and a small train. 

 Figure 20. The “Gate of Mycenae” (or of the Elephant) at Montpellier le Vieux (Aveyron, France). 

----------------------- Page 48-----------------------

                                                             The Surface Components of Karst         35 

      The stone forests (shilin) of southern China are another example of megalapies,  
areas where the landscape consists of deep, closely spaced towers, occasionally pierced  
by winding tourist paths. Often, these are landforms that initially formed beneath a  
protective covering, but were subsequently exposed by denudation. Precipitation then  
sculpted these crypto-lapies with secondary wall-lapies. In certain touristic locations,  
people have scraped away the overlying soil to reveal the lapies beneath. 

  Figure 21. Tourist p ath in the Shilin stone forest (Kunming, Yunnan, China) (photo Zhuosi Lu). 

      A similar process, coupled with intense fracturing of the limestone bedrock, is  
responsible for the Tsingy de Bemaraha and the tsingy in Ankarana (Madagascar).  
These are rocky needles several meters high, made up of stratiﬁ ed limestone sculpted  
by closely spaced vertical ﬂ utes, separated by ridges of extremely sharp rock. This  
combination makes traveling through the tsingy dangerous to virtually impossible.  
Rossi (1978) showed that the tsingy develop in very pure limestone (96% CaCO ), with  
                                                                                               3 
low porosity (< 2%). This is because pure limestones have a high rigidity, resulting  
in intense fracturing under tectonic pressure.  

----------------------- Page 49-----------------------

36   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                         Figure 22. Tsingy of Ankarana (Madagascar). 

     With 10 m of rainfall per year, Gunung Mulu National Park (Sarawak, Malaysia)  
is one of the wettest places on the planet. The reason behind the park’s creation is a  
feature on the southeastern side of Mount Mulu: a spectacular karst landscape that  
draws tourists from all over Southeast Asia. It is home to the largest underground  
chamber in the world, and to an extensive network of caves and subterranean rivers  
(cf. chap. 7.7). The landforms at the surface include a group of pinnacles that reach  
as high as 45 m (Figure 23). 

            Figure 23. Pinnacles in  Gunung Mulu National Park (Sarawak, Malaysia). 

----------------------- Page 50-----------------------

                                                             The Surface Components of Karst         37 

5.3 Karst Corridors 

Signiﬁ cant  widening  of  pre-existing  grikes  or  of  runoff  channels  can  create  deep  
slot  canyons  wide  enough  for  humans  to  explore.  Spectacular  examples  exist  in  
Madagascar, in the Bemaraha and Ankarana regions, where the karst corridors are  
several tens of meters deep. Some of these canyons may be the result of a cave roof  
collapse, while others are created by basalt dikes cutting across the limestone and  
creating paths for preferential dissolution.  

5.4 Dolines  

Dolines or sinkholes are an essential feature of karst landscapes, both in terms of  
hydrology and morphology. They are more or less circular closed depressions, varying  
in appearance and size. They dot the surface of karst regions, and they sometimes occur  
at such high densities that they coalesce. They form a multitude of small endorheic  
basins that collect rainwater and act as natural funnels.  
      Dolines also can accumulate soil cover in their ﬂ at bottoms. In Mediterranean  
karst, they are often the only places that can be cultivated amidst ﬁ elds of lapies where  
the bare rock is sterile.  

Figure 24. Subalpine doline in the Mediterranean (Calern plateau, France). The bottom of the doline  
has been cultivated. Note the presence of suffosion sinkholes, which indicate the removal of arable land  
                                            by the endokarst. 

----------------------- Page 51-----------------------

38     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

       Due to their ubiquitous nature, dolines have been the subject of numerous studies  
and have given rise to various classiﬁ cation systems based on their appearance, their  
genesis, or their hydrologic function.  

5.4.1 Primary Types 

Dish-like  dolines:  Characterized  by  low-angle  sides  and  a  ﬂ at  bottom. The  most  
common type of doline in temperate or semi-arid climates. The bottom may be marshy  
or hold an ephemeral lake or ice cap.  

Bowl-like dolines: Crescent-shaped in cross-section. Primarily found in chalky areas  
or in karsts covered by a thick layer of soil. 

Funnel-like dolines: These have steep sides, and large rocky blocks often obstruct  
the bottom. They often end in swallets, and are common in tropical regions with  
rapidly evolving karst. 

                       dissolution doline                                             collapse doline   

     lateral sediment  
                                             dismanteled 
     supply (clay, rocks)                    karrens 

                            trapping and  
                            concentration 

                                                                                                                cave 

                   water and clay 
                   vertical slumping 
                                                                                       collapsed room 

                                                  some classical features 

           bowl                   conical                 saucerpan            asymmetrical                 suffosion 

                                Figure 25. Doline structure and common forms. 

Collapse dolines: Caused by the inward collapse of the roof of an underground cavity.  
They can reach impressive sizes, at which point they are called mega dolines. Among  
the largest are the Xiaozhai Tiankeng and the Dashiwei Tiankeng (China), the Minyé  
sinkhole (Papua New Guinea) (Figure 26), and the Sotano de las Golondrinas (Mexico). 
       The roof of a cavity collapses once the breadth of the arch exceeds a certain  
threshold (based on the rock type) the thickness of the bedding, and the degree of  
fracturation in the overlying rock. Collapse generally occurs once the thickness of the  
roof is less than the width of the cavity (Gilli, 1984).  

----------------------- Page 52-----------------------

                                                       The Surface Components of Karst     39 

                          0 m 

                                     417 m 

                        Figure 26. Minyé sinkhole (P apua New Guinea). 

Cylindrical dolines: Characterized by vertical sidewalls meeting a level ﬂ oor, they  
can evolve as a later stage of the collapse dolines mentioned above, due to inﬁ lling.  

Suffosion dolines: These form in the unconsolidated material covering a karst area. In  
their early stages they are generally basin-shaped or cylindrical, but they can evolve  
quickly, collapsing into a steep-sided sinkhole and revealing the underlying bedrock.  

5.4.2 The Structure and Formation of a Doline 

A doline is a point of preferential water absorption, which concentrates runoff towards  
its center. It grows by dissolution, as well as through the classic mechanical processes  
of erosion, decompression, landslides, and frost wedging. When a thick soil cover is  
present, the doline can also grow through soliﬂ uction. As it evolves, the doline ﬁ lls  
with colluvium, which is also subject to dissolution and is sometimes transported  
below the surface. All this colluvium disappearing into the doline’s swallet usually  
indicates the presence of a vertical outlet. Similarly, speleological explorations often  
discover narrow karst ﬁ ssures that open suddenly into large pits below the dolines.  
Ground-penetrating radar can provide imagery of these vertical drain holes (Figure  
27), illustrating the classical structure of a doline: a rocky funnel ﬁ lled with colluvium,  
leading into a vertical drainage outlet.  
     The sediment ﬁ ll in dolines can create a natural ﬁ lter, trapping soil and making  
agriculture possible. Human use of a doline changes its appearance: stones are removed  
from the ﬁ elds, and terraces and retaining walls are put into place to prevent soil  
erosion. Despite these efforts, the soil cannot be entirely kept in place, and its eventual  
migration into the endokarst often causes small suffosion sinkholes. 

----------------------- Page 53-----------------------

40    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 27.  Ground-penetrating  radar image of a doline (doc. A. Szynkiewicz). The imaging covers  
 a depth range of approximately 25 m. The vertical karst conduit and the sediment ﬁ ll are clearly visible. 

5.4.3 Factors Affecting Shape and Distribution 

Like lapies, dolines emphasize the underlying structure of the surfaces they occur on.  
They are generally aligned with major faults or fractures. In highly developed karst  
they can coalesce into uvalas and “polygonal karst”, very common in tropical regions.  
In these regions, concentrated, frequent rainfall with high surface runoff cuts talwegs  
into the sides of the dolines. From a bird’s-eye view, the dolines become star-shaped,  
rather than classically circular or ellipsoid. This is called cockpitkarst, after the Cockpit  
Country of Jamaica where it was ﬁ rst described (Birot et al., 1967). 
     A comparison between the density and depth of dolines in temperate regions  
(France, USA) and tropical ones (Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo) reveals that while  
the density is comparable, the depth and lateral extent of the dolines are far greater in  
tropical areas (Troester et al., 1984). 

5.5 Poljes 

The Slavic word polje means plain. Poljes are an important component of karst, where,  
aside from the bottoms of major dolines, they are one of the rare formations that can  
support large-scale agriculture. First used by Cvijic’, the term has come to describe  
endorheic basins where surface runoff disappears into the heart of the karstic bedrock,  
though caves or chasms called ponors, swallow-holes or swallets.  
      This hydrologic system functions in its own particular ways, which results in the  
characteristic landforms common to poljes. When the discharge of a stream, swelled  

----------------------- Page 54-----------------------

                                                        The Surface Components of Karst      41 

by abundant precipitation or snowmelt, exceeds the absorption capacity of the ponor  
it ﬂ ows into, a semi permanent lake forms. This can also occur if the ponor becomes  
clogged with sedimentary and organic debris, with ice, or with various anthropogenic  
detritus (tires, barrels, etc.). The lake will persist as long as the blockage holds up  
against the water pressure. In inhabited poljes, where the economy of the area depends  
on the amount of arable land, ponors are carefully monitored in order to avoid clogging  
(cf. chap. 15). A lake can also form if the aquifer that normally receives water from  
the ponor overﬂ ows. The direction of  ﬂ ow through the ponor reverses, and it then  
acts as a source rather than a sink. These ponors are termed estavelles or inversacs.  
     Depending on the climate and the geologic context, a lake may form only rarely, it  
may appear year after year during the rainy season, or it may even become permanent.  
Even without maintaining a permanent presence, the lake gradually smoothes out  
the  topography,  while  also  laterally  expanding  the  area  of  limestone  that  it  alters  
(Roglic’, 1964). A lacustrine morphology is therefore gradually emplaced within the  
karst landscape.  

The presence of poljes depends on three main factors: 

   •  A particular geologic context such as a fault network or a lithologic limit, which  
      allows contact between a low-permeability unit, where water circulates at the  
      surface and feeds streams, and a high-permeability limestone unit into which  
      these streams can disappear; 
   •  A strong hydraulic gradient driving the hydrographic network downwards, such  
      as, for example, in areas with strong eustatic variations or signiﬁ cant tectonic  
      uplift; 
   •  Or, inversely, a high water table that can overﬂ ow easily. This last type of polje  
      is  often  found  in  tropical  karsts  and  is  associated  with  tunnel-shaped  caves  
      providing drainage pathways. 

     Poljes  are  common  around  the  Mediterranean  (Figure  28),  where  they  have  
been well described by J. Nicod (1972). Their abundance is probably linked to the  
Mediterranean’s dramatic sea level drop during the Messinian salinity crisis (cf. chap.  
14), which would have induced a strong hydraulic gradient and therefore encouraged  
surface circulation to migrate downwards. 
     Major poljes are also found in Turkey. The polje lakes in Eğirdir, Beyşehir, and  
Suğla are fed by surface circulation over the impermeable Anatolian plateau, butting  
up against the limestone barrier of the Taurus Mountains. The level of the lakes is  
set by the amount of drainage into ponors, directing the water through the limestone  
mass of the Taurus and out to massive springs such as the Dumanlı, which, with an  
average annual discharge of 50 m3s–1 is one of the largest springs in the world. These  

hydrologic connections can stretch over tens of kilometers, such as the link between  
Beyşehir Lake and Manavgat, which has been followed via tracers over a distance of  
80 km (Bakalowicz, 1970). 
     Poljes  are  also  very  common  along  the  edges  of  tropical  karsts,  where  their  
presence is a sign of the system’s late evolutionary stage (cf. 6.4). 

----------------------- Page 55-----------------------

42    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                          F igure 28. Polje in Caussols (Alpes Maritimes). 

5.6 Dry Valleys 

Holdovers  from  times  when  the  climatic  or  structural  conditions  favored  surface  
drainage, for example during periods of high precipitations, or during which permafrost  
was present, dry valleys with no surface circulation can be found on the surface of  
karstic massifs. They occasionally channel runoff during precipitation episodes, but  
the water quickly makes its way below ground. In late-stage karst landscapes, dolines  
may punctuate the valley, forming characteristic alignments.  

5.7 Canyons, Pocket Valleys, Blind Valley and Karst Windows 

Streams and rivers can be found running across the surface of karst regions, where  
they are connected to varying degrees with the subterranean drainage network. This  
results in a variety of landforms. 
     Canyons, such as the Verdon or the Tarn (France), are narrow gorges cut into  
the  limestone  bedrock. They  are  usually  carved  by  powerful  bodies  of  water,  of  
allochthonous origin, which can incise the limestone without completely disappearing  
into it. A canyon may intersect groundwater ﬂ ow paths, at which point it becomes the  
base level for groundwater circulation, but canyons can also be perched above the  
karst aquifer, which they then supplement with their diffusive losses.  
     Pocket valleys originate in limestone cirques with springs emerging at their bases,  
such as the Loue, the Fontaine de Vaucluse or the cirque d’Archiane in Vercors (France). 

----------------------- Page 56-----------------------

                                                              The Surface Components of Karst           43 

      A blind valley is a gorge that terminates abruptly at a point where the stream sinks. 
      Karst windows are essentially the combination of a pocket valley and a blind  
valley. In thin limestone units, where water ﬂ ows close to the impermeable substratum,  
sections of active river valley alternate with stretches where the water ﬂ ows below  
ground, like in Rakov Škocjan Park (Slovenia). These valleys form when long stretches  
of cave roof collapse.  

                                               terminal                                           circus 
                                               circus 
    karst window 

                                                                                                  spring 

           karst windows                          blind valley                          pocket valley 

                               Figure 29. Surface ﬂ ows in karst regions. 

5.8 Springs, Tufa, and Travertine 

Precipitation in karst regions is quickly absorbed into the ground, resulting in relative  
aridity across karst plateaus, coupled with small numbers of high-discharge springs  
along the edges of these limestone plateaus. 
                                                                                      3 –1 
      These springs commonly have discharges of several tens of m .s                      . Many cities  
in Ancient Greece and Rome were dependent on these abundant water sources to  
sustain their growth. For example, the port city of Side (Turkey) was supplied by a 50  
km aqueduct carrying water from the Dumanlı spring. Today, this spring lies hidden  
beneath the waters of the lake created by the Oymapınar dam, on the Manavgat River.  
Similarly, the Zaghouan springs in Tunisia fed the city of Carthage, via an aqueduct  
over 100 km long, parts of which remain functional to this day.  
      Springs are generally found where the base level (river, lake, sea) and the lowest  
point of a limestone unit intersect. Regressive erosion can then create pocket valleys  
retreating from this point.  
      The water may emerge inside a cave, like at the Loue (Doubs), or it may come  
from a submerged vertical conduit, such as at the Fontaine de Vaucluse (Figure 30),  
after which Vauclusian springs are named. Myriad smaller outlets are present beneath  
the principal spring, due to fractures that appear as the limestone unit decompresses  
along its edges.  
      Some  springs  emerge  in  riverbeds,  where  they  can  be  detected  by  observing  
variations in discharge, or by examining the physical and chemical properties of the  
water. For example the Var River (France) shows an increase in discharge of several  
hundreds of liters per second, as well as an increase in mineralization, as it passes  
through karst units downstream of the gorges of Daluis (where the river cuts through  

----------------------- Page 57-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                4 
                                                                                                                                                                                4 
                                                                                                                                                   cave or sinkhole               

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                   dye test                     K 
                                                                                                                                                                                A 
                       North                       338 m               South                                                                       Cretaceous limestone         R 
                                                                                                    Ventoux                                                                     S 
                                                                                                                                                                                T 
                                                                                                                                                                                O 
                                                                                                      Mount 
                                                                                                                  Trou du Vent 
                                                                                                                                                                                L 
                                                                                                            m 
                                                                                                        1909  
                                                                                                     alt.  
                                                                                                                  Frache                       Lu                               O 
                                                                                                                                                                                G 
                                       Pliocene                                                                                                 re Mountain 
                                                                                                                                                                                Y 
                                                                                                                          e        u 
                                                                                                                         u 
                                                                                                                                                                                : 
                                       lithophages                                                                      q         a 
                                                                                                                                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                           Urgonian                                                    s        v 
                                                                                                                               u 
                                                                                                                                                                                K 
                                                                                                                      e       o            l 
                                                                                                                    N                     o           e 
                                                                                      Comtat plain                          N            t          ïr 
                                                                                                                                        s          a 
                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                       r          d 
                                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                           n          h         la 
                                                                                                                          a         C          a 
                                                                                                                        e          t          C 
                                                                                                                                  S 
                                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                          pool                                                                         J 
                                       105 m                                                                                                                                    s 
                                                                                                                                                                                t 
                   83 m                                                                                                                               Belette                   s 
  perenial outlets                                                                                                                                                              , 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                       Fontaine de 
                                                                                                                                                                                C 
                   60 m   
                                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                          Vaucluse 
                                                                  Prado                                                                                                         v 
                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                    elev. 60 m to 105 m  
   
 Miocène 
                     level 0                                     gallery                                                                                                        s 
                                                                                                                                                             t                    
                                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                             l 
                                                                                                                                                             u 
                                                                          308 m       La So                                        Apt Basin                a                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                                d 
                                                                                            rgue                                                           f  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
           Urgonian                                                                                                                                        x 
                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                                                                                                                          A                     S 
                                    limit of human exploration                                                                                                                 p 
Urgonian                                                                                                                                                                        r 
                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                   - 120 m                                                                                                     North 
                                                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                              Range                                            g 
                                                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                     Lubéron 
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                              10 km 
                                      depth reached by Modexa ROV  
                                                         - 224 m       ?               L 
                                                                                        a 
                                                                                          D 
                                                                                           u 
                                                                                             r 
                                                                                             a 
                                                                                              n 
                                                                                                c 
                                                                                                 e 

     Figure 30. Cr oss-section of the Fontaine de Vaucluse. Only a remote-controlled robot could reach the bottom of the 308-m well, 224 m below sea level. 

----------------------- Page 58-----------------------

                                                             The Surface Components of Karst         45 

pelitic Permian rock). This type of spring can also be covered over by permeable  
alluvium or by scree slopes, in which case the spring can create a bump in the level  
of the water table. This phenomenon occurs on the Var River as well, near Carros.  
Lastly, springs can occur in sea or lakes, and form clearly visible concentric ripples  
on the water surface, due to the differences in density between the spring water being  
discharged and the surrounding lake or sea water (cf. chap. 14). 
      Springs can be perennial, with a high degree of variability in discharge over the  
course of the year. They may also appear only temporarily, when they are recharged  
by a yearly rainy season, by particularly intense precipitation events, or after several  
years of inactivity. Seasonal springs are generally found near perennial springs, but  
may scattered over several kilometers in the same valley, or may even emerge in a  
neighboring valley. Whether they are present and how they behave is a function of  
the landscape’s degree of karstiﬁ cation (cf. chap. 8).  
      Historically, this variability of discharge, which is often accompanied by high  
turbidity  due  to  leaching  from  underground  deposits  of  red  clay,  was  considered  
supernatural, giving rise to cults and to distinctive place names such as Fonsante or  
Fuon Santa (holly spring) in southern France. Chapels were occasionally built over  
emergences, such as Notre-Dame-des-Fontaines (Alpes-Maritimes) or Sainte Fontaine  
de Bellevaux (Savoie) in France. Some of these local cults are still very active: for  
example, in Lourdes, where the Massabielle cave and its miraculous waters attract  
millions of pilgrims.  
      Downstream  of  a  spring,  the  CaCO3  saturating  the  water  can  precipitate  out  
and  form  deposits  of  calcareous  tufa. Tufa  terraces,  which  can  reach  impressive  
thicknesses, are common in Mediterranean regions, such as Cotignac (Var). They may  
house primary cavities sheltering secondary water outlets, and they may be subject to  
secondary karstiﬁ cation. Tufa precipitation may be uniquely linked to variations in  
physical and chemical conditions (decrease in pressure and CO  degassing, increase  
                                                                              2 
in temperature, variations in pH, changes in the ionic strength due to the presence of  
sulfates, etc.). It may also be tied to plant activity extracting CO  from the water. Tufa  
                                                                              2 
is generally highly porous, and consists of a mixture of calcite and plant debris. It can  
create highly picturesque landscapes, for example, in Plitviçe (Croatia) where the tufa  
forms a series of small lakes and waterfalls that have been developed for tourism. 
      The calcite may precipitate differentially, leading to the formation of a succession  
of dams across the river, several hundreds of meters downstream of the spring, like at  
Agua Azul (Chiapas, Mexico) where the water, carrying precipitated calcite, becomes  
bright blue and ﬂ ows through a series of dammed basins, each pouring out into the  
next. On a smaller scale, numerous small natural dams often also punctuate the rivers  
in Basse Provence. 
      Inversely, precipitation may instead be immediate, covering up hydrothermal  
springs and forming travertine. Pamukkale, the Cotton Castle (Turkey), is a vast series  
of calcite tables precipitating spontaneously around hydrothermal springs. The site,  
an attraction even in Antiquity, receives millions of tourists. 

----------------------- Page 59-----------------------

46   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

               Figure 31. Hydrothermal travertine basins at Pamukkale (Turkey). 

     This type of calcite deposit can build up stratiﬁ ed sedimentary units spanning  
vast areas, such as those in Antalya (Turkey), deposited downstream of powerful karst  
springs draining the limestone Taurus Mountains. The older parts of these deposits  
have  been  subject  to  dissolution  and  show  the  classic  landforms  associated  with  
karstiﬁ cation (karren, dolines, caves, etc.). 

----------------------- Page 60-----------------------

                                             66 
                        Landscape Types 

6.1 The Role of Climate 

The factors affecting karstiﬁ cation are the amount of available water, the temperature,  
and the presence of CO , all of which are dependent on the climate. It is therefore  
                            2 
possible to deﬁ ne a climate-based zonal classiﬁ cation for karst landscapes. However,  
such classiﬁ cation is made more difﬁ cult by the superimposition of different climatic  
conditions, since it is uncommon for a geographic area to have been subjected to  
only one type of climate. The succession of several different climates results in a  
landscape where each type of karstic feature imprints itself onto a pre-existing one. It  
is nevertheless possible to deﬁ ne some general tendencies according to climate zones,  
the key factor being the amount of rainfall (cf. chap. 4) and therefore the availability  
of liquid water. Deep hypogenic karst systems (cf. chap. 7.5) are, however, completely  
independent of climate. 

6.2 Karst in Temperate and Mediterranean Regions 

Temperate karsts display classic karst landforms: circular dolines of varying depths,  
rarely connected; thick soil and well-developed vegetation cover; surface drainage  
systems that disappear into swallets.  
     In Mediterranean regions, deforestation and an arid climate have led to soil erosion,  
frequently exposing bare rock. Dolines and poljes are therefore the only sites suitable  
for agriculture, and large-scale construction projects to create terraces are common in  
order to prevent soil erosion.  

6.3 Karst in Cold Regions 

6.3.1 Karst at High Latitudes 

Landforms in high-latitude karst vary according to the availability of liquid water.  
In permafrost regions, water can  ﬂ ow across the surface, laterally, or beneath the  

----------------------- Page 61-----------------------

48   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

permafrost layer. Research in Spitzbergen shows that beneath the ice sheet, water was  
able to trickle down into the karst due to the absence of permafrost. 
     In cases where an area with a pre-existing karst system was subjected to later  
periods of glaciation, the glaciers alter the landscape mechanically, hydrologically,  
and sedimentarily (Ford, 1992). There are several effects of this alteration:  

   •  Glacial abrasion of lapies, 
   •  Cavities are dissected,  
   •  Moraines ﬁ ll in depressions, 
   •  Limestone is covered with sediment and thus protected from dissolution, 
   •  Fine particles clog drainage networks, 
   •  Ice blocks drainages and prevents the ﬂ ow of water, 
   •  High discharges due to snowmelt travel through preexisting channels, 
   •  Valleys deepen and the water table drops.  

     These effects overlap and superimpose themselves onto the existing topography,  
creating a wide variety of new landforms.  

6.3.2 Karst in Alpine Regions 

As with high-latitude karsts, high-altitude karsts were covered by ice during periods  
of glaciation, partially or completely halting karstiﬁ cation.  
     The retreat of ice sheets since the Würmian has been gradual and geographically  
variable. It began in the Alpine arc 18000 years ago, in the regions farthest from the  
poles and at the lowest elevations. It reveals now a jumble of glacial features (moraines,  
roches moutonnées, striations, etc.) as well as recent karstiﬁ cation, due to the removal  
by glaciers of the impermeable unconsolidated cover that had been protecting the  
underlying limestone. The karsts of the Platé Desert (Haute Savoie), the Arres d’Anie  
(Pyrénées), or the Marguareis (Alpes Maritimes) are French examples of young, yet  
spectacular, landscapes.  
     High-mountain  karsts  are  characterized  by  a  strong  hydraulic  gradient,  high  
precipitation, and the existence of a snow or ice pack that feeds the spring snowmelt.  
The slow melting of névé in protected topographic hollows provides a quasi-permanent  
water supply. Water circulation can, however, come to a halt during the winter, allowing  
speleological exploration without fear of the violent ﬂ oods that often occur during  
precipitation episodes in other seasons. Such ﬂ oods occur quickly due to the lack of  
soil cover that would normally slow inﬁ ltration.  
     Ice may have played a signiﬁ cant role in speleogenesis (cf. chap. 7). In some cases,  
the ice is still present. There are in fact a number of recently formed or still active  
underground accumulations of ice. These are not usually left overs from the last glacial  
maximum (Maire, 1990), but instead are a result of the compaction of névé inside  
natural pits, or of the refreezing of water from the fusion of ice, in areas with a cold  
environment (snow-ﬁ lled pits or well-ventilated tunnels). The ice in these locations  
appears stratiﬁ ed, and creates underground glaciers. In Europe they can be found in  
many mountainous regions between elevations of 1500 to 3000 m. Examples include  

----------------------- Page 62-----------------------

                                                                                                             Landscape Types                49 

the Casteret cave (Huesca, Spain), the chasm of Scarasson (Marguaréis, Italy), Snezna  
Jama (Mount Raduha, Slovenia), or the Eisriesenwelt (Werfen, Austria).  
        In caves where ice was present, it has left characteristic underground features:  
moraines, broken speleothems, corroded walls. The weight of the ice and its intrusions  
can  also  deform  the  rock  (fractures,  bedding-plane  slip).  These  features  have  
occasionally been interpreted as seismic in origin (cf. chap. 19). 

6.4 Karst in Tropical Regions 

6.4.1 Speciﬁ c Landforms 

The richness of karst landforms in and around the intertropical zone was conﬁ rmed ﬁ rst  
by the exploration of Papua New Guinea and Borneo in the 1980s, then by the opening  
of  China.  Stone  forests,  pinnacles,  giant  dolines,  gushing  springs,  cave  networks  
stretching over tens of kilometers, enormous underground caverns and passageways,  
all stand as testimony to the intensity of karstiﬁ cation in these areas. 
        This is explained by several factors: rainfall that can reach extreme intensities  
(10 m in Mulu), lush vegetation that can store CO2, and especially, the long time  
periods over which karstiﬁ cation has been taking place. These areas, being located near  
the Tropics, remained warm and humid while glaciers covered the rest of the world. 
        Tropical zones also allow for the existence of speleothems on the exterior of  
limestone surfaces. 

6.4.2 Evolution 

The durability of the karstiﬁ cation process allows for signiﬁ cant incision into the  
landscape. Dolines deepen, merge, and give rise to a cockpit karst landscape. When  
karstiﬁ cation nears the base level, it expands horizontally, and the gradual destruction  
of the ridges between dolines carves out conical stand-alone or contiguous limestone  
hills (mogotes or haystack hills), which then evolve, as their sides steepen and their  
bases are eaten away, into isolated forms (towers, peaks, fungling) (Figure 32). 
        In southeastern China, the constant uplift caused by Himalayan tectonics results  
in more accentuated verticalisation and relief.  

         PRESENCE OF IMPERMEABLE COVER                                                    ABSENCE OF COVER 

   inactive karstification      cryptokarst                 vertical karstification                     horizontal karstification        arrêt 

                             beneath  beneath 
                             cover     alterites 

                                                 
   impermeable              suffosion suffosion dragon 
                            dolines   dolines   teeths                 joint dolines 
  cover 
                                                    stone                
                                                    forest   
                                                             dolines cockpitkarst fencong 
                                                      
                                                                                                                     fengling 
   limestone                                                                                                 tunnel 

                                                                                                       poljé 

    aquiclude 

                             Figure 32. Evolution of tropica l karst (after Salomon, 2000). 

----------------------- Page 63-----------------------

50    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                  Figure 33. Fungling landscape (Guilin, China) (photo E. Gaschat). 

   Gunung Mulu National Park 

   Located in Sarawak (Malaysia) on the island of Borneo, Gunong Mulu National Park is  
   home to the Melinau limestone, riddled with over two hundred kilometers of underground  
   passageways. The  intense  karstiﬁ cation  is  due  to  the  presence,  east  of  the  limestone  
   outcrops, of a clayey sandstone unit, the Gunung Mulu, which concentrates the precipitation  
   (10000  mm/year)  and  injects  the  water  directly  into  the  limestone,  thereby  excavating  
   signiﬁ cant voids, such as Deer Cave or the Sarawak Chamber, the largest subterranean  
   chamber in the world. 

Figure 34. Geologic sketch of the Mulu region (Sarawak, Malaysia). The vast underground spaces of  
the Sarawak Chamber and of Deer Cave are located at the contact between the Melinau limestone and the  
       Mulu sandstone, which collects large quantities of water (after Waltham and Webb, 1982). 

----------------------- Page 64-----------------------

                                                                                 Landscape Types        51 

6.5 Karst in Arid and Semi-arid Regions 

Karst in desert regions (precipitation under 400 mm/year) is rare given the scarcity  
of water and vegetation. The features that do exist are usually inherited from times  
when the climate was more favorable. Limestone outcrops are usually devoid of the  
classic surface features found in other karst regions, such as dolines and lapies. These  
features are not, however, completely absent (Figure 35) since rainfall is not entirely  
non-existent.  Solution  pans  (Figure  36)  are  common,  and  can  occur  at  surprising  
densities. They form temporary watering holes, and the largest are sometimes crudely  
modiﬁ ed by humans to limit evaporation. 

Figure 35. Juvenile lapies on a li mestone slab in the process of being exhumed (Jebel Tebbaga, southern  
Tunisia). The lapies on the upper portion of the slab are more developed than those on the freshly exhumed  
lower portion. The intensity of the features can also be accentuated by the action of wind-borne sand grains.  

                  Figure 36. Solution pans in the Jeb el Tebbaga (southern Tunisia). 

----------------------- Page 65-----------------------

 52   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      The wind can also sculpt eolian lapies, which are reminiscent of dissolution  
karren (Figure 37). 

               Figure 37. Eolian lapies in the Timb aïne limestone (southern Tunisia). 

----------------------- Page 66-----------------------

                                              77 
 Speleogenesis and the Endokarst 

The Endokarst 

The endokarst is the part of a karst system that is underground, and therefore not  
visible from the surface. The endokarst is nevertheless closely linked to the exokarst.  
The endokarst can be subdivided into two parts: the carbonate matrix, and the open  
spaces within it. The underground spaces accessible to speleologists fall into this latter  
category. For hydrologic purposes the endokarst can be divided into the unsaturated  
(or vadose) zone, the phreatic zone, which is saturated year-round, and the epiphreatic  
zone, which varies with the vertical ﬂ uctuations of the water table.  

7.1 The Inﬁ ltration of Aggressive Water 

If water that is not saturated in CaCO  trickles down into a limestone unit, dissolution  
                                           3  
can take place at depth. Water that is initially saturated can also become aggressive if  
the physical and chemical conditions change. Dissolution can then take place, carving  
out subterranean spaces.  
     The high mechanical resistance of limestone allows these underground cavities  
to remain stable, and water can then  ﬂ ow through them, both widening them and  
leaving sediment deposits behind. This is how the subterranean karst landscape, the  
endokarst, takes shape.  
     Caves and caverns are only the parts of the endokarst that humans can visit. The  
network of underground passageways and cavities also includes a high percentage of  
spaces that are inaccessible and can only be indirectly studied. 
     In order for water to carve out subterranean spaces, three main conditions must  
be met: the presence of pre-existing openings (pore spaces or discontinuities), the  
presence of aggressive water, and the existence of a strong hydraulic gradient. 

----------------------- Page 67-----------------------

54    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

7.2 The Spatial Organisation of Discontinuities 

7.2.1 The Nature of Discontinuities 

Primary  porosity  (the  spaces  between  grains)  can  occasionally  be  quite  high,  
particularly in chalk or in limestone formed from coral reefs, which can have porosities  
of up to 30%. Most of the time, however, limestone is impermeable (and is often  
used in construction for that very reason). Water  ﬂ owing through a limestone unit  
must therefore pass through discontinuities, joints, and faults, present as artifacts of  
sedimentation or of mechanical stresses. 
      Sedimentary rocks generally form through the deposition of successive layers.  
Variations in climate can result in layers with varying amounts of clay minerals, or in  
gaps in deposition. During diagenesis, the pre-existing layer boundaries can become  
discontinuities as joints (sometimes called interstrata) appear along the stratiﬁ cation  
planes. The types and magnitudes of these joints are highly variable, ranging from  
simple color variations to entire layers of clay or marl that water can leach away. 

7.2.2 Diagenesis and Mechanical Forces 

From their initial deposition in sedimentary basins to their eventual outcropping at the  
surface, rock units are subject a number of syn- or post-diagenetic stresses, resulting  
in the formation of fractures. The stresses acting on a rock (weight of overlying units,  
tectonics, ﬂ uid pressure, etc.) can be described  by three primary perpendicular vectors:   
σ1, σ2, and σ3, where σ1 > σ2 > σ3. 

                                              V 

                                   V                      V 

                   Figure 38. Mechanical stresses, σ1, σ2, σ3. Where σ1 > σ2 > σ3. 

     When subject to weak stresses, the rock will deform elastically, but as the stresses  
increase  in  magnitude,  the  rock  will  deform  inelastically,  ﬁ rst  undergoing  ductile  
deformation, then, as the stresses increase further, switching to brittle deformation  
(Figure 39). The point at which brittle deformation occurs and the rock ruptures is  
a function of the pressure and temperature, and can be empirically determined by  
laboratory testing. Figure 40 illustrates the behavior of a marble cylinder subjected  
to triaxial stresses at variable conﬁ ning pressures (after Paterson, 1978). 
     From its diagenesis to its current state, every sedimentary rock has undergone a  
number of stresses that resulted in brittle deformation, creating joints (sets of ruptures  
where no displacement occurs) or faults (ruptures where one side moves with respect  
to the other).  

----------------------- Page 68-----------------------

                                                       Speleogenesis and the Endokarst         55 

                                                                Elementary unit = bed 

 e 
l 
i 
 p 
   
 y                                                               t 
 r                                                               i  C 
 a                                                               n  F  
t                                                                u   d 
 n                                                               s  n 
 e                                                               c  a 
                                                                 i    
 m                                                               n  F 
i                                                                a  P 
d                                                                h  H 
                                                                 c    
 e                                                               e  r 
                                                                    o 
S                                                                M  f 

                                                            Fracture corridor (FC) 
                                                            Highly persistent fracture (MBF) 
                                                            Multiple bed limited fracture (MBF) 
                                                            Bed controlled fracture (BCF) 

 Figure 39. Different families of fractures in a stratiﬁ ed unit (after Bazalgette, 2004). 

          V1- VMPa 

            300 

                                                   confining pressure    

                                                                 100 Mpa 

            200                                                   70 Mpa 

                                                                 35 Mpa 

                               deformations 
            100 

                        3,5 Mpa 
                   1 Hpa               10 Mpa 
                          ruptures 

              0               1              2              3 

           V1                  V1                   V1 

                                                                         V1 

                         V3 
                                            V3 
                                                                 V3 
                     3,5 MPa 
                                         35 MPa 
                                                             100 MPa 

      simple fracture 
      parallel to the         oblique            conjugate 
      compression axis        fracture           fractures 

                     Figure 40. Triaxial tests on a marble cylinder. 

----------------------- Page 69-----------------------

56    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      Joints are a result of the processes that form sedimentary rocks (burial, diagenesis,  
and denudation). Rocks form under high pressure deep in sedimentary basins, and  
subsequent uplift and erosion results in unloading fractures as the compressive load  
on the rock decreases. 
      Many studies and models aim to analyze joint distribution and orientation, often  
for the purposes of exploring groundwater or hydrocarbon reservoirs (Bazalgette,  
2004; Jorand, 2007).  
      Joints are generally thought to be a result of extensional periods, and are therefore  
expected along the extrados of a fold or in rift zones, but recent studies have shown  
that joint sets can also be generated by stresses perpendicular to sedimentary bedding  
planes, and that the distribution and geometry of these joints is dependent on the nature  
and depth of the affected layers.  
      With the exception of very deep formations (>10 km) where lithostatic pressure can  
be considered to be isotropic (σ = σ = σ = ρgz), the internal structure of outcropping  
                                       1    2     3 
limestone units, which are often hundred of meters thick, is determined by past and  
present stresses, which dictate where discontinuities will open or close. It is often  
assumed  that  stress  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  fracture  closes  discontinuities.  
However, the closure is not total, since laboratory tests show that there is a limit  
determined by the surface roughness and the geometry of the fractures (Jorand, 2004).  
      In outcrop, a carbonate unit might be compared to a pile of variably spaced, more  
or less porous bricks, between which water can circulate. However, the initial fracture  
geometry cannot be the only factor, since the water saturating the unit exerts pressure,  
which  also  has  an  effect.  Hydrostatic  pressure  causes  fractures  to  open,  a  hydro  
mechanical phenomenon that has been analyzed by numerous authors (cf. chap. 20).  

7.2.3 Determining Outﬂ ows 

Karst aquifers are a very particular type of fractured aquifer. Water can circulate in  
the matrix when it is porous (like chalk). But more often the matrix is impermeable  
and inﬁ ltration occurs only through discontinuities (fractures, joints, etc.). The general  
permeability in a fractured medium is anisotropic and depends on the direction and  
interconnectedness of the fracturation (Figure 41). 
      Various tectonic environments favor the opening of fractures, and theoretically  
facilitate the inﬁ ltration and circulation of water at depth, for example, the upper  
surfaces of anticlines or the lower surfaces of synclines. The latter also form natural  
gutters as well (Figure 42). 

It is useful at this point to recall two important requirements for karstiﬁ cation to occur: 

  1.   CaCO  laden water must be ﬂ ushed from the system through an outﬂ ow of some  
              3  
       sort, otherwise it will prevent dissolution because it is saturated, 
  2.  In order for there to be an outﬂ ow, there must be a hydraulic gradient.  

      The  water  collected  by  a  catchment  area  ﬁ lters  into  the  bedrock  unit,  ﬁ lling  
the fracture network above an impermeable layer (aquiclude). It then  ﬂ ows out to  
an exit point, which corresponds to the lowest point at the intersection between the  
aquiclude and the local base level (river, lake, sea). This creates a current from the  

----------------------- Page 70-----------------------

                                                                 Speleogenesis and the Endokarst           57 

                                                                                   I 
                                                                                   n 
                                                                                   c 
                                                                                   r 
                                                                                   e 
                                                                                   a 
                                                                                   s 
                             y 
                                                                                   i 
                                                                                   n 
                             p 
                                                                                   g 
                             o 
                             r 
                                                                                     
                             t 
                             o                                                     p 
                           g s                                                     e 
                             i 
                           n                                                       r 
                          i                                                        m 
                             n 
                           s  a 
                           a                                                       e 
                                                                                   a 
                           e  y 
                             t 
                                                                                   b 
                           r i 
                             l 
                             i 
                           c                                                       i 
                                                                                   l 
                                                                                   i 
                             b 
                                                                                   t 
                           n 
                                                                                   y 
                          I  a 
                             e 
                             m 
                             r 
                             e 
                             p 

Figure 41. Variations in permeability as a function of fracturation (after Bazzalgette, 2004). The degree  
of fracturation increases, the permeability increases and well, and its anisotropy decreases, allowing water  
                                      to circulate in different directions. 

                                        anticline 
                                                                                        anticline 

                                                              syncline gutter 

        syncline gutter 

                 Figure 42. Spatial orga nization of open discontinuities in a fold zone. 

entry point towards the exit point. Its speciﬁ c characteristics depend on the resistance  
of  the  medium  (porosity,  degree  of  fracturation).  Subterranean  ﬂ ows  can  thus  be  
compared to an electric current that establishes itself in a circuit due to a difference  
of electric potential. The current preferentially follows the path of least resistance.  
Water circulation therefore favors zones with high transmissivity. 

The distribution of these zones is a result of several factors:  

    •  Lithologic (cavities in coral reefs, areas of high porosity, facies variations, gaps  
       in sedimentation),  
    •  Tectonic, 
    •  Historical, when previous karstiﬁ cation has already created open spaces within  
       the rock unit. 

----------------------- Page 71-----------------------

58   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

7.2.4 The Role of Structure 

This question is the source of much debate. Structure actually only has an effect in  
allowing the circulation of water between an inﬂ ow zone and an exit point along the  
path of least resistance and on the shortest distance. If the structure is homogeneous,  
the ﬂ ow path will appear to be independent of structure. If the structure has created a  
strongly anisotropic permeability, it will direct the ﬂ ow path. 
     In mountainous regions, where the general drainage is often determined by the  
bedding dip, an analysis of geologic maps and cross-sections can uncover the important  
role of structure in the formation of conduits (Choppy, 1992c). Fractures oriented along  
the dip are preferentially used as drainage, but only if they are oriented roughly in the  
same direction as the general ﬂ ow direction, which is determined by the base level.  
     Major faults, termed “highway faults”, for which the loss of head is minimal, can  
locally divert water ﬂ ow from its theoretical direct path to the outﬂ ow point. Similarly,  
the presence of conduits inherited from older karstiﬁ cation can channel water into  
drainage axes with very small to nonexistent losses of head.  
     Attempts to model speleogenesis therefore run into difﬁ culties in trying to include  
all of the various factors determining the locations of highly transmissive zones within  
a limestone unit. This is made even more difﬁ cult due to the fact that variations, such as  
changes in the local stress ﬁ eld, can occur during the formation of water passageways.  

7.3 Speleogenesis, or Cave Formation 

7.3.1 Tectonic Cavities 

Karstic cavities are spaces created by dissolution, overlaid onto the fracture network,  
but certain limestone cavities, such as the Cassaïre chasm (Figure 148), though they  
may contain speleothems, are simply tectonic cavities, created by the opening of a  
joint or the shifting of a fault. The formation of most cavities begins with a tectonic  
phase, since the opening of joints is a necessary prelude to the inﬁ ltration of water. At  
depth, circulation is determined by hydromechanical linkages, high pressures causing  
joints to open (cf. chap. 20). 

7.3.2 Dissolution Cavities 

When the water circulating through a joint comes into contact with rock, as long  
as it is not saturated, it will initiate the dissolution of CaCO3. Without ﬂ ow, phase  
equilibrium is reached and the saturated water can no longer dissolve the rock. As  
soon as circulation is established in the aquifer, dissolved ions are ﬂ ushed out and  
saturated water is replaced with aggressive water. Dissolution can then proceed, and  
the joint widens. A conduit forms gradually, within which head losses decrease as the  
passageway becomes more excavated. This initiates a feedback loop favoring higher  
ﬂ ow and thus increased excavation rates. In this context, certain discontinuities become  
preferred circulation channels, orienting and hierarchizing the general drainage system.  
Flow paths become organized between the inﬁ ltration zones of varying diffusivity,  

----------------------- Page 72-----------------------

                                                       Speleogenesis and the Endokarst     59 

transit zones, and the aquifer, which contains reservoirs and drainages, converging  
towards one or more springs. This assemblage makes up the karst system.  

7.3.3 Ghost Rock Karstiﬁ cation 

Ghost rock karstiﬁ cation is a result of isovolumetric in situ alteration of limestone by  
the very slow inﬁ ltration of water. Water circulation, enabled by the presence of joints,  
takes place at a microscopic scale, within the matrix, gradually increasing the porosity  
of the rock via dissolution of its most soluble components. The resulting formations are  
large regions of altered, porous rock where only the insoluble framework remains, and  
where the initial structure of the unit, such as stratiﬁ cation, joint sets, faults, and fossils,  
is conserved. Pseudo-passageways may form, where the space between the healthy  
enclosing walls is ﬁ lled with residual decayed rock. When the altered formations are  
evacuated a classic karstic cavity remains.  

                       west                              east 

                                                                      0 m 

                                                                       1 

                                                                       2 

                   unaltered                                           3 
                   parent 
                   rock  
                                                                       4 

                                                                       5 

                                                                       6 
                                 alterite 

                                                        ghost-rock 
                                                        crack 

          Figure 43. Ghost rock formations in the Pic à Glace cave (after Vergari, 1998). 

----------------------- Page 73-----------------------

60    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      Ghost rock karstiﬁ cation is an intermediate phenomenon, between karstiﬁ cation  
stricto sensu and the alteration of fractured rock, for example like in granites, where  
the action of water occurs only as it ﬁ lters in through fractures. Interstitial ﬂ ow carries  
away the more soluble ions while a less soluble mineralized fraction remains in place.  
It is possible that biological processes play a role as well.  

7.3.4 Zonation of the System 

Generally zones are listed from uppermost to lowermost: 

    •  The epikarst—The rock unit is decompressing over a depth of several meters,  
       karstiﬁ cation can be occurring beneath an overlying soil layer where corrosion is  
       important. Water can accumulate in perched aquifers (epikarst aquifers), allowing  
       the growth of vegetation. Although in certain cases horizontal conduits can lead  
       to the formation of subcutaneous caves, the aquifer is largely vertically drained  
       by fractures, which have been enlarged to varying degrees by dissolution.  

    •  The vadose zone, or unsaturated zone—The vadose zone receives the water  
       percolating  down  from  the  epikarst,  or  from  precipitation  when  the  epikarst  
       is saturated. It is a zone for the transit of water in vertical conduits. It can be  
       assumed that the major conduits are located beneath dolines, which concentrate  
       water received from precipitation. The largest conduits are shafts explorable by  
       speleologists, which can continue downwards into deep chasms. Water circulated  
       very rapidly within them (with a residence time ranging from a few minutes to a  
       few hours), which allows water not saturated in CaCO  to arrive at depth during  
                                                                             3 
       large precipitation events.  

    •  The phreatic zone, or saturated zone—This is the deepest part of the system,  
       in which all openings (pore spaces, fractures, conduits) are ﬁ lled with water. Its  
       upper boundary, the epiphreatic zone, is the area within which the surface of  
       the water table ﬂ uctuates, allowing exchanges between the three phases: solid,  
       liquid, and gaseous.  

                                               infiltration zone 
                              soil 
                epikarst 

                                              vertical 
                                               transit 
                                  vadose or                                                       ponor 

                                  unsaturated 
   spring                         zone 
                  drain 

                                           saturated zone 

                                           aquiclude 

                           Figure 44. Spatial organizat ion of a karst system. 

----------------------- Page 74-----------------------

                                                        Speleogenesis and the Endokarst    61 

   •  Springs—The saturated zone is drained by springs, points at which the system  
      overﬂ ows,  determined  by  the  geometry  of  the  unit  and  the  elevation  of  the  
      hydrologic base level. 

7.3.5 Distribution of Dissolution 

Dissolution and the widening of joints take place in a heterogeneous manner, depending  
on the zone they are located in: 

   •  In the epikarst, dissolution occurs rapidly and homogeneously. 
   •  In the unsaturated zone, dissolution is less rapid and is heterogeneous due to the  
      rapid transit of water. 
   •  In highly transmissive drainages in the saturated zone and in the epiphreatic  
      zone, dissolution is signiﬁ cant but heterogeneous. 
   •  In  the  capacitive  saturated  zone,  where  water  becomes  saturated  in  CaCO3,  
      dissolution is slow but homogeneous. 

This leads to an irregular distribution of openings within the limestone unit. 

7.3.6 The Formation and Evolution of Conduits 

Speleogenesis can be examined at the conduit scale and at the system scale. 

At the conduit scale, there are two types of excavation: 

   •  In saturated systems, water  ﬁ lls the conduit and weathering occurs across its  
      entire section. Dissolution generally highlights the fracturation and the lithology,  
      but in some cases excavation is isotropic, giving the passageway a circular shape  
      often termed a phreatic tube by speleologists (Figure 45).  
   •  In unsaturated systems (or when water can ﬂ ow freely), water only ﬂ ows through  
      the lower part of the passageway, and dissolution occurs below the water level  
      forming vadose passages. The conduit can become deeply vertically incised,  
      creating sinuous passageways with parallel vertical walls, called vadose canyons.  
      Often, originally phreatic, tubular passages, are modiﬁ ed by vadose streams to  
      create a typical keyhole cross-section. 

     In both cases, the presence of sediment deposits can protect the ﬂ oor of the conduit,  
resulting in lateral erosion. A slow ﬂ ow rate that cannot transport ﬁ ne particles can still  
displaces ions, such that excavation occurs only by dissolution, which, paradoxically,  
favors the creation of cavities in the most mechanically resistant areas. The sedimentary  
deposit can clog passageways, resulting in preferential dissolution along their roofs.  
This type of dissolution, called paragenetic dissolution (Renault, 1970), can result in  
channels or pendants along the passage’s roof.  
     At the system scale, it is useful to distinguish vertical conduits, which allow the  
passage of water from zones of inﬁ ltration in the epikarst down to the aquifer, and  
horizontal conduits, which drain the aquifer towards the springs.  

----------------------- Page 75-----------------------

62    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                                         PHREATIC ENVIRONMENT 
                                                                          pendants or 
                                                                           "pig teeth"  

                                  syngenetic galleries                paragenetic gallery 

                                      VADOSE ENVIRONMENT 

                                  keyhole 
                                  passage 
              vadose 
              canyon 

                                                     notch 

 Figure 45. Examples of cross-sections of karstic passageways in saturated and unsaturated zones. 

7.3.7 Drainage of the Unsaturated Zone 

Between the epikarst, which can be saturated to varying degrees, and the deep karstic  
reservoir and drainage zones, water ﬁ ltering downward passes through the unsaturated  
zone, where it can exchanges gases with the atmosphere. Water passes quickly through  
this zone, generally moving downward.  
      Ponors and losing streams feed subterranean ﬂ ows, that form underground rivers  
perched above the aquifer, whose beds are determined by the underlying structure.  
These pathways consist of a succession of underground streams, waterfalls, lakes with  
sometimes totally submerged parts called sumps or siphons. It was in fact Martel’s  
1888 exploration of such a river, between the Bonheur River ponor and Bramabiau  
Spring that led to the longstanding misconception that karst systems could simply be  
reduced to a series of underground rivers.  
      Precipitation also provides water to the system, as it falls on the epikarst and then  
trickles down through it. The vertical transit of water occurs via slow percolation at  
the base of the epikarst, into a fracture network that then feeds stalactites (cf. 7.7.3).  
The inﬂ ux from percolation varies with the amount of precipitation, the saturation  
of the watershed, and the amount of vegetation. The Edytem laboratory (University  
of Savoie, France) traced the discharge from stalactites in Choranche Cave (Vercors,  
France), approximately 200 m below ground, and found short response times, ranging  
from 4 to 7 hours, depending on precipitation intensity.  
      Water also travels through vertical conduits large enough to be accessible to humans,  
where the transit time is very brief. These areas, termed avens, shafts or pit caves, can  

----------------------- Page 76-----------------------

                                                                Speleogenesis and the Endokarst           63 

have several origins: tectonic cavities, collapse sinkholes, dissolution pathways, etc.  
The rock structure in large part determines the ﬂ ow paths taken by water (Figure 46).  

                     
                  0 

               500 

              1000 

              1500                   karst water table                               - 1441 m- 1441 m 

Figure 46. Trave System (Picos de Europa, Spain). The system is superimposed on major tectonic features,  
           which in some cases control the shape of the passageways (Fernandez et al., 2000). 

      Shafts like the Cassaïre chasm (Figure 47) or the Barrenc du Haut Paradet (Figure  
148), although they contain speleothems, are not karstic cavities stricto sensu but are  
instead tectonic cavities created by displacement along a fault. They nevertheless  
provide passageways for water transit, and can therefore be partially reshaped by  
karstiﬁ cation. 
      It is easy to understand the processes that lead to the formation of tectonic pits, or  
collapse sinkholes. Dissolution pits, however, are less well studied, and often exhibit  
surprising depths or diameters. They are generally vertical shafts located below dolines,  
demonstrating the importance of features that concentrate precipitation. These pits are  
often wider at the base, and exhibit vertical ﬂ uting, suggesting that they are carved  
by runoff ﬂ owing downwards.  

----------------------- Page 77-----------------------

64    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

   Cassaïre shaft                                Calernaûm shaft 
   (Var - France)                                (Alpes-Maritimes  
                                                   France) 

                                                                        solution 
    entrance 
                                                                        pits 

                                                                    - 170 

                                                                 80 m pit 

                                                                  open 
                                                                  crack        Bathonian limestone 

                           - 60 m 
                                                                                         thrust 
                                                                                   over  
                                                            - 250 m 

                                                                            Cenomanian marls 

Figure  47.  Partially  or  complete ly  tectonically  shaped  cavities.  In  the  Cassaïre  aven  (Var,  France)  
underground chambers were created by fault motion. In the Calernaum chasm (Alpes-Maritimes, France),  
                the terminal well is a large joint opened by unloading over a thrust plane. 

      Water  splashing  onto  the  walls,  condensation,  and  downward  ﬂ ow  along  the  
walls can explain most of the formations seen in these vertical pits, but in some cases,  
the walls are perfectly smooth and cylindrical. This could indicate that the well was  
formed by residual snow or ice, melting slowly at the contact between ice and rock, and  
therefore producing only small amounts of water at a time (Figure 48). Underground  
glaciers still exist in mountainous regions such as Snezna jama (Slovenia), or the  
Scarasson chasm (Marguareis, Italy) (cf. chap. 6.3.2). 
      The transit direction of vertically percolating water can change if the water meets  
a perched aquiclude. The ﬂ ow direction will then be more or less horizontal until the  
water ﬁ nds a vertical discontinuity allowing it to pass through the aquiclude.  

7.3.8 Horizontal Drainages 

Horizontal drainages direct water in the aquifer out towards springs. In map view, the  
architecture of drainage networks (as we can observe them in dry caves or in water  
passageways large enough for diving) is determined by the hydraulic gradient, by  
porosity, fracturation and paleokarstiﬁ cation, and by the topography of the impermeable  
bedrock (Palmer, 1991). For example, synclines act as preferential drainage channels  
or  gutters,  while  anticlines  act  as  barriers. The  geometry  of  drainage  networks  is  

----------------------- Page 78-----------------------

                                                                 Speleogenesis and the Endokarst           65 

                                                  firn 

                                                          ice creeping 

                                    lateral 
                                   melting 
                                       and 
                                limestone 
                               dissolution 

                                                 underground 
                                                 ice block 

                                                                           aspersion 

                                                            runoff 
                                                          
                                                    

                   Figure 48. Possible role of ice in the formation of a vertical shaft. 

therefore highly variable, ranging from simple underground rivers ﬂ owing along the  
steepest slope of an impermeable substratum, like the Berger chasm (Figure 49), to  
the labyrinthine anastomosing networks that can form in a vadose zone with very slow  
ﬂ ow rates (Figure 50, Figure 51). 
      Their emplacement is different when water ﬂ ows directly atop an aquiclude, as  
compared to an aquifer developing below the level of its springs. 
      In the ﬁ rst case, drainage passageways form at the contact between the limestone  
and the impermeable bedrock. If the ﬂ ow rate is high, water can carve into the bedrock,  
and  the  conduit  forms  partially  in  the  impermeable  substrate  and  partially  in  the  
limestone. Under certain conditions, this can result in the formation of large chambers  
(cf. chap. 7.6). The subterranean rivers of the Pierre-Saint-Martin massif circulate  
this way, at the base of a thick Cretaceous carbonate unit discontinuously overlying  
folded Paleozoic basement. Similarly, in the Berger chasm, much of the circulation  
occurs at the contact between the limestone and the Valanginian marls (Figure 49).  
The layout in map view of the passageways is determined by the topography of the  
impermeable basement and the cracks network. 

----------------------- Page 79-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                 6 
                                                                                                                                                 6 
North-west                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                K 
                                                                                                                                                A 
                                                                                                                Senonian 
                  Berger  
                                                                                                                limestone                       R 
                                                                                                                                                S 
0                 shaft 
                                                                                                                                                T 
                                                                                                                                                O 
                                                 SCHEMATIC                                                     Urgonian 
                                                                                                               limestone                        L 
                                                                                                                                                O 
                                                 CROSS SECTION 
                                                                                                                                                G 
                                                                                                                                                Y 
                                                                          Cuves de                             substratum of 
                                                                                                                                                : 
                                                                          Sassenage                                                               
                                                                                                               Valanginian marls                K 
                                                                          spring                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                     South-east 
                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                , 
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                               cave 
                                                                                                                                                C 
                                  vadose 
                                  runoff                                                                                                        a 
                                                                                                                                                v 
                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                               phreatic zone                    s 
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                d 
                                                                                                                                                  
 1191 m                                                                                                        spring                           S 
                                                                                                                                                p 
                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                g 
                                                                                                                                                s 

                                                                                                                   water 
                                                                                                                   circulation  
                                                                                                                    in phreatic zone 
                                                                                                                   towards 
                                                                      v 
                                                                       a 
                                                                        d 
                                                                         o                                         Sassenage 
                                                                           s 
                                                                            e 
                                                                              r 
                                                                              u 
                                                                               n 
                                                                                o 
                                                                                  f 
                                                                                  f 

       500 m 
                            MAP 

                    Fi gure 49. Map and cross-section of the Berger chasm (Isère) (after Courbon and Chabert, 1986). 

----------------------- Page 80-----------------------

                                                               Speleogenesis and the Endokarst            67 

                                      Apocalypse Pothole 
                                            Transvaal - S.Africa 

                                     ENTRANCE 

                                       THE OLD WORLD 

                                                                   THE NEW WORLD 
                             CROSS SECTION A-A 

                                ENTRANCE 

                                                SCALE 

  Figu re 50. Map of the passageways in Apocalypse Pothol (after Courbon and Chabert, 1986). 

    N RIVER                                                                      Toohey Ridge System 
   E 
  E 
 R 
G 

                                              Flint Ridge System 

                                            Mammoth Cave 

                                                                                                   N 

                                                                                                  1 km 

                                                                   Proctor Cave 

    Figur e 51. Map of Mammoth Cave (Kentucky, USA) (after Courbon and Chabert, 1986). 

----------------------- Page 81-----------------------

68     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      In the second case, Choppy (1992c) conﬁ rmed, based on numerous and varied  
examples, that when the springs draining a system are located at a higher elevation  
than the aquiclude, creating a signiﬁ cant saturated zone, the karstic drainages are  
preferentially located at the top of the phreatic zone, following the most direct path  
towards the spring. This is due to the fact that discontinuities generally form a dense  
enough network for the rock can be considered homogeneous.  

7.3.8.1 Epiphreatic zone 

The epiphreatic zone is the level of the karst system where the water table ﬂ uctuates.  
It is a favorable area for the excavation conduits, since CO  is abundant and facilitates  
                                                                              2 
the dissolution of the limestone. Choppy (1992c), then Audra (1994) demonstrated  
that part of the excavation of these conduits occurs not while they are submerged, but  
while they are being drained, due to the outﬂ ow of water. In mountainous regions,  
this often creates a rollercoaster-like topography, where conﬁ ned conduits formed  
when the area was submerged alternate with passages with the ﬂ uting and meanders  
characteristic  of  unsaturated  ﬂ ow. The  following  ﬁ gure  is  a  simpliﬁ cation  of  the  
mountainous Siebenhengste system in Switzerland (Hauselmann, 2010). 

                                          SECTIONS                                               Vadose zone   

                                            vadose trench        tributary 

                                            phreatic tube                                          Epiphreatic zone 

  Spring                                                                   solution rills 

                                                                                                      Phreatic zone   

                                             perenial phreatic gallery 

Figure 52. Cross-section of a rollercoaster system (after Hauselmann, 2010). The limit of the epiphreatic  
zone  is  characterized  by  the  transition,  at  the  tributaries,  from  ﬂ ow  conduits,  with  key-hole  shape,  to  
                                                phreatic galleries. 

7.3.8.2 Base level variations and inactive levels 

When a valley forms, either because the sea level drops, or because of tectonic or  
isostatic uplift, the spring at the lowest point in the karst system can relocate to a lower  
elevation as long as the aquifer is not blocked by an aquiclude. The water table drops  
and new karst drains form at depth. The original water-carrying conduits then run  
dry, and become classic dry caves which are the realm of speleology. These drainage  
conduits occasionally go back into use during ﬂ oods, and are then termed semi-active  

----------------------- Page 82-----------------------

                                                                                                                               Speleogenesis and the Endokarst                                                   69 

caves. If the difference in elevation is too great, however, the original conduits ﬁ ll  
only under exceptional circumstances, and are called dry or relict caves.  

                               spring                            karstic drain                                   former baselevel                                             dry cave 
                        valley 
 base level 
                                                                                                                                                                            new drain 
                                                                                                                 new 
                                                                                                                 baselevel 
                                                             karst aquifer                                                                                                     karst aquifer 

                                                 Establishment of a drain                                                                                        Lowering of the baselevel 

      Figure 53. Creation of an inactive level in a karst system due to the lowering of the base level. 

                                                                                  COUMO  D'HYOUERNEDO 
                                                                                                     
                                                                                        Arbas Massif - Haute Garonne (France) 
                                                                                           

                   

  GOUFFRE DE LA COQUILLE (elev. 1452 m) 

       0            P. de l'If G. Raymonde                                                           Sarrat dech Méné   G. DE LA HENNE MORTE (1339) 
                                         Trou du Vent (1276) 
                              Trou Mile (1325)                                                                     P. Cendrillon                                                              1 km 
                                                      G. Duplessis                       G. Odon 
                                                                            G. du Quebec 
                                                                  G. Barnache 

                                                                                                                                                           G. des Commingeois (940 m)   

                                                                                                                                                                  G. de Bourusse 

                                                                                                                                                                                              GOUEIL DI HER (elev. 486 m) 
                                                                                                                               Siphon 1 (-20, 120 m) 
                                                                                                                                          Siphon 2 (-3, 15 m) 
                                                                                                                                                     Siphon 3 (-28, 200 m)  Siphon 4 (-30, 220 m) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                depth : 1004 m   

                                               N 

                                         1 km 
                                                                                                                        G. de Pène Blanque (elev. 930 m) 

         Plantillet (elev. 1455 m) 

                                                                     G. DE LA HENNE MORTE  
                                                                     (1339 m) 

                                                                                                                                                   Siphons 

         GOUFFRE DE LA COQUILLE  
         (elev. 1452 m)                                                                           Pont de Gerbaut 

                                          Trou Mile (1325 m) 

                                                                                                                                                                         GOUEIL DI HER (elev. 486 m) 

Figure 54 . Trombe or Coume Ouarnede network (after Courbon and Chabert, 1986). The longest network  
in France, with 117 km of passageways and a depth of 1001 m. Note the staging of the horizontal passages,  
            indicating the progressive lowering of the base level, and the capture by neighboring valleys. 

 7.3.8.3 The role of ice 

Glaciers, because they exert a large amount of pressure, and because they can ﬂ ow,  
can intrude into karst networks. This phenomenon can be observed in the Castelguard  
Cave (Alberta, Canada), 300 m beneath a glacial sheet.  
            Glaciers can either feed subterranean circulation or block it. The network at the  
Dent de Crolles (Isère, France) (Figure 55, Figure 56) was partially excavated by melt  
water from the Isère glacier, to the south. The subterranean circulation was ﬂ owing to  
the north, where a local glacier blocked the springs, creating a conﬁ ned karst aquifer.  
The karstic drainages formed at the top of this aquifer (Audra, 1994). 

----------------------- Page 83-----------------------

70     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                                         DENT DE CROLLES SYSTEM 
                                            Chartreuse - Isère - France 

  CROSS SECTION 

                                                                                                       scale 

Figure 55. M ap and cross-section of the Dent de Crolles (Isère, France) (after Courbon and Chabert,  
1986). The system formed partially due to circulation through the rock of melt water from the Isère glacier. 

                                                         Dent de Crolles 
          NORTH                                                                      summit                       SOUTH 
                                                                                     icecap 
                                                                 infiltration 
                                                                   
                                                                - 
                                                        melting  

                                                                                                    Isère 
                                                                                                   Glacier  
        Perquelin                                                                          1700 m 
        Glacier   
                                                           limestone 
                                                                                        ing 
                               1500 m                                                  lt 
                                                                                    me 
                                            karstic drain 

                   ice dam               karst aquifer 

                                                          marls 

Figure 56. Glac ier/karst interactions in the Dent de Crolles (Isère, France) system (after Audra, 1994).  
To the south, the Isère glacier provides melt water to supply the subterranean circulations, while to the  
                                north the Perquelin glacier blocks the karst aquifer.   

----------------------- Page 84-----------------------

                                                                                  Speleogenesis and the Endokarst                      71 

7.4 Vauclusian Springs 

At the Fontaine de Vaucluse (France), there is a spring emerging from a 308 m deep  
vertical  conduit.  Its  origin  is  still  subject  to  debate.  Is  it  a  drainage  aligned  on  a  
fault that has been eroding upwards since its inception? Or is the vertical conduit an  
inherited form, secondarily put to use by water due to its small losses of head? Vertical  
ﬂ uting observed by divers is attributed to water running down the cavity walls when  
it was not completely submerged, supporting the second hypothesis (Gilli and Audra,  
2004). This conclusion is also supported by observations of similar features around  
the Rhône’s Pliocene ria (cf. chap. 8.1) 

    South-west                                                                                                               North-east 

                                                                                                    Shafts of Vaucluse Mounts  
                                             Fontaine  
                                             de Vaucluse : 
                                             vertical old 
                                             conduit ? 
                                                                                  level 
                                                                recent piezometric  
            Plio-quaternary alluvium plain 

      Messinian 
      paleo-valley                                faultfault 
                            ppaalleeoo--ddrraaiinn                                  MMeessssiinniiaann  ddrraaiinnss 
                                                                            lleevveell  ooff   

                     blocking by alluvium 
                     blocking by alluvium                                          impermeable substratum  

              Plio-quaternary alluvium                Urgonian limestone aquifer                  explored caves 

              Miocene molasse                          Neocomian marls                            hypothetical drains  

              Urgonian limestone                                                                  present water circulation  

            Figure 57. Messinian hypothesis for the emplacement of the Fontaine de Vaucluse. 

7.5 Hypogenic Caves 

The mechanisms described above depend on downward circulation fed by percolating  
water which forms an epigenetic karst. The presence of secondary gypsum formations  
in the giant caves of New Mexico like Carlsbad Cavern, or Lechuguilla (Figure 58)  
served as the basis for a model of cave formation that was quickly applied to numerous  
previously difﬁ cult-to-explain environments (Hill, 1987).  
        Excavation in these cases was not tied to an aquifer fed by percolating water or  
losing streams, but instead to ﬂ uid circulation per ascensum  that forms a hypogenic  
karst. The water is still of meteoric origin, but it circulates at great depth and becomes  
laden with carbon dioxide or hydrogen sulﬁ de. In France, the Grotte du Chat (Daluis)  
is an interesting example of hypogenic cave (Audra, 2007). 
        The cave was hollowed out in part by the effects of sulfuric acid. Subterranean  
degassing of hydrogen sulﬁ de (H2 S) from a deeper aquifer led to the formation of  

----------------------- Page 85-----------------------

72     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 58. Cross-section of the hypogenic Lechuguilla network (doc. M. Heller. Uté de Zürich. Toporobot  
          software). Upward excavation has resulted in a network of over 200 km of passageways. 

sulfuric acid, then to the dissolution of the surrounding limestone and consequently  
to the formation of gypsum. The reactions involved are: 

                                              +        2– 
                    H S + 2O  => 2 H  + SO                or 2 H S + O  => 2 S + 2 H O  
                      2          2                     4            2        2                    2 
                                                                               +        2– 
                             then 2 S + 3 O  + 2 H O => 2 (2 H  + SO                       )  
                                                  2         2                           4 
                                                                                    +        2– 
                          H SO  in solution in the water => 2 H O  + SO 
                            2     4                                             3            4 
                                         +        2–                       
                  CaCO  + 2 H O  + SO                => CO  + (Ca SO , 2H O) gypsum.  
                           3         3            4            2              4      2 

       We note that CO  degassing, coupled with capillary water ﬂ ow, creates an acidic  
                              2 
solution, which also leads to limestone dissolution through a more classic series of  
reactions. The Grotte du Chat was recognized as having been formed in an unusual  
manner thanks to observations noting gypsum layers, dissolution humps and notches,  
and ﬁ ne incisions (sulfuric lapies) on the walls of vertical conduits. The subsequent  
discovery of a sulfuric spring with high hydrogen sulﬁ de emissions downstream of  
the cave in the Riou Valley, and of several abandoned karst conduits between the cave  
and the spring, conﬁ rmed this hypothesis.  

                                                       cupolas 

                                              H SO 
                                                2   4           H SO 
                                                                  2   4 

                                                   O 
                                                     2 

                                            CO           H S 
                                              2           2 
                                                                                       CO                     lateral  
                                                                                          2 
                                                                                                             notches 
             H SO                                                                                H SO 
              2   4                                                                               2   4 

                                                                                                          gypsum 
                                                                                                           deposit 

                                                             water and H  S 
                                                                            2 

 Figure 59. Hypogenic excavation of the Grotte du Chat main chamber (Daluis) (after Audra, 2007). 

----------------------- Page 86-----------------------

                                                                          Speleogenesis and the Endokarst                 73 

       Hydrogen sulﬁ de occurs naturally in petroleum, natural gas, volcanic gas, and hot  
springs. It can also be a byproduct of the bacterial degradation of sulfur. In this case, for  
the Riou spring and the Grotte du Chat, the H S could have come from the reduction  
                                                                    2 
of pyrite (FeS ), which is common in the Barremian and in the Hauterivian marls, or,  
                     2 
more likely, from the reduction of locally abundant Keuper gypsum. Water analyses  
of the spring show it to be rich in NaCl and in CaSO , which are characteristic of the  
                                                                              4 
Keuper. Recent work (Barton and Luiszer, 2005) shows that the production of H S  
                                                                                                                           2 
also requires the presence of metabolically available organic carbon. In the caves of  
New Mexico it comes from hydrocarbon, but in Daluis its origin remains unknown.  
       Although some examples, such as the Grotte du Chat, are now dry caves and can be  
studied, active systems are much more difﬁ cult to access due to the water temperature.  

                                                           North 

                                                                                                   MAP 

       entrance 

                                                                                                 vents 
                                                                                            sulfur  
                                                                                         old  
                                          

                    50 m 

                                            fault 

                                                                                                          upper gallery 
     SCHEMATIC                                                 cupolas 
     CROSS SECTION 
                                                             gypsum 

                           H S 
                            2                                                                    old sulfur vents 

                 sulfur  
                 spring 

                                    active hypogene conduit 
                                                                      Jurassic limestone 
  impermeable 
  Cretaceous 

Figure 60. Map of the Grotte du Chat (Daluis). Note the labyrinthine shape of the cave network. H S  
                                                                                                                           2 
                                              sources are marked by stars. 

7.6 Great Caves 

Speleological explorations occasionally result in the discovery of gigantic subterranean  
cavities, giant galleries, or great chambers (this last term being reserved for the sudden  
widening of a passage in a cave system). Among these, we can cite in France the Verna  
chamber (Pierre Saint-Martin cave, Pyrénées-Atlantiques) with a diameter of around  
250 m and a roof 150 m up, and in Borneo, the largest known underground space in  
the world, the Sarawak chamber (Mulu massif, Sarawak), of incredible size: 600 m  
long, 415 m across, and 100 m high. 

----------------------- Page 87-----------------------

74   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

        fault     fault               fault   SARAWAK CHAMBER 

                                                                                   E 
                                                                                 N 
                                                                                O 
                                                                               T 
                                                                              S 
                                                                             D 
                                                                           N 
                                                                          A 
                                                                         S 
                                                                       U  
                                                                      L 
                                                                     U 
                                                                    M 

                                                                       1 km 

Figure 61. Structural context of the Sarawak chamber, the largest underground chamber in the  
                            world (Mulu, Sarawak, Malaysia). 

7.6.1 Natural and Artiﬁ cial Cavities 

There  is  a  large  gap  between  human  creations  and  natural  examples. The  largest  
human-made limestone cavity in France is the underground Sautet hydroelectric plant  
(36 m wide before the inner surfaces received their protective coating). The largest  
unsupported artiﬁ cial excavations are the Tytyri mines (Finland), which extend for  
an entire hectare without any pillar. The Sarawak chamber is sixteen times larger. In  
an effort to determine the natural laws governing the existence and stability of such  
subterranean spaces, Électricité de France undertook a study during the 80s, examining  
thirty-odd caves in France, to see if some of these laws might be applicable to the  
construction  of  underground  nuclear  power  plants  (Gilli,  1984,  1986). The  study  
found that most of the large chambers examined had the same formation mechanism.  

7.6.2 Excavation Through Scouring and Draining 

Large cavities can be found in a wide variety of geologic and structural contexts,  
although they often have a vaulted roof supported by thick limestone units. These  
cavities form as a result of repeated scouring and draining—they are not simply a  
result of the classic processes of dissolution and collapse in limestone like other caves.  
Their existence is linked here to erosion and to water transporting soft materials (marls,  
schists, etc.), all beneath a large mass of limestone providing a stable roof. One of the  
best examples of this phenomenon is the Poudrey chamber, a vast underground space  
near Besançon that has been developed for tourism. The roof consists of a massive  
Jurassic limestone slab, but most of the cave’s volume is a result of erosion in the  
underlying marls, as the eroded particles are continually washed away into a karst  
network in the limestone below the marl (Figure 62). 

----------------------- Page 88-----------------------

                                                                Speleogenesis and the Endokarst          75 

                                                      100 m 

         0 : entrance 

                                         Upper Sequanian limestone 

                                         - 40 m         Poudrey Chamber 

                                                                             - 69 m 
     Middle Sequanian marls 

    Lower Sequanian                                                                  marls 
    and Rauracian                                                                   suffosion 

             Figure 62. Cross-section of the Po udrey chamber (Étalans, Doubs, France). 

   La Verna, the largest underground chamber in France 

   In the Pierre Saint-Martin network, which contains several large chambers, water circulates at  
   the base of the Cretaceous limestone found in the surrounding canyons, which discordantly  
   overlies intensely folded Paleozoic basement. The basement is mostly impermeable, and  
   the scouring of softer areas (schists, clayey sandstones, etc.) is what led to the formation of  

Figure 63. La Verna chamber. Pierre-Saint-Martin cave (Pyrénées-Atlantiques). The people in the  
center of the halo of light give a sense of scale. In the foreground, a pile of scree rests on the Namuro- 
           Westphalian basement schists. At its foot, the river disappears into the lower levels. 

----------------------- Page 89-----------------------

76      KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

    several chambers. For the largest of these, the La Verna chamber, the process was ampliﬁ ed  
    by river water ﬁ ltering in and ﬂ owing through basement to reach underlying limestone units.  
    This led to the excavation of the Arphidia network, through which the particles eroded from  
    the impermeable basement were washed away. Scouring of the Paleozoic basement thus  
    occurred both laterally, as for the other chambers in the area, but also vertically, resulting in  
    a chamber of immense volume (Figure 64, 2-3). The river capture is dated to 200,000 years,  
    based on dating the sediments left in the Aranzadi passage, which was fossilized when the  
    river was captured, and comparing them to deposits in the still-active upper passage (Quinif  
    and Maire, 1998). 

                                                              West 

                                                                                                CHAMBER GENESIS 

    East 
                                                                                           Canyons limestone 
           ARPHIDIA RAVINE 
                                                                                1 
                                                                                                                                 river 

                                                                                      paleozoïcal basement    basement 
                                                                                      sandstone and shale     limestone 

           Canyons limestone 
                                                                                                            suffosion 

   rudistic limestone 
                                                                                2 
                                                                                                             total catchment 

                         bottomset beds 
                                                         Aranzadi Gallery  

                         s 
                          t 
                           r 
                            e 
                             a                                                               Arphidia cave 
                              m                            Namurian 
    Namuro-Westphalian                                                                       genesis 
                                                           limestone 
    sandstone and shale   

                                                                                3                      Verna   Aranzadi Gallery 

                                                                                                     Chamber 

    0        50       100 m                       to Arphidia 

                                                cave network 
                                                                                                                 Arphidia cave network 

Figure 64. Structural context and genesis of the La Verna chamber. The chamber’s large volume is in  
part a result of the impermeable Paleozoic schists and sandstones. Before the river was completely captured  
by the underlying Arphidia network, around 200 thousand years ago, it ﬂ owed through the Aranzadi Gallery. 

    Based on the mechanisms described above, it should be possible for humans to create large  
    artiﬁ cial caverns, by excavating soft materials under a thick slab of more resistant rock. The  
    overlying unit could be reinforced and made more stable if it was naturally arch-shaped.  
    The largest cavities could therefore be created by hollowing out the center of an anticline.  

7.7 Underground Sediments 

As it evolves, a karst system goes through periods of excavation, but also periods  
of deposition, when sediments, either autochthonous (rubble, dissolution residue,  
etc.) or allochthonous (terrigenous sediment carried underground by water, etc.)  
settles into the bottom of karst conduits. When water is not circulating, chemical  
precipitation in both submerged and sub aerial environments results in the formation  
of speleothems as well.  

----------------------- Page 90-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Speleogenesis and the Endokarst                                                                                                               77 

 7.7.1 Clasts 

Decompression along slopes and cryoclasty (freeze-thaw cycles) can result in rock  
units fragmenting and turning to rubble. Cave entrances are often subject to these  
processes  and  are  thus  ﬁ lled  with  gelifracts  and  debris,  which  can  in  some  cases  
completely obstruct the entrance.  
                    Deeper into the cave networks, as dissolution widens discontinuities in the rock  
(joints, etc.), chunks of rock of various sizes are excavated and accumulate on the  
passageway  ﬂ oors. As the size of the passages increases, limestone beds, that can  
no longer resist being sheared, break. Similarly, when a passage crosses through a  
brecciated fault zone, large masses of rock can become destabilized and can fall into  
the conduits, sometimes completely obstructing them (Figure 65).  

        MANDRESY                                                                                                                                                                                    3                                                                     sortie  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +25 supérieure 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          vestiges de 
       Ankarana Plateau- Ambilobe                                                                                                                                                                         campement 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            trémie 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ? 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -1                      +18        +18 

       Andranomilika Butte                                                                                                                                                                                                                             puits        puits 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   foyers 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              réseau supérieur   

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1 

                                                                                                                                                                                                -1 

                                                                                                                                                                                                  +2 

          magnetic                                    geographic                                                                                                                              +4 
                    North                              North                                                                                                                           +2 

                                                                                                                                                                                      -1 

                                                        

                                                                                                                                                                                    -1 
                                                                                                                                                                                          +6 

                                                                                                                                                                                       -1 

                                                                                                                                                                                    +3 

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chamber 250 m x 100 m 

                                                                                                                                                                     +10  guano 

                                                                                                                                                +18                                              

                                                                                                                                                         +18                                    -1 
                                                                                                                                           +24 

                                                                                                                                      +28 

                                                                                                                                                                  +7 

                                                                                                                                +25 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ? 

                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1 
                                                                                                                        tsingy                                                                                                                          argile 
                                                                                                                        souterrain                                                                      ruisseau      -1                             ? 

                                                                                                             +26                                                                                +8                                                   -2 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ? 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1    lac                                                                                     ? 

                                                                                                                                                                                    +6 
                                                                                                                                                               +6                                                                                                                                                     ? 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ?        -1                                                    -1                    ? 
                                                                                                   +15                                                                       +4                                                                       ?        -2         0     0                           ?  ?         puits 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -1 
                                                                                                                                                                 +3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -4   puits 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ? 
                                                                                                                                                                                           +7                                               -1                                                            -3 

                                                                      +9                                                                       +2                                                                                                                                                           ? 
                                                                                      +5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -3 

                                                                                    +3 
                                                                                                                                                                                     ?                                                       -1,5 

                                                                                                                                         +2 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -3 
                                                                                                    +4                      +3                                                                                                                                                                                               -3 

                                                                                                                     +11                                                                                                                                                                                                               ? 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         air 
                                                                                tombes 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ? 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0 

                                                                                0 

                                                                                    entrance 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ? 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0 
                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ?                         Survey 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ?                         2006  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       puits 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D. Bessaguet 
                                                                              
                                                                         2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         puits            E. Gilli 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         +1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ?                      2007 
    0                                                                                 200 m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F. Tessier 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?                               P. Gilli 

    E. Gilli-2007                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E. Gilli 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +1 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               trémie 

Figure 65. An underground network affected by collapsing chambers in Mandresy Cave (Madagascar).  
Widening of the primary conduit caused the roof to collapse, creating a ﬁ rst chamber and channeling water  
ﬂ ow to the east. The new conduit created a second chamber, which also blocked the water ﬂ ow with debris,  
                                                                                                                                             shifting it eastward again. 

 7.7.2 Clay Deposits 

 Subterranean clay deposits are fed by residue left behind as impure limestone dissolves,  
but they come primarily from soil particles moving through the epikarst and from  
ﬁ ne-grained sediment carried by allochthonous water ﬂ ows or from glaciers. Karst  
 system acts then as a sediment trap. 

----------------------- Page 91-----------------------

78    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      Soil erosion is a common agricultural problem in karst areas. Deforestation and  
soil tilling liberate ﬁ ne-grained particles, which can then make their way through  
the endokarst. In the Mediterranean area, red soils (terra rossa) have in some cases  
completely disappeared into the endokarst, where they form substantial deposits.  
      Inside the drainageways, water-saturated clay deposits favor weathering, but the  
water they hold is not replaced and become saturated which limits corrosion. These  
clays form an impermeable coating that protects limestones from normal dissolution  
and favors paragenetic dissolution (cf. chap. 7.3.5).  

      1000 

                               Erosion 
       100 

 Stream  
 speed 
 in cm/s 
         10 

                                                                                  

                              Transport                                   Sedimentation 
         1 

        0,1 
                          00,1            0,1             1              10             100           1000 

                                            Elements size  in mm 

                                     Figure 66. Hjulstrom diagram. 

      Subterrane an deposits form much in the same way as they would in a classic  
surface stream, with sorted sedimentary sequences, where grain size decreases with  
water velocity: cobble, pebble, gravel, sand, silt, clay. As particles accumulate, they  
can completely clog conduits and stop circulation. A Hjulstrom diagram (Figure 66)  
delineates what water velocities can mobilize different particle sizes. 
      When a drainage dries up completely due to a lowered base level or during a dry  
period, various chemical deposits making up a large family of cave formations (or  
speleothems) can start and protect underlying series of detrital deposits.  

7.7.3 Speleothems 

Concretions,  stalactites,  stalagmites,  ﬂ owstones,  and  so  on,  are  an  undissociable  
part  of  the  world  of  caves. They  form  through  the  slow  precipitation  of  calcium  

----------------------- Page 92-----------------------

                                                             Speleogenesis and the Endokarst         79 

carbonate, and are dependent on many biological, physical, and chemical conditions.  
Precipitation can occur sub aerially, or in spaces ﬁ lled with CaCO3– saturated water.  

Speleothems grow as a succession of thin layers of calcium carbonate (laminae) are  
deposited. The presence of granules and ﬁ laments within these laminae suggests that  
microorganisms play a role in their formation, as is the case for other geologic features  
like stromatolites. However, it has thus far been difﬁ cult to identify any fossilized  
remains (Saint-Martin, 2010). 
      Each speleothem is the output of a biochemical system, the parameters of which  
are stored in the formation. Analysis of the order and characteristics of the laminae can  
reveal important information about the paleoenvironment they formed in (cf. chap. 19). 

7.7.3.1 Principal forms 

There is immense diversity in the forms speleothems can take. The most well known  
are stalactites and stalagmites, which ornament most caves.  

Stalactites and sodastraws  

Stalactites form from water percolating down through the limestone above a cave,  
and becoming saturated with calcium carbonate. Calcite precipitates around a water  
droplet, the crystals becoming distributed around its periphery. The precipitation and  
capillary action form a sort of cuff (Figure 67). The successive stacking of these cuffs  
creates a tube a few millimeters across, called a sodastraw. The sodastraws evolves into  
a stalactite as calcite precipitates around the tube, increasing its diameter and giving  
it a generally conical form. Stalactites therefore generally have a central channel.  
      Sodastraws are indicators of verticality that may be useful for stability studies. 

Fi gure 67. Longitudinal and transversal cross-sections of a sodastraw. The growth cuffs are clearly  
           visible and consist of darker micrite laminae associated with clear sparitic laminae. 

Stalagmites 

Stalagmites are most often found immediately below stalactites, and form from the  
CaCO  remaining in the percolating water droplet. As the droplet falls, some of the  
        3 
water evaporates, liberating more calcite, which then forms a thin deposit. As these  

----------------------- Page 93-----------------------

80      KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

deposits accumulate on top of one another, they create a more or less vertical column.  
In stalactite-stalagmite pairs, when the stalagmite is large, the stalactite is generally  
small, and vice versa.  

                 water 

          active 
          crack 

                               saturated water                saturated water 

      sodastraw 

                                                        successive  
                                                        external layers  
                                                        precipitation 
                                                                                         stalactite 

                                                         drop with 
                                                                                                      column 
                                                         CaCO3 

                                                        precipitation                   stalagmite 

                                                        on the floor  
                                                                     

                   Figure 68. Birth and growth of sodastraws, stalactites and stalagmites. 

Gours or rimstone dams 

These are small basins, often superimposed. They form when the laminar ﬂ ow of  
water leads to evaporation. When changes in slope thin the layer of water and favor  
evaporation, calcite precipitates. This forms a small dam, accentuating the phenomenon  
and causing the formation of a calcite dam tilted towards the center of the gour. As  
water evaporates from the surface of the gour, a thin ﬁ lm of calcite often forms, held  
on the surface by surface tension. This ﬂ oating calcite accretes onto the sides of the  
gour and contributes to its growth.  
       Gours are indicators of horizontality that may be useful for stability studies.  

The variety of speleothems 

The description of the different forms speleothems can take would require an entire  
book. The following ﬁ gure presents the most common forms. The reasons for such  
variation  and  for  the  location  of  different  types  of  speleothems  are  still  poorly  
understood. They are not randomly distributed, and it is likely that biological factors  

----------------------- Page 94-----------------------

                                                                Speleogenesis and the Endokarst          81 

                                                                                          helictites 
                                                                          curtain 

                                                              soda straws 
                      stalactite 
                                           anthodites 
      disc                                                                            flowstone 

                      stalagmite                         broomstick 
         popcorn                                                                     cristals 

                                                                           gours 
           flowstone 
                                                                pearls 

                          Figure 69. Different types of speleothems in a cave. 

play a role. In nature, many types of CaCO  precipitation are linked to living organisms:  
                                                     3 
test, shells, skeletons, stromatolites, algal crusts, etc. It would therefore be surprising  
if subterranean concretions were an exception.  

7.7.3.2 Growth and evolution rates 

Speleothems incorporate the elements found in the percolating water they are formed  
from (oxides, clays, humic acid), giving them a variety of colors. The rate of concretion  
is highly variable and depends directly on the climate. At European latitudes, they can  
grow several millimeters per year. Since they are made of calcite, they can dissolve  
when the cavity they are in is ﬁ lled with water or ice. They can also halt their growth  
for  several  thousand  years  and  then  begin  growing  again  without  any  noticeable  
morphological changes.  
      In warmer climates, speleothems sometimes degrade into onion-skin-like slices,  
as certain laminae become pulverulent or pasty. It has been hypothesized that this is  
due to some sort of bacterial process.  
      The crystal structure of a speleothem can also change, and in some cases systems of  
ﬁ ne micritic or palisadic laminae have been observed to transition to a monocrystalline  
solid that keeps ghost traces of lamination. The cause of this phenomenon is unknown,  
and it creates a problem for the reliability of speleothem dating, which requires that  
the system be perfectly closed (Figure 70). 

----------------------- Page 95-----------------------

82    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                         Figur e 70. Calcite monocrystal with ghost laminae. 

7.7.4 The Study of Sedimentary Deposits 

The analysis of subterranean sedimentary deposits can inform our understanding of  
the evolution of the karst system and of regional climatic and hydrologic conditions  
(cf. chap. 19). Protected from exterior agents and from vegetation, sediments can be  
preserved for thousands of year, allowing for highly detailed analysis. The geometry  
of the deposits can be highly complex, due to successive phases of sedimentation and  
erosion below ground, resulting in nested deposits, where it is not uncommon to ﬁ nd  
younger deposits that appear to be below older deposits. A very careful analysis of  
the geometry of deposition is therefore crucial. Various dating methods are described  
in 19.2. 

7.7.5 The Evolution of Subterranean Sediments 

Karst is not only a trap for detritic material, but also an environment where these  
sediments can react and undergo diagenesis. Organic-rich clays can see the appearance  
of neoformation pyrite (FeS ) and of sodium or potassium nitrates, which can prompt  
                                  2 
primitive resource extraction, such as in the Daxiao Dong cave (Luodian, Ghuizhou,  
China) where the sediments are washed and the resulting brackish water is concentrated  
and evaporated in underground ovens. The resulting nitrate is then used to manufacture  
gunpowder or fertilizer.  

----------------------- Page 96-----------------------

                                                    Speleogenesis and the Endokarst   83 

     Such mineral resources, tied to a signiﬁ cant accumulation of material and to  
evolution over a long time period, can therefore be linked to karst. For example,  
limestones in Provence (France) hold bauxite accumulations, and phosphorites can be  
found in Quercy (France). A few examples of mineral deposits are described in chap. 17.  

----------------------- Page 97-----------------------

                                                         88 
      Evolution of Karst Landscapes  
                                 and Paleokarsts 

Like most natural systems, karst undergoes several stages of evolution. Given the  
rate of dissolution, this evolution is rarely noticeable on human timescales, unless the  
rock in question is highly soluble, as is the case for parakarsts in salt or in gypsum.  

8.1 Variations in Climate and Paleogeographic Evolution 

8.1.1 Variations in Base Level 

The geometry and position of drainage channels are determined by the hydrologic  
base level. When the base level changes, the aquifer adjusts accordingly, and the  

                                                          dry cave                                          limestone 

                                                                                                            impermeable 
                                                                                                            terranes 

     aquifer                                           aquifer 
                                                                                                            aquifer 

        Karstic conduit creation                          Base-level lowering                               alluvium 

                                                                                                            spring 

                  re-activated                                                                              karstic drain   
                  karst conduit 

     aquifer                                            aquifer 

    Base-level rising                                 Capture by a neighboring valley 
               

                        Figure 71. Changes in base level recorded by a karst system. 

----------------------- Page 98-----------------------

                                        Evolution of Karst Landscapes and Paleokarsts     85 

drainage system follows suit. These variations can be a result of either climatic or  
tectonic changes. 

8.1.2 Glacio-eustatism 

Milanković’s work has shown that the amount of incoming solar radiation on Earth is  
a function of cyclical variations in the parameters describing Earth’s rotation around  
the Sun: eccentricity, obliquity, and precession. These variations have a period of  
approximately  100,000  years.  During  the  past  four  cycles,  a  strong  correlation  is  
apparent between the amount of incoming solar radiation and the extent of continental  
ice sheets. It is therefore an easy matter to infer that karst systems would have been  
regularly affected by alternating periods of excavation and inﬁ lling. In limestone units  
exposed for several million years, many oscillations have left their mark, and several  
successive karst features are superimposed making most of karst systems polyphase  
ones (cf. 8.2). 

8.1.3 The Messinian salinity Crisis and its Effects on Karstogenesis in  
       Southeastern France 

During the Messinian, from 5.9 to 5.3 Ma a major event altered the recent sedimentary  
sequence in the Mediterranean zone: the Messinian Salinity Crisis (Hsü et al., 1977;  
Cita and Ryan, 1978). This crisis was a result of several successive drops in sea level,  
eventually  decreasing  to  2000  m  below  the  present  sea  level. The  Mediterranean  
maintained exchanges with the Atlantic through straights crossing through what is now  
southern Spain (the Baetian Mountains) and Morocco (the Rif Mountains) (Rouchy,  
1999). Inﬂ ow from the surrounding rivers was not enough to counteract the high  
evaporation rates in the Mediterranean basin. The series of drops in sea level upset  
the depositional environment, resulting in the deposition of thick layers of evaporites  
in basin bottoms, as well as deep downcutting into the sedimentary layers along the  
continental shelf. 
     The major rivers, the Nile, the Pô, the Rhône, saw their beds cut downwards. The  
karst systems attached to these various hydrologic base levels (the sea, the rivers and  
streams) also incised downwards (Bini, 1994; Audra et al., 2005). 
     When the Mediterranean basin ﬁ lled again at the beginning of the Pliocene (5.3  
Ma), during the opening of the straight of Gibraltar, the subsequent deposition up until  
the present day was strongly inﬂ uenced by Messinian paleogeography. The sea ﬁ lled  
the Messinian valleys, up to 80–100 m of elevation, forming long rias (Mediterranean  
drowned river valleys) that were gradually ﬁ lled with sediment, blocking karst water  
circulation.  During  the  subsequent  marine  regression,  these  deposits  were  eroded  
down to their current level, resulting in yet more changes in the drainage networks.  
     Around the Rhône valley, these effects were felt along all the major karstic springs,  
resulting in the formation of very deep conduits, relict passageways, pits, chimneys,  
and Vauclusian springs (Mocochain et al., 2006). 

----------------------- Page 99-----------------------

86      KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                                                  Lave 
                                                                               Etoile Mountain 
                              Nerthe Range 
         Nord 

                                                              25                                   Allauch Mountain 
                                                              25 
                                                           50 
                                                           50 

                                                                                                                          Aubagne 
                                                 75 
                                                 75                        MARSEILLE                                     polje 
                                                                           MARSEILLE 

                                     80 
                                                                                               r 
                                                                                               rr 
                                                                                              e 
                                                                                              ee 
                                                                                             v 
                                                                                             vv 
                                                                                            i 
                                polje ?                                   Roucas            ii 
                                                                                          R 
                                                                                          RR 
                                                                                             
                                                                                        e   
                                                                          Blanc         ee 
                                                                                       n 
                                                                                       nn 
                                                                                     u 
                                                                                     uu 
                                                                                    a 
                                                                                    aa 
                                                                                   e 
                                                                                   ee 
                                                                                 v 
                                                                                 vv 
                                                                                u 
                                                                                uu 
                                                                              H 
                                   75                                         HH 
                                                                                

         dolines 
                                                                           Calanques block Calanques block Calanques block n 
                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                           Port          u 
                                                                                                                        o 
                                                                                                                       t 
                                                                                                                      s 
                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                 Sugiton   Miou     B   CASSIS 
                                  Planier 
                                          50 
                                  Island 
                                             75 

               100 
                                           sinkholes 
                                              kh 
                                                                              Riou Island 
                                                                              Riououu IsII 

        present shoreline 
                                                                     1001001000 
        paleo-shoreline 
                                                                                                                 ? 
        dépression 

        spring                                                                               ? 
                                                                                                                                1 
                                                                                                                                 2 
    ?   paleo-spring ?                                     sinkholes                                           0                  5 
                                                                                                             0 
                                    200                                                                     6  0    400 
                                                                                                              0 
        proved                                                                                        0      5    300 200 
                                                                                                      0 
        connection                                                                                    8 
            125                                                125                                                     1 
                                                                                                                        5 
                             0                                                                                           0 
        supposed            0   0                                                                    0               1 
                           3                                                                                          2 
        connection             0                                                                    0                  5 
                               5                       150                                         9   Cassidaigne 
        Marseille            Planier                                                                   Canyon 
        Oligocene           Canyon                                                                0                       5 km 
                                                                                                  0 
                                                                                                 0 
                                                                                                1 

Figure 72. Submerged paleokarst off the coast of Marseilles (after Collina-Girard, 1994). The depth of  
the basins and the incision of the Cassidaigne canyon indicate a base level lower than that caused by the  
                                     sea level drop during Plio-Quaternary glaciation. 

8.1.3.1 Tectonics 

Periods of uplift or of subsidence induce relative variations in base level. These can be  
regular and continuous, as in southern China, where the evolution of the topography  
and of speleogenesis are accentuated by the increasing hydraulic gradient caused by  
the Himalayan uplift.  
       They can also be sudden, such as changes caused by major earthquakes. During  
the magnitude 7.5 Limón earthquake in Costa Rica in 1991, the sudden uplift of the  
coastal region led to the exposure of a submarine carbonate platform, but also tilted  
the coastal karst systems that were already in place, resulting in the reversal of ﬂ ow  
direction in some places, such as in the Gioconda cavern (Limón). This immediately  
affected sedimentation, and had more long-term effects on erosion as well (Gilli, 1995a).  

8.1.3.2 Isostasy 

When the mass of a continent changes, due to loading or unloading by glaciers, isostatic  
adjustments result in changes in base level, and therefore changes in the karst systems.  

----------------------- Page 100-----------------------

                                            Evolution of Karst Landscapes and Paleokarsts          87 

Post-glacial rebound due to the melting of continental ice sheets affected the karst  
systems in Patagonia (Chile) (Jaillet et al., 2008) and in Norway (Faulkner, 2005). 
      High erosion rates could also result in uplift due to isostatic adjustments (Molnard  
and England, 1990), a phenomenon that may have resulted in several hundreds of  
meters of uplift in the Pyrénées during the Cenozoic (Babault et al., 2005). 

8.2 Polyphase Karst  

In areas where a limestone unit has been uncovered for long periods of time, base  
level variations such as those described above can be seen in the rock record as the  
traces left by different phases of karstiﬁ cation. The Jurassic limestones of Provence,  
for example, have been subject to nearly continuous karstiﬁ cation since the Cretaceous  
(Blanc, 1993).  
     At the surface, this long history results in the gradual wearing away of limestone  
surfaces, such that it is not uncommon to ﬁ nd karstic cavities that have been exposed  
as slopes cut backwards and soil erodes away. Figure 73 shows a large stalagmite, a  
vestige from an older cave that was unroofed by erosion. 
      In the endokarst, successive adjustments to changing base levels can both create  
new conduits and fossilize older ones. The largest cave networks are often made up  
of numerous levels, remnants of different stages of karstiﬁ cation (Figure 54).  
      The systems in place today are therefore the result of an often-complex evolution,  
and the current landforms must be interpreted as the products of different phases of  
climate variation. 

                  stalagmite 

                                                                                 remnant of cave 
                                                                                   transformed in 
                                                                                         sinkhole 

Figure 73. Vestiges  of a large stalagmite, indicating the presence of a paleo-cave, on the Calern plateau  
                                     (Alpes-Maritimes, France). 

----------------------- Page 101-----------------------

88    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

8.3 Paleokarst 

It is safe to assume that, as long as the climate allows for the presence of water in liquid  
form, any carbonate platform exposed for a length of time, for example as a result of a  
marine regression, would have been subject to karstiﬁ cation. The evolution of the karst  
system can be completely halted by subsequent sedimentation during, for example, a  
marine transgression, resulting in preserved karst topography, or paleokarst with fossil  
caves. The deposits found in these systems can shed light on the paleoenvironment  
(cf. chap. 19). For example in the carbonate units in the sedimentary ring around the  
Maures-Tanneron massif (Alpes-Maritimes, France), paleokarst is common, because  
those sediments underwent frequent phases of exposure. In the town of Valbonne the  
Bajocian limestones were exposed during the Bathonian, when a karst network formed.  
The karstic cavities then ﬁ lled with Bathonian clays, and were sealed off by another  
period  of  limestone  deposition,  during  the  subsequent  marine  transgression. This  
Bathonian paleokarst is responsible for the Vallauris pottery industry that ﬂ ourished  
during  the  19th  century,  thanks  to  the  ﬁ re-resistant  properties  of  kitchen  utensils  
made from the clays found there. An examination of the road cuts in the same area  
reveals cross-sections of fossil shafts ﬁ lled with Eocene red sand, or Oligocene marl  
or andesite (Figure 74). Karstiﬁ cation in this area has been almost continuous from  
the Cretaceous to the present day, making it difﬁ cult to determine the precise age of  
the caves that hold these deposits. They may be either primary deposits in pre-Eocene  

                               Bathonian              Oligocene                          Oligocene 
                                                                                              
                               basement               karstic filling      topsoil       karstic filling 

    CERTIAM excavation 

    Valbonne 
    (France) 

    Tertiary paleo-karst  

    Ch. Mangan -1979 

           5 m 

          Figure 74. Tertiary p aleokarst in Valbonne (Alpes-Maritimes) (doc. Ch. Mangan). 

----------------------- Page 102-----------------------

                                       Evolution of Karst Landscapes and Paleokarsts    89 

caves (in the case of sandy ﬁ ll) and pre-Oligocene caves (in the case of andesite ﬁ ll),  
or secondary deposits in more recent caves or dolines, which could have trapped  
reworked primary deposits.  
     Sediments below ground can undergo diagenesis and transform into economically  
important ores, such as the bauxites of Provence, trapped in Cretaceous paleokarst, or  
the iron ores of Kisanga (Zaire), found in an Upper Proterozoic karst (cf. chap. 17).  

----------------------- Page 103-----------------------

                                             99 
        Parakarsts and Pseudokarsts  

9.1 Parakarsts 

Parakarsts are landforms that develop as a result of dissolution in non-carbonate rocks,  
and that can have karst-like features such as lapies, dolines, underground rivers, and  
caves. This often occurs in gypsum or in salt. The word karst is also commonly used  
for gypsum in particular. Gypsum karsts are highly problematic for development, as  
they evolve rapidly and the effects of dissolution can be felt after only a few years.  

9.1.1 Evaporites 

Evaporites are rocks deposited as a result of precipitation in conﬁ ned bodies of water  
such  as  lagoons,  isolated  seas,  and  endorheic  continental  basins.  Major  evaporite  
minerals included anhydrite (CaSO ), gypsum (CaSO .2H O) and salt (NaCl). 
                                         4                    4    2 
     These minerals have high solubility, and karst features can develop very quickly.  
     Salt karsts exist only in arid regions; elsewhere the salt deposits they might have  
formed in are too quickly washed away by precipitation. Examples have been found  
in Iran, in Israel, and in the Atacama Desert in Chile (De Waele et al., 2009) as well  
as at the Rock of Djelfa in Algeria (Salomon, 2000).  
     Gypsum karst is common. It evolves differently than karst in carbonate, because  
of gypsum’s different mechanical characteristics. Gypsum is fairly weak, so large  
caverns are unusual, and cavities have a tendency to collapse in on themselves.  
     Gypsum systems can be unary (ponor/resurgence) like at the Gébroulaz cave  
(Savoie, France) or the Suès cave (Sospel, France), but often karstiﬁ cation occurs when  
there is an inﬂ ow of unsaturated water, coupled with an outﬂ ow of water saturated in  
dissolved gypsum, through lateral or underlying karstic conduits in limestone units  
adjacent to the gypsum.  
     There are enormous subterranean networks in Ukraine (Klimchouk, 2000), where  
gypsum units are protected from surface erosion by an impermeable cover. Limestone  
units bracket the gypsum, providing support and stability for caverns like the Optimistic  
cave, and serving as passageways for the inﬂ ow of unsaturated water and the outﬂ ow  
of dissolved gypsum (Figure 75).  

----------------------- Page 104-----------------------

                                                                             Parakarsts and Pseudokarsts              91 

                                    Optimistic cave network 
                                    (Ukraine) 

                                                                         A 

                                                                                                                        B 
                                                                     marls 

                                                                   limestone 
                                                                    gypsum 
                                                                   limestone 

                                                                                            AB cross section  

                                                        
                                                 entrance 

Figure 75. Optimistic network (Ukraine) (after Courbon and Chabert, 1986). This cave network, entirely  
                             carved out of gypsum, reaches over more than 100 km. 

       In France, gypsum layers are common in the Ludian (Uppermost Eocene, Parisian  
Basin) and in the Keuper (southern France). Deep karstiﬁ cation in these layers often  
creates signiﬁ cant problems due to soil movement and particularly sinkholes, which  
can be disastrous when they reach the surface. Occasionally, caves are discovered  
fortuitously during mining operations, such as those in Denis-Parisis (Béthemont- 
La-Forêt, France) where an underground gypsum mine perforated a 3-km-long cave  
network. 
       Given gypsum’s rapid dissolution rate, ten times faster than limestone, gypsum  
karsts  can  be  entirely  anthropogenic.  Leakage  from  water  pipes,  pumping,  septic  
tanks, and poorly designed gutters can all be responsible for the formation of large  
cavities underneath built-up areas, and therefore require signiﬁ cant work to shore up  
foundations, or even force residents to abandon the area.  

9.1.2 Quartzite and Arenite Sandstone 

Siliceous rock units, while considered generally insoluble, occasionally show well- 
developed karstic formations. These have been found in basement quartzites in Africa  
(Martini and Marshall, 2002), and in Brazil (Willems et al., 2004). The largest examples  
are found in Venezuela in Precambrian quartzite (1600 Ma) from the Roraima formation  
(Poullyaud and Seurin, 1985), where gigantic collapsed dolines were discovered in  
Sarisariñama and in Aonda. Their exploration revealed an access point to a network  
of passageways comparable to those found in limestone.  

----------------------- Page 105-----------------------

92    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

     Karstiﬁ cation mechanisms in these rocks are poorly understood, and hydrothermal  
processes have been suggested. However, these formations are some of the oldest on  
earth, and the low solubility of silica (5 to 10 mg.L–1) may be compensated simply by  

the amount of time the rock has been wearing away.  

                TEPUYS EXTERNAL             SIMA  AONDA  PLATEAU                        SECOND  
                WALL                                                                       WALL 

    VALLEY 

       SPRING 
                                              GROUND WATER CIRCULATION  
                                                  IN SIMA AONDA PLATEAU 

      Figure 76. Caves in the Sima Aonda quartzite (Venezuela) (Courbon and Chabert, 1986). 

9.2 Pseudokarst 

They are landforms similar to those found in karst regions, but created by mechanisms  
other than dissolution.  

9.2.1 Suffosion Dolines 

Non-carbonate outcrops such as the loess plateaus of northwestern China are often  
dotted with numerous dolines. These are not a result of karstiﬁ cation, but of suffosion,  
a mechanism where interstitial water circulates through pore spaces between larger  
grains, carrying ﬁ ner particles. The removal of these particles creates voids, which  
collapse in on themselves and cause settling and compaction. This process propagates  
upward to the surface, where it creates closed depressions. Examples have been found  
in  many  places,  including  the  Campania, Apulia,  and  Calabria  plains  in  southern  
Italy, regions where seismic activity can cause soil liquefaction, which speeds doline  
formation (Del Prete et al., 2010). 

9.2.2 Thermokarst 

Thermokarst refers to areas where dolines form due to the effects of snowmelt and  
of water circulation in the periglacial zone. Water can come from melting ice caps,  
or  from  liquid  water  ﬂ owing  beneath  frozen  soil  or  permafrost.  Interstitial  water  

----------------------- Page 106-----------------------

                                                         Parakarsts and Pseudokarsts     93 

circulates and carries away ﬁ ne-grained sediment, leaving behind underground cavities  
help up by the frozen soil above. When the roof melts, the cavities collapse, creating  
suffosion dolines.  

The classic components of a karst system are still present: 

   •  an environment with high mechanical strength, 
   •  an energy vector, although in this case the energy is thermal, not chemical,  
   •  a hydraulic gradient enabling the transport of material: either unsaturated water  
      or water carrying ﬁ ne sediment. 

9.2.3 Water Flow in Ice 

Where the climate allows it, ice on the surface of glaciers can melt as a result of  
incoming solar radiation, creating rivers and streams along the surface of the ice: a  
supraglacial stream. Tectonic openings such as crevasses or zones where the glacier is  
not attached to the underlying bedrock allow liquid water to ﬂ ow through the interior  
of the glacier, carrying heat and melting the ice inside, thereby widening cavities  
within the ice. Ponors can form, like the Moulins in the Mer-de-Glace (Chamonix,  
France) where water has carved vertical shafts in the glacier that are accessible to  
speleologists. Similarly, rivers are common below the ice, between the glacier and the  
bedrock, where they often feed powerful rivers. At the Argentière glacier (Chamonix,  
France), these rivers have been diverted into passageways carved in the rock, where  
they generate electricity.  
     When fractures in the ice are interconnected and make it possible to link areas  
with contrasting elevations and amounts of solar radiation, air currents can have the  
same effect. Finally, in volcanic areas, geothermally heated water and fumaroles can  
excavate large cave networks, such as those in Kverkfjöll in Iceland. 
     Water ﬂ ows in glaciers can also transport sediment. The cavities they ﬂ ow through  
are then partially ﬁ lled with sediment deposited by the stream, which, when the ice  
melts, leave long winding berms, called eskers, forming a raised imprint of the sub- 
glacial stream network.  

9.2.4 Lava Caves 

When lava is still ﬂ uid, it can, as it cools, form a solid crust underneath which the hot  
lava continues to ﬂ ow. As the outﬂ ow slows then stops, the crust remains, forming  
caves called lava tubes. These can extend for several kilometers, and are often marked  
at the surface by sinkholes or collapse dolines.  

9.2.5 Martian Pseudokarst 

The various Mars exploration missions have revealed and/or conﬁ rmed the presence  
of two types of pseudokarst on the planet: lava tubes and sub-glacial streams.  
     Sinkholes aligned following certain lava ﬂ ows are thought to be lava tube cave- 
ins (Battistini, 1985). 

----------------------- Page 107-----------------------

94    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 77. Buri lava tube (Iceland) (photo M. Detay). Molten lava ﬂ owed out beneath a hardened roof  
         that it partially remelted. Note the lateral ﬂ ow marks and the ropy lava ﬂ oor of the cave. 

      Paleo-eskers observed along the periphery of the ice caps, talwegs, valleys, and  
lakes, show that liquid water must have existed, or still exists, on Mars, either beneath  
the permafrost or under the polar ice caps.  
      With the possibility of manned missions to Mars in mind, these underground  
features are of importance as potential sources of shelter and water. 

----------------------- Page 108-----------------------

                                        1010 
            Speleology and Study of  
                           the Endokarst 

Speleology (also known as spelunking or caving) is the exploration or the study of  
caves. Although generally considered a sport, it is also a science, like any type of  
exploration. It is the only way of directly observing and studying part of the endokarst,  
with the result that advances in scientiﬁ c understanding are directly dependent on  
improvements in caving techniques and equipment.  

10.1 Precursors to and Origins of Speleology 

The exploration of caves is undoubtedly as old as the invention of ﬁ re, and therefore  
of artiﬁ cial light. Many caves still conserve evidence of the sometimes far-reaching  
explorations of our ancestors. Visits to the subterranean world were prompted by  
the need for shelter, for water, for game or natural resources, by religious ceremony,  
or  perhaps  even  by  simple  curiosity. What  differentiates  speleology  from  simple  
underground excursions is the end goal of exploration, with specialized transportable  
and reusable equipment. The French caver E.A. Martel is considered the inventor  
of speleology by this deﬁ nition, with his exploration of the Bramabiau cave in the  
Camprieu causse at the end of the 19th century. By following Bonheur Creek, he was  
able to pass through the mountain, from the point where the creek disappeared all the  
way to its re-emergence.  
     It has been estimated that since Martel, approximately 60,000 caves and 15,000  
km of passageways have been explored and mapped in France.  

10.2 The Speleology Community 

The  world  of  caving,  although  it  is  made  up  of  members  with  various  different  
backgrounds  and  interests,  is  nevertheless  a  very  well  organized  microcosm.  
Exploration is a team effort, and it brings together people who have more in common  
than simply their interest in being underground. Programmers, topographers, scientists,  

----------------------- Page 109-----------------------

96   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

engineers, and genius tinkerers, now connected via the Internet, have slowly built a  
community that takes the initiative to self-regulates almost all of its activities, from  
organizing underground rescue operations to managing databases. If a problem related  
to speleology arises, for example the discovery of a cave during a construction project,  
the caving community is quick to respond. There is a multitude of speleology clubs  
and organizations, some as many as 60 years old (Spéléo Club de Paris), with large  
libraries of area-speciﬁ c documentation. 
     The FFS (French Federation of Speleology), founded in 1963, unites almost 8000  
members and over 500 organizations. It edits a magazine, Spelunca, which publishes  
thematically  related  and  region-speciﬁ c  articles,  and  contributes  to  the  academic  
journal Karstologia. Website: www.ffspeleo.fr.  
     In  the  US  the  National  Speleogical  Society  (NSS)  with  10,000  members  is  
the largest organization in the world working to further the exploration, study, and  
protection of caves. Website: caves.org. 
     On  an  international  level,  the  UIS  (Union  Internationale  de  Spéléologie,  or  
International  Union  of  Speleology)  was  founded  in  1965  and  counts  59  member  
countries. Website: uis-speleo.org.  

10.3 Methods in Speleology 

 10.3.1 Subterranean Travel and Speleometry 

Methods and techniques for underground exploration are taught in a few specialized  
books, but are primarily learned through speleological organizations. It should be  
noted that since the advent of single-rope techniques, vertical drops are no longer an  
obstacle to human exploration (Figure 78).  

Several barriers to exploration still remain: 

   •  Narrow passageways. The concept of a cave is an anthropocentric one, based on  
      the dimensions of the human body.  
   •  The length of time spent below ground. Some cave networks extend over 100 km  
      in length, and their exploration requires setting up camps to rest, and therefore  
      transporting sustenance and light. 
   •  High discharge rates in some subterranean rivers. 
   •  Drowned passageways. These can only be explored using diving techniques. 
   •  Disease (histoplasmosis). 
   •  Heat and noxious gases in some hydrothermal or volcanic areas. 

 10.3.2 Cave Diving 

Since caves drain karst aquifers, it is common for diving to be necessary in order to  
explore submerged cavities. In France, the ﬁ rst such explorations took place in the  
Fontaine de Vaucluse, with heavy-footers diving suit and helmet, by Ottonelli in 1878,  
but the breathing tube required for the suit prevented any signiﬁ cant exploration of  
the passageways. It was not until the invention of the autonomous “Le Prieur” then  

----------------------- Page 110-----------------------

                                                         Speleology and Study of the Endokarst          97 

                                Dates 
                                  2025                                               Krubera (Georgia) 
                                                                                                  2200 
                                  2000 
       Single rope techniques 
                                  1975 

        Flexible metal ladders    1950 

                                  1925 

                                  1900 
  Birth of speleology in France 
             with rope  ladders   1875 

                                  1850 
                  Scafholdings 
                                  1825 

                                  1800 

                                  1775 

                                  1750 

                                  1725 
                                        0       250      500     750    1000   1250   1500   1750   2000   2250 

                                                                  Maximum depth 

                     Figure 78. Evolution of underground exploration since 1750. 

“Cousteau-Gagnan” diving equipment with regulator and compressed air tanks that  
signiﬁ cant exploration was possible. It should be noted that J.Y. Cousteau tackled the  
Fontaine de Vaucluse in 1946, reaching a depth of 46 m, only a part of the cave’s total  
known depth of 308 m (Figure 30).  
      The  distances  and  depths  accessible  to  humans  are  highly  dependent  on  
technological advances. The greatest discoveries were a result of using gas mixtures,  
with helium in the 80s and with hydrogen by the pioneer J. Hasenmayer, an innovation  
that allowed him to descend alone to a depth of 200 m in the Fontaine de Vaucluse.  
Today, the use of rebreathers is becoming more widespread, allowing divers to explore  
distances of over a kilometer: 5900 m at the Doux de Coly (Dordogne), and 3000 m  
in the Bestouan (Calanques de Cassis), as well as depths of over 100 m, the French  
record being 240 m at the Goule de la Tannerie (Ardèche). 
      However, human exploration has its limits, and continued efforts can quickly  
become out of the question. For example, at Port Miou, the current record is a dive  
of more than 2 km from the entrance; at a depth of 223 m. Continued exploration is  
possible only with the help of submarine robots. Beyond certain depths, ROVs (Remote  
Operated Vehicles) take over from humans, and have been able to travel down into  
the Fontaine de Vaucluse to a depth of 308 m, and into the Pozzo del Mero to a depth  
of 320 m. However, although a ROV can easily work completely submerged when  
equipped with a tether cable of neutral buoyancy, horizontal displacement over any  
signiﬁ cant distance is impossible. Current ROVs can therefore only explore near- 
vertical shafts. For horizontal passages, the only known exploration technology is the  
specially designed ROV used during the exploration of the Titanic (Cameron Ltd.),  
which was piloted via a ﬁ ber-optic cable that unspooled as the robot made its way  
through the wreckage, and which was abandoned on-site once the project was over. It  
was built out of material that would gradually dissolve over time, so that after a few  
months no trace of the cable remained.  

----------------------- Page 111-----------------------

98   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

10.3.3 Underground Topography of Karst Systems 

10.3.3.1 Objectives and methods 

Topographic surveying is inextricably tied to the work of exploration, and accurate  
mapping of cave systems is at the foundation of any fundamental or applied research  
in the endokarst. The classic tools of the topographer (theodolites, total stations, etc.)  
can be used for the more accessible caves, but in most cases specializes equipment  
that is light and sturdy must be used. This generally includes a compass, a clinometer,  
and a laser distance-meter. The most up-to-date tools are entirely electronic, and can  
record and store data. 
     Data analysis is done with the help of specialized softwares, which have been  
developed, tested, and improved by the speleology community (Compass, Visual topo,  
Toporobot, Cyber topo, GNU Hades topo....). These softwares can create 3D models  
of caves and their surroundings (surface topography, other caves, fault planes, etc.). 
     Angle  measurement  errors  can  be  signiﬁ cant,  and  can  result  from  imprecise  
instruments, possible magnetic disturbances, or reading errors. The quality of the  
measurements can be tested when a passageway being surveyed cuts across a previously  
mapped location. The XYZ offset observed between different measurements for the  
same location gives the measurement precision, which is sometimes less than 2%.  
Softwares can automatically compensate for this type of error. When it is not possible  
to intersect with a pre-existing survey marker, surveyors can do a round trip, taking  
measurements in both directions (Courbon, 2002). For better precision, classic methods  
with a theodolite should be used.  

10.3.3.2 Precision of existing surveys  

It can be risky to use an existing cave map for professional purposes if the map’s  
precision is not known. The degree of precision is a function of the mapmaker’s goal:  
a simple exploratory sketch, a highly detailed description of the cave walls for an  
archaeological dig, a morphological analysis of speleothems, and so on. It is also a  
function of the original surveyor’s attention to detail and of the equipment they used.  
Estimates made using different surveyors’ maps of the same area (Aucant et al., 1971)  
that varied by as much as 100%! The use of laser telemetry starting in the 90s slightly  
increased the accuracy of topographic maps.  
     The BCRA (British Cave Research Association) put forward a precision scale,  
which is now included on some maps, and which estimates their precision. The numeric  
part of the scale indicates the precision of the location and route of the passageways,  
while the letter indicates the precision of the height and width measurements used to  
draw the map. Speleological surveys usually have a BCRA rating of 4C. 

----------------------- Page 112-----------------------

                                                          Speleology and Study of the Endokarst           99 

Table 7. Precision scale for subterranean topographic surveys (after the British Cave Research Association). 

 Degree     Tools                                      Measurement precision 

 1          None                                       Variable 

 2          Graduated rope, compass                    Length to ± 1 m; angles to ± 5° 

 3          Decameter, compass, clinometer             Length to ± 0,5 m; angles to ± 3° 
 4          Compass, navigational compass,             Length to ± 0,1 m; angles to ± 2° 
            decameter, clinometer 

 5          Compass on tripod, Laser range meter,      Length < 10 cm; angles to ± 1° 
            total station 

 6           Compass on tripod, Laser range meter,     More accurate position of stations than grade 5 
            total station 
 X          Theodolite, total station                  Length to ± 5 mm; angles to ± 10–2 °  

Precision of the cave dimensions 

    •  Class A: drawn from memory. 
    •  Class B: widths and heights estimated on-site. 
    •  Class C: widths and heights measured at each station. 
    •  Class D: details measured and notes on-site at each station and between stations. 

   The La Verna tunnel 

   During  the  exploration  of  the  Pierre  St.  Martin  shaft,  speleologists  following  the  river  
   underground  found  an  enormous  chamber,  almost  200  m  in  diameter,  which  the  river  
   ﬂ owed into over a waterfall. Since this occurred near a steep-sided valley, EDF (Electricity  
   of France) proposed a project to generate hydropower by diverting the water. Based on  
   the survey maps created by speleologists (BCRA rating 3B), a tunnel was dug along the  
   side of the valley near Saint Engrace, to reach the chamber. When the tunnel did not hit  
   the chamber where it was expected to be, a team of geometers undertook a second survey  
   (BCRA rating 6C). They found the chamber 400 m away from where it was thought to be.  
   Once the error had been corrected and the chamber ﬁ nally reached, a second surprise  
   awaited the engineers: the river’s discharge had been signiﬁ cantly overestimated, and the  
   project had to be abandoned. Fortunately, the construction was not a complete loss, as it  
   led to the discovery of the Arphidia cave network (cf. chap. 7.6). 

   Currently, thanks to the increased development of renewable energy projects, the diversion  
   has been realized a few years ago. 

10.3.4 Automated Cartography 

Combining the use of video equipment and lasers enables precise cartography and  
3D rendering of caves. In France the Cosquer cave, the La Verna chamber, and the  
Chauvet cave have all been very precisely mapped thanks to these techniques. 
      LIDAR can automatically acquire thousands of spatial data points with a laser  
beam, and is also used to create DTMs (Digital Terrain Models) of the passageways  
and their ﬁ ll level. This allows, for example, the study of paleo-ﬂ ow levels that may  
be responsible for nicks on the cavern walls. This type of work is currently underway  
at the Chauvet cave (Ardèche) in order to study the relationship between prehistoric  
humans and their environment. 

----------------------- Page 113-----------------------

100    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                                                                80 m 

     Figure 79. Automated LIDAR cartography in the La Verna chamber (document ATM3D). 

   Speleothems in the Orgnac sinkhole 

   In order to analyze the external morphology of the stalagmite forest in Room 1 of the Orgnac  
   sinkhole (Ardèche, France), a high-resolution (average grid spacing of 19 mm) survey was  
   undertaken using terrestrial LIDAR. 

   This data was used to create a model of the speleothems, by deﬁ ning series of overlapping  
   ellipses. An analysis of 134 stalagmites, taking into account the geometric ﬂ oor measurements,  
   identiﬁ ed breaks in the stalagmites’ growth linked to activity in a karstic drain.  

   This type of 3D analysis using a dense numeric model allows for the study of fragile or  
   difﬁ cult-to-access objects.  

      Figure 80. Digital envelope around a stalagmite in Orgnac (Ardèche) (Hajri et al., 2009). 

----------------------- Page 114-----------------------

                                                            Speleology and Study of the Endokarst              101 

10.3.5 Locating Caves  

When a cave is already known to exist, it can be useful to precisely position a section of  
the cave, to install a water well for example. The precision of speleologists’ topographic  
surveys depends on a number of factors: the nature of the material, the availability  
of reference markers, and the surveyor’s attention to detail. Generally surveys have a  
1% precision. For instance, in the case of a 300 m deep shaft, with passages extending  
over 2 km, and in which someone wishes to drill a well to reach a gallery that is  
3 m in diameter, the survey precision would be ±3 m of elevation and ±20 m of map  
extent, which would not be enough.  

Two courses of action are then possible: 

    •  Increasing  the  precision  of  the  topographic  survey  using  better  cartographic  
       methods, 
    •  Guiding the drill by using a magnetic or electromagnetic beacon.  

10.3.6 Radiolocation 

Radiolocation  involves  finding  the  depth  and  position  of  an  emitter  located  
underground, using a radio receiver array at the surface. The beacon can be hung  
from a cavern ceiling, attached to a tripod, or left on a buoy in a body of water in the  
area to be located.  

                             square  
                             antenna 

                                                                                            earth surface 
                     parallel to   
             1     to field lines : 
                                                      epicenter 
                      no signal                                   D          T 

                                                                        tangent to 
                              perpendicular                         3   to field lines : 
                          2   to field lines : 
                                                                        no signal  
                              maximum signal  

                                                                    cave 

                                        vertical solenoide  
                                        emitter 

                         Figure 81. Principles or radiolocation by Hertzian beam. 

----------------------- Page 115-----------------------

102    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      The receiver array is then transported at the surface above the cave, and reports  
the strongest signal when it is perpendicular to the  ﬁ eld lines. The signal cancels  
itself out when the receivers are parallel to the ﬁ eld lines. The different cancellation  
directions observed are drawn along the ground, and the emitter can be located at the  
intersection of these lines. 
      In order to ﬁ nd the depth, the receptors are placed perpendicular to the ﬁ eld, at  
a distance D from the epicenter, and is tilted at an angle θ until the signal cancels  
out. The receiver is then tangent to the ﬁ eld lines. The depth can be found using the  
following formula. 

                                            3tan q     9 tan2  q + 8 
                                          . 
                                 P = D    
                                                        4 
      This method has been used to ﬁ nd underground rivers in order to pump water  
from them through wells (Table 8). 

                       Table 8. Examples of wells drilled based on radiolocation. 

 Location                                                  Depth in m                   Purpose 
 Vitarelles network, Lot, France                              120                    Water supply 
 Qattine Azar, Lebanon (Courbon, 2002)                        280                    Water supply 
 Trou qui Soufﬂ e, Vercors, France                            300                    Water supply 
 Ressel Spring, Lot, France                                     95                   Water supply 
 Labeil cave                                                   26                       Cabling 

10.3.7 Magnetometry 

Magnetometry  involves  placing  a  carefully  oriented  magnet  in  the  cave  whose  
location is to be determined. This method is useful in submerged passageways that  
are accessible to divers. It was used to drill water wells in the Lez spring (cf. chap.  
13) and the access well to the “Cloche 500” in the underground river at Port Miou  
(Marseille, France), at the respective depths of 880 m and 46 m below the surface (cf.  
chap. 14). This technique was also used in 1987 to choose a location for the 250 m  
long well drilled into the Trou du Garde in Féclaz (Dévoluy, France), using nuclear  
magnetic resonance magnetometers developed by CEA-Leti (a French research and  
technology organization).  
      Because locating the magnet in the cave is a complex operation requiring costly  
technology,  radiolocation  is  often  preferable. This  is  particularly  true  now  that  
waterproof beacons exist that can be used in submerged caves (Figure 82). 

10.4 The Impacts of Speleology on Water Quality in Wells in  
        Karst Aquifers 

Although speleologists are the primary source of direct observations of underground  
water sources, they are also considered by some professional hydrologists as potentially  
harmful to water quality. Caving is therefore prohibited in certain caves used as sources  
of drinking water in France (Brudour Cave, Embut de Caussols, Trou du Garde), a  

----------------------- Page 116-----------------------

                                                 Speleology and Study of the Endokarst      103 

                Figure 82. Waterproof beacon (photo M. Douchet, Valade-minage). 

decision that prompted a study on what the real effects speleologists have on water  
quality (Hobléa and Picollier, 2007). The study was done on caves in the mountains  
around Vercors (Brudour cave) and Bauges (Trou du Garde at Féclaz), and showed  
that visits by groups of cavers signiﬁ cantly increased turbidity only in one case, and  
that they had no signiﬁ cant effect on the water’s bacterial content. Based on this study,  
and in response to pressure from speleologists, who discovered the water resource in  
the ﬁ rst place and had a hand in tapping it, the regulations at the Trou du Garde were  
revised to allow access to all but a few critical passageways near the pumping station. 

----------------------- Page 117-----------------------

                                         1111 
                           Karst Aquifers 

11.1 Particular Characteristics 

Karst  aquifers  are  a  particular  type  of  fractured  aquifers.  Unlike  other  fractured  
aquifers, in karst the water circulating through the network of discontinuities dissolves  
the surrounding rock, creating a very anisotropic aquifer. Dissolution favors further  
circulation of water, creating a hierarchically structured system, from the catchment  
basin down to the point of outﬂ ow. A karst system is therefore similar to a surface  
hydrographic system, where small streams high in the watershed converge downstream,  
ﬂ owing  together  into  progressively  larger,  but  less  numerous,  waterways.  Karst  
evolves  rapidly  as  a  function  of  climate,  which  determines  when  the  system  will  
downcut and when it will ﬁ ll in, resulting in a geometry that varies over time, and  
therefore in complex functioning (Mangin, 2008). The study and modeling of karst  
aquifers is therefore complex, because unlike porous aquifers, they cannot be assigned  
a representative volume element (RVE), and their geometry and functioning can be  
understood only through the study of karstogenesis in the area.  

A karst hydrosystem has 4 permeable aspects: 

   •  A generally non-porous matrix, excepting certain carbonate rocks such as chalk  
      or dolomite, 
   •  Microﬁ ssures units that have a high porosity but a low permeability,  
   •  Active drainages, which have less holding capacity, but through which water can  
      ﬂ ow rapidly (velocities of ten to a hundred meters per hour), which are more or  
      less connected to the previously mentioned structures, 
   •  Paleo-drainages and paleo-cavities from previous stages of karstiﬁ cation (which  
      may have occurred a very long time ago), which may be more or less ﬁ lled in,  
      and more or less closely connected to the current drainages.  

11.2 Geometry of the Aquifer and Surrounding System 

The different zones of a karst system, outlined above, are of course the result of water,  
and therefore have hydrogeologic signiﬁ cance. 

----------------------- Page 118-----------------------

                                                                         Karst Aquifers   105 

   •  The  epikarst  is  a  highly  permeable,  relatively  homogeneous  environment,  
      able  to  store  a  non-negligible  portion  of  inﬂ ow  from  precipitation,  which  
      creates an epikarst aquifer near the surface that percolates slowly down to the  
      deeper karst aquifers or returns to the atmosphere through evapotranspiration.  
      In Mediterranean karsts, the epikarst has easily recoverable reserves of 15 to  
      30 mm.  
   •  The  vertical  transit  zone  is  a  generally  unsaturated  region,  where  perennial  
      water ﬂ ow fed by the epikarst or by losing streams, and temporary ﬂ ow from  
      precipitation events transits through. If the lithology and structure are favorable  
      it can have perched aquifers within it.  
   •  The phreatic, or saturated, zone makes up the primary karst aquifer and serves  
      as the system’s deep reserves. It is a permeable zone, generally with horizontal  
      drainages along its top. It can include annex-to-drain systems, areas with a high  
      water storage capacity that are nevertheless poorly connected to the drainage  
      network. 
   •  The epiphreatic zone is the range of depths between the highest and lowest levels  
      that the water table ﬂ uctuates between. It plays an important role as the site of  
      gas exchanges between the aquifer and the atmosphere of the unsaturated zone. 
   •  Finally, at the lowest level of the system, there is the zone of emergence, which  
      usually contains a small number of springs.  

     Multiple karstiﬁ cation can result in the superposition of these different zones,  
creating a system whose complexity reﬂ ects its history. As a result, different karst  
systems can behave in vastly different and sometimes disconcerting ways. 
     It should be noted that parts of the above description of a karst system are still  
subject to debate, particularly with respect to the nature of deep karst aquifers in the  
saturated zone. Is the water mainly held in the fracture network (Drogue, 1974) or  
in karstic voids (Mangin, 1994)? Completely dry areas must exist in the saturated  
zone, as evidenced by the number of wells drilled into the saturated zone that are  
nevertheless dry. Experiments that involve artiﬁ cial waterhead augmentation in cave  
network or pumping from karst conduits have shown that the rock units around the  
karst conduits are generally impermeable. Coastal and submarine karst aquifers that  
remain uncontaminated by salt water serve as more examples of how impermeable the  
surrounding rock and fracture network can be (cf. chap. 14). This supports the idea  
that the majority of water reserves in karst aquifers are stored in karstic cavities. The  
available storage volume would then be dependent on the area’s paleokarstiﬁ cation.  
Older  areas,  where  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  karstiﬁ cation  phases  would  be  
more likely to hold signiﬁ cant groundwater reserves. For example, the aquifers in  
the Jurassic limestones of Provence (France) may exist today because that area has  
been undergoing almost continuous karstiﬁ cation since the Cretaceous, and has seen  
signiﬁ cant variation in base level as a result of isostatic adjustments, tectonic activity,  
post-glacial rebounds, and the Messinian Salinity Crisis (cf. chap. 8).  
     The particular characteristics of any given aquifer are, however, a function of the  
type of discontinuities present, of the various constraints particular to the area, and of  
the hydrodynamic system (cf. chap. 20). For example, under high pressure conditions  
water can ﬂ ow into discontinuities even if they would normally be closed. It is prudent  

----------------------- Page 119-----------------------

106    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

to consider that there is not only one model for karst systems, and that each system  
will be differently shaped by the history and characteristics of the carbonate units it  
develops in. These characteristics will determine the shape of the fracture and drainage  
networks that will eventually hold the water in the saturated zone. 

11.3 Behavior of a Karst System 

The behavior of a karst system depends on the surrounding rock structure and its  
geologic history, and on the climate, which determines the amount of precipitation.  
Soil thickness above the epikarst and the importance of vegetation cover (which affects  
the amount of water percolating downwards) also have a signiﬁ cant effect.  

11.3.1 The Epikarst and the Unsaturated Zone 

During rainy periods, water inﬁ ltrates into the epikarst and also feeds rapid vertical ﬂ ow  
down into the deeper parts of the karst aquifer. If the epikarst is saturated, precipitation  
will also ﬂ ush water through the system, increasing the amount of water ﬂ owing to  
deeper areas. When vertical drainage paths can no longer accommodate the inﬂ ow,  
dolines and poljes ﬁ ll with water, forming temporary lakes and streams as the epikarst  
overﬂ ows. The Lac de Rives (Hérault) and the lakes in the Hospitalet causse (Larzac)  
are two French examples of such features. 
     Water continues to move into deeper parts of the system even after the precipitation  
stops, sustained by percolation in the epikarst and by losing streams at the surface.  
During dry periods, the epikarst can become completely drained and surface streams  
run dry, slowing and then bringing to a halt the vertical transit of water. However,  
perched aquifers in the epikarst, although still poorly understood, appear to play a  
role in temporarily storing water within the unsaturated zone. 

11.3.2 The Saturated Zone and the Drainage Network 

During periods of precipitation, a rapid inﬂ ux of water moving downwards feeds into  
the deeper karst. The system’s behavior depends on whether or not it encompasses  
a saturated zone with deep reserves. If these reserves are absent, groundwater ﬂ ows  
through the system in much the same way, as it would move through a surface drainage  
network. The discharge increases, then gradually decreases as a function of the amount  
of water ﬂ owing in.  
     When a deep aquifer does exist, precipitation creates an incoming wave that acts as  
a piston, ﬂ ushing water through storage systems and prompting an immediate increase  
in discharge at the springs draining the system. The movement of water is therefore  
a result of pressure changes. In either scenario, the increased discharge may exceed  
the capacity of the drainage network. If this occurs, the water level in the epiphreatic  
zone rises, and water can ﬂ ow back up into normally dry galleries, ﬂ ooding fossilized  
levels and driving the water towards temporary perched springs. These changes in the  
height of the water table often exceed a hundred meters.  

----------------------- Page 120-----------------------

                                                                                     Karst Aquifers      107 

      During  the  dry  season,  discharge  gradually  decreases  as  the  water  stored  in  
compartments  connected  to  the  drainage  network  is  used  up.  In  some  cases,  the  
discharge can decrease to zero, but a lack of discharge does not necessarily mean that  
there is no water left in the system—some water can be stored at elevations beneath  
the springs, and so cannot exit the system.  

                                   REVEST SHAFT (Gourdon - France) 

     m 
       
     n 
    i 
       
    l 
     e 
     v 
     e 
    l 
       
     r 
     e 
    t 
     a 
     w 
    d 
     n 
     u 
     o 
     r 
     g 

     m 
     m 
       
     n 
    i 
       
     s 
    l 
     o 
     s 
     s 
     u 
     a 
    C 
       
     n 
    i 
       
    l 
    l 
     a 
    f 
     n 
    i 
     a 
     r 

 Figure 8 3. Fluctuations in the water table at the Gouffre du Revest (Gourdon, Alpes-Maritimes). 

11.3.3 Springs 

Springs are the endpoints for karst systems, and quality and quantity of water they  
discharge is therefore dependent on the state of the system it issues from. Monitoring  
stations set up at various springs, combined with individual measurements of three  
parameters: discharge, temperature, and conductivity, provide good information on  
how the system as a whole functions. 
      Periods of precipitation generally result in an abrupt increase in discharge that  
begins with the water that was already in the system being pushed out in a warm  
wave with a high dissolved mineral load, followed by decreasing discharge made up  
of colder rainwater with low amounts of dissolved minerals, and ﬁ nally a return to  
the initial state of the spring (Figure 84). 
      Karst springs can have highly variable discharge, and the lowest and highest  
discharges in a year often differ by one order of magnitude. 

----------------------- Page 121-----------------------

108      KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                      Figure 84. Salinity and temperature variations in a karst spring. 

   Fontesorbes: An intermittent spring 

   There are almost a hundred known intermittent springs like the one at Fontestorbes (Belesta,  
    France), with a discharge that ﬂ uctuates regularly from a few tens of liters per second to  
                  3  –1 
   almost 2 m .s        with a periodicity of 61 minutes. The spring is connected to the Caoujous  
   Cave, through which runs an underground river. The cave also contains a sump where strong  
   variations in the water level have been observed. The spring was originally interpreted as the  
   result of a system where a reservoir ﬁ lled up and then emptied through a siphon. However,  
   later on A. Mangin (1969) attempted to model the spring’s behavior and showed that a simple  
   siphon was not enough to explain the ﬂ uctuations in discharge, and that an air intake was  
   needed to create a functional model (Figure 85).  

                        Curves                                                        Model 

  level 
                                                                                              air intake  
  variations  
  1n cm 
  in 

    40 

                                                                                                          q 

                                                         siphon 
    20 

      0                                                                                                     
                                                      time 
              1      2       3      4      5      5   in h          Q 

                          with q  constant filling flow and Q  variable discharge 

                  When the air intake is active, Q is lower than q and the reservoir fills in.  
                   When the water level reaches the air intake, Q becomes higher than q 
                                             and the reservoir empties 

Figure 85. Intermittent spring at Fontestorbes (Bélesta, France). The constant discharge is represented  
by q and the variable discharge by Q. When the air intake is open, Q is less than q and the reservoir ﬁ lls up  
           until the intake is submerged. Q then becomes greater than q and the reservoir empties. 

11.4 Quantitative and Qualitative Consequences 

Karst aquifers are notably difﬁ cult to use as resources. Their highly variable discharge  
rates mean that only part of the theoretically available water supply is actually usable.  

----------------------- Page 122-----------------------

                                                                                Karst Aquifers      109 

This is also problematic in designing catchment systems with appropriate capacities and  
security measures. Catchment structures that are too small are vulnerable to ﬂ ooding  
and are unable to take advantage of periods of high discharge. Conversely, catchment  
structures that are too large become unusable during dry periods. 
      In addition problems of quantity, there are also problems of water quality, such  
as high turbidity and bacterial contamination, due to the lack of ﬁ ltration as the water  
passes through a karst aquifer. There are two potential reasons for high turbidity: it  
can be a result of turbidity in the drainage basin, or it can occur when relict galleries  
are ﬂ ooded, and the turbulent water ﬂ owing through stirs up old sedimentary deposits  
and becomes loaded with clay particles. 
      Bacterial contamination comes from the surface (from water ﬂ owing directly into  
ponors, or from wastewater being discharged into the ground), and because of the short  
residence time (often less than a week) and absence of ﬁ ltration mechanisms in karst  
aquifers, the bacterial load is not much reduced by water’s passage through the aquifer.  

 11.5 Circulation in Hydrothermal Systems  

The existence of hypogenic caves has revealed aquifers that are drained per ascensum .  
Water in deep reservoirs becomes loaded with minerals and thermal energy, which it  
can conserve if it rises quickly enough to the surface.  
      A recent study (Thiébaud, 2008) on workings of the La Léchère (Savoie, France)  
hydrothermal system showed that water circulates in a low pressure area fed by both  
surface water circulation and by heated water from the deeper parts of the system.  
B. Blavoux (1995) demonstrated that thermal waters are primarily fed by inﬁ ltrated  
meteoric water. This is indeed the case at La Léchère, where, at the beginning of its  
journey, the water in the system reacts with dolomite, cargneule, and gypsum (Ca,  
SO , Mg), before following a different path from the surface water, travelling through  
    4 
the basement rock over the course of several thousand years, during which it picks  
up Cl, Si, K, as well as organic material and H S from Permo-Carboniferous rocks.  
                                                           2 
When this deep water ﬂ ows back up towards the surface, it mixes with the surface  
water near the springs where it ﬁ nally emerges.  
      The Mescla cave (Malaussène, France) behaves in a similar way, and cave divers  
have observed deep isolated conduits that supply hot, salty water to the system. The  
water comes from deep circulations along the sides and bottom of a Jurassic limestone  
syncline, at the contact with the evaporitic Triassic substrate (Reynaud, 2000). 
      The movement of water back up towards the surface is in part a result of the  
hydraulic gradient between the springs where it emerges and the inﬁ ltration zone,  
but is also due to the water heating up and releasing CO  or H S, both processes that  
                                                                     2      2 
result in decreased density and allow the water to ﬂ ow up through the upper levels of  
the karst aquifer, which contain colder and denser water.  

----------------------- Page 123-----------------------

                                                        1212 
                Aquifer Characterization 

 12.1 Geometry of Karst Systems 

 12.1.1 Geologic Structure 

One  of  the  ﬁ rst  steps  in  understanding  a  karst  system  is  deﬁ ning  the  aquifer  and  
aquiclude geometry. This type of analysis requires a geologist’s approach: surface  
mapping, exploratory wells, and geophysical surveys.  
       In areas with complex structure, in the Alps or the Pyrénées, it is not always easy  
to determine even the approximate relationships between permeable and impermeable  
units.  
       Figure 86 shows an example in the Préalps near Grasse (France). The Caussols  
unit  forms  a  limestone  reservoir  that  is  partially  drained  towards  the  underlying  
Malle unit. To the north, the Calern thrust unit shows a similar structure. In such  
complex environments, speleological exploration and tracer studies provide precious  
information. For example, at Calern, the Calernaum Shaft follows the contact between  
the  Calern  limestone  and  the  Caussols  marl  for  several  kilometers.  Speleological  
exploration in the cave found that groundwater was ﬂ owing northwards, and tracer  
tests conﬁ rmed that it then turned to the south. 

                 infiltration and                                                              CALERN PLATEAU 
                 ground water  
                 circulation                                                               OCA         Calern perched 
                                                                                                       water body     NORTH 
                                               CAUSSOLS PLATEAU             thrust fault 

         LA MALLE PLATEAU                                         embut 
                                                                          polje 
  SOUTH                 thrust                                                         Cretaceous 
                        fault 
                                taceous 
                             Cre 
                                                                                          karst aquifer 
                           Jurassic 

                                         Triassic 

                                                                                                 towards Bramafan springs 

Figure  86.  Difference s  between  topographic  drainage  basins  and  hydrogeologic  drainage  basins  
                                              (Alpes Maritimes, France). 

----------------------- Page 124-----------------------

                                                               Aquifer Characterization    111 

12.1.2 The process of Karstiﬁ cation and of Spatial Organization in the  
         Endokarst 

Multiple phases determine the extent and the geometry of karstiﬁ cation. Areas that  
have been subject to several periods of uplift and exposure suggest the existence of  
highly  karstiﬁ ed,  and  therefore  high-capacity  zones. The  spatial  organization  and  
therefore the workings of an aquifer are a function of the paleogeography of the base  
level, which determines preferential ﬂ ow axes.  
     Information provided by cavers is therefore important. For example, cave diving  
exploration revealed the extent and the geometry of drainage passageways in the south  
of France, and thereby led to our current understanding of the Messinian Salinity  
Crisis’ important role in speleogenesis in the area.  

12.2 Data Collection 

      “Better one person who knows than ten who are searching.…” 

12.2.1 Bibliography and Preliminary Data Gathering 

Sources of information are numerous and varied: national databases, universities,  
drilling organizations, private consulting ﬁ rms, naturalists’ associations, caving clubs,  
etc. Even so, the study of karst is somewhat similar to a police investigation, where  
every tiny detail is important. It is therefore often useful to practice “bistrot geology”:  
a day spent at the local bar or cafe where hunters and ﬁ shermen congregate often  
yields precious information, such as the exact locations of seasonal or hidden springs.  

12.2.2 Fieldwork 

Hydrogeologic analysis requires hydrometric, climatic, physical, and chemical data.  
To calculate a hydrologic budget for a basin, all the inputs and outputs need to be  
measured ﬁ rst.  

12.2.2.1 Weather data and catchment basins 

A  main  difﬁ culty  is  to  obtain  reliable,  well-distributed  weather  data  covering  the  
basin in question. The current trend is unfortunately towards fewer and fewer weather  
monitoring stations, but better technology is making it easier for individuals to set up  
small stations with very little effort. These cannot, however, provide older data from  
previous years. Additionally, it is important to avoid confusing topographic basins with  
geologic basins (Figure 86). Setting up instrumentation on a basin therefore requires  
an initial understanding of its geologic limits. 

----------------------- Page 125-----------------------

112    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

12.2.2.2 Hydrometry 

Although it may seem a simple matter to measure karst springs, in fact several factors  
make it a complex operation: 

    •  Highly variable discharge. Peak discharges are often not measured because the  
       sensors in use are not equipped to handle such large volumes. 
    •  Temporary springs, which are sometimes several kilometers away from the main  
       spring, discharge some of the water exiting the system. 
    •  Some springs are hidden (springs that emerge on the sea ﬂ oor or that are covered  
      by permeable alluvium). 
    •  The  aquifer  can  overﬂ ow  into  other  aquifers  or  receive  inﬂ ows  from  other  
       aquifers, all below ground. 
      The total discharge is therefore often underestimated.  

                                                                          3 –1 
            Figure 87. Fontaine de Vaucluse (France) hydrograph in m .s       (2001–2004). 

12.2.3 Piezometry 

The geometry of an aquifer in a porous medium can be determined by using a network  
of piezometers. In karst regions, this process is more difﬁ cult for several reasons: 

    •  the aquifers are often at great depth, 
    •  there is a high likelihood that any boreholes that need to be drilled will pass  
      through karstic voids or cave-ins, which requires a larger initial diameter and is  
      therefore more expensive, 
    •  there is a risk that a piezometer will be in an impermeable block, or in an area  
      that is not connected to the aquifer. 

----------------------- Page 126-----------------------

                                                                           Aquifer Characterization          113 

      The sumps seen in some caves can serve as natural piezometers, providing a  
view of the karst water table, and the water level can be monitored at minimal cost by  
installing an autonomous piezometric sensor that can store data collected over long  
periods of time (Figure 83). 

12.2.4 Water Quality Analyses 

 12.2.4.1 Physical, chemical, and microbiological characteristics  

Changes in the different physical and chemical characteristics of water reﬂ ect the  
conditions deep within the aquifer. For example, water saturated in CaCO  suggests  
                                                                                                     3 
a long residence time in the phreatic zone.  
      Natural tracers (physical, chemical, isotopic, or microbiological) are a powerful  
tool for understanding groundwater. Indeed, at every point where groundwater can  
be observed below the surface (piezometers, caves, etc.) or as it emerges (springs,  
man-made  catchment  systems,  passageways,  wells,  or  boreholes),  water  carries  
information about its provenance and the sources of its dissolved minerals, the overall  
hydrologic budget of its recharge zone, the different inputs from various parts of the  
hydrologic system, its residence time in the reservoir, and any natural or anthropogenic  
contamination. This information can be read and understood if the various components  
present in the water appear in detectable concentrations. 

 12.2.4.2 Isotopes 

Isotopes  provide  essential  information  when  the  existing  data  is  insufﬁ cient  and  
traditional methods are inadequate. Table 9 outlines the major applications of the most  
common  tracers:  provenance,  recharge  volume  and  timing,  water-gas  interactions  
(CO , H S), and water-rock interactions (silicates, carbonates, sulfur, evaporites, etc.),  
      2    2 
residence time in the phreatic zone or in conﬁ ned aquifers, pollution sources, etc.  

                           T able 9. Major isotopes used in hydrogeologic surveys. 

 ISOTOPE         Stable                                                           Radioactive 
 In water        18O Recharge elevation. 

                 Seasonal phase shifts. 
                 Paleo-recharge. 

                 2     18                                                         3 
                  H +    O Soil,vadose and phreatic zone evaporation.             H dating: < 30 years 
                 Carbonate/silicate exchanges. 
                 H S exchanges. 
                   2 

                 13C Vegetation type.                                             14C dating: < 25,000 years 

                 Deep/biogenic CO  exchanges. 
                                     2 
                 Solid carbonate exchanges. 
                 Dating. 
 In solutes      34S Sulfur origins: pyrite oxidation/evaporites                  36Cl dating: < 250,000 years 
                 15N Nitrogen origins: 

                 fertilizer/livestock/wastewater 
                 87Sr Origins of dissolved minerals: 

                basement/evaporites/carbonates  

----------------------- Page 127-----------------------

114     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

   Determining the catchment basin of an aquifer: the Fontaine de Vaucluse  
   (Blavoux et al., 1992; Malzieu, 1987) 

   In order to determine the average elevation of an aquifer’s large, diffuse recharge zone (the  
   Vaucluse system), samples are taken from springs with well-understood recharge zones  
   in a similar geologic, geomorphologic, and climatic environment (Figure 88). Samples are  
   taken simultaneously, during the dry season (when the aquifer’s reserves are emptying  
   out), from the reference springs and from the spring under study. The reference springs are  
   then used to adjust the 18O-elevation relationship curve (whether by using a linear function  

   or, in the Mediterranean, where there is no linear relationship between effective rainfall and  
                                                        18 
   elevation, an exponential curve). Indeed the δ O changes with temperature (low elevation  
   Æ hot Æ not very negative, high elevation Æ cold Æ very negative).  

   The following reference graph (Figure 88) is a guide to estimating the average recharge  
   elevation for Mediterranean aquifers. 

                          18O (G% )   

                           - 7 
                                                                        (0.18481) 
                                               - delta = 2.5428* Zi 
                                               r = 0.950* 
                           - 8 

                                 - 8,8 

                           - 9 

                         - 10 

                                               850 
                          - 11 
                               0                                   1000                               2000 
                                          watershed average elevation  (m) 

                           F igure 88. Average recharge elevation of an aquifer. 

12.3 Data Analysis 

12.3.1 Hydrometric Data 

12.3.1.1 Discharge 

A karst spring is the ﬁ nal exit point for water that has passed through a complex system  
of reservoirs and passageways. A simple examination of discharge curves, coupled with  
precipitation graphs, provides a great deal of insight into karstiﬁ cation. A very short  
response time indicates either a system with a well-developed drainage network or with  
a low storage capacity, while a longer, more softened response time indicates either a  
system with very high storage capacity or with a poorly developed drainage network.  
The following graph (Figure 89), where even the slightest precipitation event results  
in a spike in discharge, shows a system with a small storage capacity, as evidenced  
by the fact that it can be completely drained in two months. Additionally, the slope  
breaks visible during the dry period indicate that there are two compartments within  
the reservoir, a hypothesis conﬁ rmed by the system’s geological and structural context. 

----------------------- Page 128-----------------------

       Aquifer Characterization       115 

 . 
N 
E 
R 
I 
D 
   
 , 
O 
R 
D 
Y 
H 
   
 m 
 o 
 r 
f 
   
 a 
t 
 a 
D 
   
 . 
) 
 s 
 e 
 m 
i 
t 
i 
 r 
 a 
M 
   
 s 
 e 
 p 
l 
A 
( 
   
 m 
 a 
 r 
é 
 c 
 u 
L 
   
 e 
d 
   
 x 
 u 
 o 
F 
   
 e 
h 
t 
   
f 
 o 
   
t 
 x 
 e 
t 
 n 
 o 
 c 
   
l 
 a 
 r 
 u 
t 
 c 
 u 
 r 
t 
 s 
   
d 
 n 
 a 
   
 e 
 g 
 r 
 a 
h 
 c 
 s 
i 
D 
   
 . 
 9 
 8 
   
 e 
 r 
 u 
 g 
i  
F 

----------------------- Page 129-----------------------

116     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

 12.3.1.2 Flow-duration curves 

A more in-depth analysis of the discharge data can yield even more information about  
the system.  
       Speciﬁ c events like a sudden outﬂ ow at depth, an inﬂ ux of water, a seasonal spring  
beginning to ﬂ ow, or a particular compartment emptying itself, can be identiﬁ ed by  
using ﬂ ow-duration curves. These events show up as slope breaks or changes on a  
hydrograph (Mangin, 1975; Marsaud, 1997).  

  frequency 
    %                                                          % 
                    high percentages rupture                                     low percentages rupture 
  99.9                                                       99.9 

                                       D2 
                                                                                                 D2 
   99                                                         99 

                            B                    D2                                                          D2 
                                                                                C 
   90                                                         90 
              D1                     A                                                          D 

   70                                                         70 
                        D1                                          D1 
   50                                                         50             D1 
   30                                                         30 
   10                                                         10 
                                                     discharge                                                   discharge 

                                         Figu re 90. Flow-duration curves. 

       Table 10. The workings of karst systems, deduced from ﬂ ow-duration curves (cf. Figure 90). 

 Example        Slope     Position of the        Interpretation 
                          slope break 
 A             C2 > C1     High percentages      - Activation of an overﬂ ow basin 
                                                 - Outﬂ ow to another system 
                                                 - Temporary storage 
                                                 - Leakage or overﬂ ow at the gauging station during high- 
                                                   water episodes 
 B             C2 < C1                           - Inﬂ ow from another system 
                                                 - The gauging station is measuring ﬂ ood discharge that  
                                                   includes water from another system 
 C             C2 < C1     Low percentages       - Inﬂ ow from a reservoir that was created during a previous  
                                                   cycle 
 D             C2 > C1                           - Water being stored in a reservoir 
               C2 > C1    Double break           - A reservoir being cut off as the water level drops, and then  
               C3 < C2                             being reconnected during the low-water period 

 12.3.1.3 Hydrographic recession curves 

Hydrodynamic  parameters  can  be  deﬁ ned  through  the  study  of  recession  curves.  
For example, the curves can yield information about the coefﬁ cients for recession,  
inﬁ ltration, and ﬂ ow heterogeneity, as well as providing a way to estimate the system’s  
dynamic volume. This last value can be found from the discharge at the slope break  
(Q , t ), when recession begins (Figure 91): 
    i  i 

                                                   V      = c . Q /α 
                                                     dyn           i 

       Where c is a time constant (c = 86400 when Qi is in m3                            –1 
                                                                                       .s   and α is in days)  

----------------------- Page 130-----------------------

                                                                                  Aquifer Characterization              117 

         3  -1 
  Q(t) m .s 
                                                
                RECESSION                     DRYING UP 

   q0          q = q   1 - Kt                                                                     q 
                     0 1 + Ht 

                                                        -Dt 
                                             Q = QRO e                                                                 Q 
           Q i  
 Q 
   RO 

                             t i  
          1                       10                      100       time in days 

Figure  91. Recession curve (Mangin, 1975). This system includes a reservoir (epikarst and unsaturated  
                           zone) that empties into another reservoir, the saturated zone. 

12.3.1.4 Classiﬁ cation of karst systems 

Mangin (1975) created a classiﬁ cation for karst systems, based on the analysis of two  
coefﬁ cients, K and i. 

    •  K (regulation coefﬁ cient) represents the average residence time for water in  
        the saturated zone. It is equal to the relationship between the greatest dynamic  
        volume over a long time period and the interannual transit volume (the volume  
        discharged during the most cycles divided by the number of cycles) calculated  
        over the same time period. In normally functioning karst systems, K is often  
        under 0.5. 
    •  i (inﬁ ltration delay coefﬁ cient: 0 < i < 1) is equal to the discharge two days after  
        a ﬂ ood peak. A high i value indicates slow inﬁ ltration or strong inﬂ uence from  
        the epikarst. A low i value is the sign of short transit times to the saturated zone. 

The different types of karst systems are as follows: 

    •   Type 1: Highly developed drainage network and small saturated zone. 
    •   Type 2: Well developed drainage network leading to a signiﬁ cant karst system  
        in the saturated zone. 
    •   Type 3: Karst systems that are more well-developed downstream than upstream,  
        with delayed inﬂ uxes. 
    •   Type 4: Complex karst systems. 
    •   Type 5: Systems with poorly developed or mostly inactive karstiﬁ cation (fractured  
        aquifer, paleokarsts). 

12.3.1.5 Systemic approach 

Systemic approach (Mangin, 1975), takes into account the aquifer in its entirety, and  
deﬁ nes the karst system as a sort of black box with deﬁ nite inputs and outputs, that can  

----------------------- Page 131-----------------------

118    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

     i 
 1 
 0,9                                       Fontaine               Chamsine 
                                                                                    Aïn ez Zarka 
 0.8                                       l'Evèque     Anjar 
              1          Fontaine de 
 0,7                     Vaucluse 
 0,6 
 0,5                                     Fontestorbes                       5 
 0,4                  2 
 0,3                           Baget 

 0,2 
                         
 0,1   Alliou         3                     4 
 0                                                                                                       K 
     0,01                   0,1                      1                      10                      100 

          Figure 92. Classiﬁ cation of karst systems (after Mangin, 1975 and El Hakim, 2005). 

be described using multiple parameters (rainfall, height of the water table, hydrometry,  
physical and chemical characteristics, etc.). 
      The signals that the system receives and transmits can be analyzed with many  
different  methods:  correlations,  spectral  analysis,  wavelet  analysis,  fractal  or  
multifractal analysis, and dynamical systems attractor analysis (Mangin, 2008). These  
analyses enable the identiﬁ cation of point-speciﬁ c or recurring events (tides, snow  
fusion, etc.) within the overall system response.  

12.3.2 Temperature and Conductivity 

The transit time for water entering the system as precipitation is easy to ﬁ nd, based on  
the delay between the abrupt discharge increase that follows a precipitation event and  
the subsequent change in water temperature. The mass of incoming water displaces  
water already in the aquifer, resulting in an almost immediate increase in discharge  
at the spring, whereas the change in temperature of the water coming out indicates  
that new water has reached the spring. Using hydrographs and the delays between  
different  responses,  it  is  therefore  possible  to  estimate  the  reservoir  size  and  the  
system’s response time.  

12.4 Tracer Tests in Karst Systems 

12.4.1 Objectives and Difﬁ culties 

Tracer tests (or dye tests) involve injecting some product that is not naturally found in  
the water at a point upstream, and then looking for it downstream, in springs, rivers,  
caves, or wells. This was how Norbert Casteret discovered, in 1931, the true source  
of the Garonne River, by pouring ﬂ uorescein into the Trou du Toro in Spain; the dye  
reappeared in the Goueil de Jouéou before ﬂ owing across the border into France.  
      In some cases, tracer tests happen by accident, as was the case in 1901, when  
a ﬁ re broke out at the Pernod distillery in Pontarlier (Doubs, France), and all of the  

----------------------- Page 132-----------------------

                                                             Aquifer Characterization   119 

alcohol and liquor stored nearby was dumped into the river to prevent it from catching  
ﬁ re and destroying the town. A few days later, the waters of the Loue spring began to  
smell like absinthe, proving that it was somehow connected to the water being lost  
from Doubs River. 
     When planning a tracer test, it is best to seek out locations where large amounts  
of water concentrate and move down into the system, particularly locations that have  
a year-round ﬂ ow of water (ponors, natural caves with underground waterways, losing  
streams, etc.). This ensures that the tracer will be carried all the way into the deeper  
aquifer. In the event that no such entry points can be found, the tracer can be ﬂ ushed  
into the aquifer by injecting a large amount of water with it, into areas likely to absorb  
both (dolines, karren ﬁ elds, etc.), but there is always a risk that the tracer will remain  
trapped near the surface and never make it all the way into the aquifer. 
     In order to reduce costs, multiple tracer tests are often done at the same time, by  
injecting different tracers at different points in a karst system, and by simultaneously  
monitoring different potential exit points: springs, caves, wells, etc. 
     Tracer tests are always delicate and costly operations, requiring a careful operating  
protocol and rigorous interpretation. A few common problems that can lead to failure  
are listed below: 

   •  Not enough tracer was used. 
   •   The number of potential exit locations being monitored was insufﬁ cient. 
   •   The tracer was injected into an impermeable part of the aquifer. 
   •   The monitoring period was too short. 
   •   The monitoring instruments were lost (because of ﬂ ood or theft). 
   •   The samplers were too worn down, or were saturated with organic material. 
   •   The person collecting the samples did not wash their hands well enough and  
      contaminated the samples. 
   •   There was no circulation within the aquifer (deep drought). In this last case, the  
      tracer will stay in the aquifer until it is replenished by rainfall, which can be  
      extremely problematic, as it can then affect later tests.  

12.4.2 Artiﬁ cial Tracers 

Many different substances can be used as tracers (salts, radioactive elements, bacteria,  
viruses, colored spores, etc.) (Table 11), but ﬂ uorescent compounds (ﬂ uorescein, eosin,  
rhodamine, and naphthalene) are the most commonly used in hydrogeology, because  
they are harmless, easy to detect, and can be measured using activated carbon samplers  
(particles of activated charcoal in a permeable container), which trap tracer particles  
and are easy to place in the locations being monitored. 
     These ﬂ uorescent tracers emit a very speciﬁ c type of radiation when they are lit  
up by particular wavelengths of radiation. For example,  ﬂ uorescein emits 515 nm  
wavelengths when it is excited by 475 nm incoming radiation. 

----------------------- Page 133-----------------------

120     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      These measurement methods convert a ﬂ uorescence signal into a concentration.  
However, many ﬂ uorescent organic materials (humic and fulvic acids) occur naturally  
in water. Activated carbon samplers have the same problem; they record the natural  
background levels of ﬂ uorescence. Quantitative tracer measurements should therefore  
always be conﬁ rmed with qualitative analysis of the tracers using radiation to excite  
them and then measuring the outgoing radiation’s spectral signature. Generally, natural  
ﬂ uorescence  creates  peaks  spread  out  over  many  wavelengths,  because  it  reﬂ ects  
many different weakly ﬂ uorescent substances, whereas injected tracers create narrow,  
intense peaks. However, high background levels of ﬂ uorescence can sometimes mask  
a weak tracer signal. It is therefore wise to consider concentrations under a  μg.L–1  

untrustworthy. The use of data loggers like the GGUN ﬂ uorometer, which continuously  
monitors the ﬂ uorescein levels in situ allows for a visual representation of the tracer’s  
arrival (Figure 94). 

                           Table 11. Primary tracers used in karst hydrogeology. 

       Tracer            Color          Analysis       Detection    Trapped by          Disadvantages 
                                        method          threshold     activated  
                                                                     charcoal? 

    Fluorescein          Green        ﬂ uorescence     few μg.L–1         Y          Can be confused with  

                                                                                      naturally occurring  
                                                                                          ﬂ uorescence 

    Rhodamine             Red         ﬂ uorescence     few μg.L–1         Y             Easily adsorbed 

        Eosin             Pink        ﬂ uorescence     few μg.L–1         Y        Similar spectral signature  

                                                                                       to rhodamine and  
                                                                                           ﬂ uorescein 

      Duasyne             Blue        ﬂ uorescence     few μg.L–1         Y            Not commercially  

                                                                                      available in Europe 

       Sodium          No color       ﬂ uorescence     few μg.L–1    Somewhat        Can be confused with  

    Naphtionate                                                                       naturally occurring  
                                                                                          ﬂ uorescence 

      K iodide         No color           Ionic         10 μg.L–1         N             Costly analysis 

                                    chromatography 

 Lithium chloride      No color          Atomic         10 μg.L–1         N             Costly analysis 

                                       absorption 

        Na Cl          No color       Conductivity       1 g.L–1          N        Requires large quantities 

    Radioactive        No color       Counting the          _             N            Delicate handling  
       tracers                         number of                                            required 
                                        particles 

      Bacteria         No color       Microscope            _             N            Delicate handling  
                                                                                            required 

   Bacteriophage       No color       Microscope            _                          Deteriorate during  
       viruses                                                                              pumping 

  Colored spores        Various       Microscope            _             N             Labor-intensive 

----------------------- Page 134-----------------------

                                                                        Aquifer Characterization         121 

Figure 93. Example of sodium naphtionate restitution at the Raby spring (Signes, Var). The background  
noise is high and varies with rainfall. Concentrations before the 8/4 peak reﬂ ect the environment’s natural  
                                                ﬂ uorescence. 

 Figure 94.  Example of rhodamine injection in the subterranean river beneath Port Miou (Cassis,  
Bouches-du-Rhône). Note the background levels right before the peak (0,14  μg.L–1) compared to the  
maximum concentration (2,2  μg.L–1) of rhodamine (time in hours on the x-axis,  μg.L–1 equivalents on  

                                                 the y-axis). 

12.4.3 Tracer Interpretation 

Knowing  transit  times  is  useful  in  determining  the  velocity  of  the  water  ﬂ owing  
between the injection point and the exit point. However, this velocity can only ever be  
an average, estimated for a straight line, and generally the actual path that the water  
takes is unknown, as are the environments through which it passed (fractures, karst  
conduits, cave-ins, ﬁ ssural aquifers, etc.). 
      In karst systems, water often travels several meters per hour, and can sometimes  
reach  velocities  of  hundreds  of  meters  per  hour  (Example:  400  m/h  between  the  
Caussols ponor and the Bramafan Spring). 
      Analyzing tracer breakthrough curves, the amounts of tracer that were recuperated,  
spring discharges, and rainfall data allow for a more precise understanding of the  
system.  

----------------------- Page 135-----------------------

122     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

    •  A  tracer  breakthrough  curve  with  a  sharp  peak  indicates  highly  developed  
       karstiﬁ cation and low reserves. The tracer may have been injected into a drainage  
       that ﬂ ows directly into the spring (Figure 94).  
    •  On the other hand, a very spread out curve, highly diluted, shows that the tracer  
       passed through a poorly karstiﬁ ed area or an area with a large storage capacity. 
    •  Successive  spikes  tied  to  rainfall  events  indicate  that  the  tracer  has  become  
       trapped in the epikarst or a compartment badly connected to the aquifer. 
    •  Spikes that are not linked to rainfall may indicate that the aquifer has several  
       compartments or that there are difﬂ uences. 

12.4.4 Hydrobiology and Biological Tracers 

The karst system is home to a very speciﬁ c ﬂ ora and fauna. Each environment (drainage  
passageways, shores, fractures, caves, etc.) has its own characteristic assemblage of  
organisms, and each aquifer has its own ecosystem. Capturing and analyzing, with a  
plankton net, the organisms carried in water emerging at a spring, provides insight on  
the environment that water is emerging from (Gibert, 1986; Prié, 2009)  

                                                        Beginning        Surface 
                                                        Begining of                 ACARIDS 
       HARPACTICOIDS                                 hydrological cycle  drift      terrestres 
               NEMATODES : 
               Arrhopalites 

                                  Surface                    Surface                   CYCLOPOIDS : 
                                  drift                      drift                       Specyclops 
                                                                                      HARPACTICOIDS 

                                                     WINTER  
                                    FLOOD 
                                                     HIGH WATER 

                                   Bottom                  Bottom                   HARPACTICOIDS 
            adult DIPTERA          drift                   drift                    NEMATODES 
                 ACARIDS                                                           ACARIDS 

                                                           End of        Bottom  
                                                     hydrological cycle  drift      DIPTERA larvae 
                                                                                    terrestrial ACARIDS 
                                                                                    

                                        CORMORAN 
                                  underground stream 
                                  hydrologic behavior 

                                                                                    COLLEMBOLES : 
        HYDRACARIDS : 
       Plusiocampa               Surface                     Surface                Plusiocampa 
       TRICHOPTERA ad.           drift                       drift 
       DIPTERA larvae                                        (summer floods)        adult COLEOPTERA 
       Niphargus 

                                FLOOD                  SUMMER 
                                RECESSION            LOW WATER 

        Proasellus                Bottom                     Bottom  
        HYDRACARIDS               drift                      drift                  Niphargus 

                       Figure 95. Ecology of the Cormorant cave (Gibert, 1986). 

----------------------- Page 136-----------------------

                                                           Aquifer Characterization  123 

     Subterranean fauna, once isolated from the outside world, evolves rapidly to create  
genetically distinct populations that can in some cases become entirely new species.  
Karst water fauna are characterized by a high level of endemism. Phylogenetic studies  
on stygophilic mollusks, which are conﬁ ned to the subterranean world, show that  
in 97% of the cases studied, there were genetic differences between organisms that  
were putatively of the same species but that lived in aquifers separated by a vadose  
zone, even when the aquifers were geographically close to each other (Prié, personal  
communication). This can be useful in determining the precise relationships between  
the aquifers in question.  

12.5 Modeling Outﬂ ows 

Aquifer models can be deterministic, seeking to reproduce the various properties of the  
environment, or stochastic, seeking to ﬁ nd the relationship between an input (rainfall)  
and an output (discharge, dissolved mineral load, etc.). The problem will be different  
for a temporal model like a rainfall-discharge one, versus a spatial model (gridded  
model) which will require a solid grasp of the scaling involved—a complex problem  
given the heterogeneity of karst systems.  

There are three types of models: 

   •  Simple discharge models for springs, linking precipitation and spring discharge.  
      These are based on surface ﬂ ow models.  
   •  Reservoir models (BEMER, CREG, VENSIM) where the different parts of a karst  
      system (epikarst, drainages, annex drainage systems, saturated zone, etc.) are  
      represented as nested conceptual reservoirs, with pre-deﬁ ned ﬂ ow relationships.  
   •  Three-dimensional  models  using  partial  differential  equations  (PDE). These  
      deﬁ ne  a  series  of  hydrodynamic  behaviors  and  responses  for  the  different  
      components of the system: matrix, fractures, and drainages. 

     All of these methods run into problems with scaling, and with fully describing  
the polyphase system. To complicate things further, groundwater movement occurs  
both in saturated environments and in contact with air, and therefore water ﬂ ows both  
monophasically and diphasically, which makes modeling more difﬁ cult.  
     Given the problems described above, it is easy to understand why modeling karst  
environments is so difﬁ cult, and why it has yielded little useful information. 

----------------------- Page 137-----------------------

                                         1313 
      Water Use and Management 

13.1 Water Management 

Water management in karst regions must deal with several challenges: 

   •  Flooding risks in depressions (dolines and poljes). 
   •  Soil erosion and migration into the endokarst. 
   •  Variable spring discharge. 
   •  Difﬁ culty in accessing deep reservoirs for catching water. 
   •  Bacterial contamination and turbidity in the water. 

     Water laws written in France introduced the concept that water is all one entity  
and that it has value as natural heritage. The new legislation no longer treats surface  
water and groundwater separate entities, nor does it make a distinction between water  
resources and wastewater. Like any natural resource, water as an entity requires both  
qualitative and quantitative management.  
     Quantitative management of a groundwater resource involves maintaining long- 
term equilibrium between the outﬂ ow to other aquifers or to human consumption, and  
the inﬂ ow recharging the aquifer. Another concern is prioritizing use of the aquifer to  
ensure that drinking water supply needs are met ﬁ rst.  
     The European  Union’s Water Framework Directive introduced the legal concept of  
“good qualitative status.” This means a healthy biological, physical, and chemical state,  
deﬁ ned by certain maximum acceptable concentration limits for speciﬁ c contaminants  
(nitrates, pesticides, etc.). For surface water (for example in rivers), this also takes into  
consideration the ecological state of the body of water as a potential habitat. 

13.2 Surface Water Management 

13.2.1 Poljes and Flood Zones 

Poljes, due to the way they are formed, have their own unique workings. They ﬂ ood  
periodically, either when the water table rises or when the conduits leading downwards  

----------------------- Page 138-----------------------

                                                                 Water Use and Management         125 

ﬁ ll up. If a ponor becomes clogged with debris, the polje may ﬂ ood signiﬁ cantly more  
and for a longer time period.  
      In  the  Peloponnesian  region  (Greece),  projects  to  drain  swallow-holes  (or  
katavothrons)  and  poljes  were  undertaken  as  early  as  the  classical Antiquity,  by  
protecting ponors and preventing them from getting clogged, and by channeling water  
towards more absorbent areas. For example, in Tripoli, water was directed into the  
Mantinea and Tegea ponors, or into Lake Copais and the Vinya ponors. Pausanias  
relates the legend of Hercules draining another lake, Lake Phenea, by digging a canal  
50 stades (10 km) long to carry the water into a chasm. Today, Lake Phonias ﬁ lls the  
area, fed by the Olbios and Aroanios rivers, which used to be drained by ponors. The  
ponors were obstructed by debris, ﬂ ooding the ancient city of Phenea (Beulée, 1875). 
      In France, the Cuges polje (Var) was drained and turned into agricultural land  
around 1475, by cleaning and widening the ponor to the west of the polje, then later in  
1860 by building a surface drainage system to direct water into areas where it would  
be easily absorbed (Nicod, 1972). 
      On  a  smaller  scale,  dolines  that  receive  clayey  sediment  are  also  prone  to  
ﬂ ooding, which can damage buildings that were imprudently placed in the bottom of  
the depression. In the Mediterranean, as the collective memory of such events fades,  
an illusory impression of aridity takes shape and leads to construction in seemingly  
safe locations. When a particularly rainy year comes along, poorly placed buildings  
can be affected.  
      In poljes, this type of risk can be managed by directing water into the ponors with  
the greatest absorption capacity, and increasing inﬁ ltration rates by cleaning out ponors,  
preventing them from clogging up by stabilizing the surrounding embankments, and  
regularly cleaning and widening surface drainages.  
      Boreholes can serve as artiﬁ cial inﬁ ltration pathways in dolines and poljes, if  
they are drilled deep enough to get past the clay ﬁ lling the bottom of the depression.  
The wellhead is usually protected by a half-sphere of wire netting to prevent debris  
from clogging it. 

   The Caussols polje 

   In the Alpes-Maritimes (France), the access road leading to Caussols passes through a vast  
   polje, and is sometimes cut off when a lake ﬁ lls the depression. 

   Located at the base of the Calern limestone, thrust upwards to the south over the Caussols  
   unit, the Caussols polje is a nice example of a typical Mediterranean polje. It is mostly  
   located in Cenomanian marl. Water ﬂ ows into it from its catchment area: the plain and its  
   surroundings, and particularly the scree slopes off the Calern unit, resting on impermeable  
   marl. Several small springs feed a small stream that meanders across the marl. At the  
   southern edge of the plain, the stream reaches Jurassic limestone, where it disappears into  
   a ponor. It can be followed underground for a few hundred meters, until it reaches a 40 m  
   vertical siphon that has not yet been successfully explored by divers. Beyond the siphon,  
   the water theoretically ﬂ ows through a series of cascading passages until it reaches the  
   base of the Caussols limestone, where it is stored in a deep reservoir in the base of the  
   Caussols syncline, above the impermeable Triassic clays. Dye tests have shown that water  
   travels very quickly (400 m per hour) through the system to the Bramafan springs, 6 km to  
   the east, at an elevation of 460 m in the Loup River gorges. 

   During intense rains, the stream’s discharge exceeds the ponor’s absorption capacity, and  
   a lake ﬁ lls the polje. It generally empties out again in less than a day.  

----------------------- Page 139-----------------------

126     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 96. Lake formation in the Caussols polje (Alpes-Maritimes) after several days of heavy rains  
                                          (photo M. Giovannini). 

   After a piezometer was installed, it recorded regular increases in the level of the water table,  
                                                                     3 –1 
   which occurred when discharge at the ponor exceeded 4 m .s            ; however, precipitation events  
                                            3  –1 
   often lead to discharges of over 8 m .s       . Flooding of the polje is therefore a function of the  
   system’s geometry, and not an event that occurs only in response to the ponor becoming  
   clogged, as had previously been thought (Tennevin, 2010, personal communication). 

   The 1994 Frayère ﬂ ood 

   In 1994, the village of Auribeau–sur-Siagne was devastated by a ﬂ ood that took everyone by  
   surprise, as the Frayère River’s bed normally held only a thin trickle of water. The damage was  
   considerable because, following a change in municipal governance, the zoning regulations  
   had been modiﬁ ed to allow construction on a lot in the ﬂ oodplain, which had until then been,  
   for good reason, considered unsuitable for development. A survey of the karstic catchment  
   basin that fed the river showed that a ﬁ rst wave of rain fell when the grasses in the area had  
   reached their maximum growth. The grass ﬂ attened and created a layer like a thatched roof  
   over the underlying karren ﬁ eld, shedding water and preventing it from reaching the epikarst.  
   When a second wave of rain arrived, most of it ﬂ owed into the river as runoff instead of  
   inﬁ ltrating into the epikarst.  

13.2.2 Runoff Concentration 

Runoff from roads and paved surfaces is sometimes collected and driven to ponors  
or caves. Although these openings can be useful in capturing rainwater, they can also  
lead to contamination by allowing water carrying hydrocarbons from the pavement  
into the aquifer. This phenomenon therefore requires an impact study. 

13.3 Using Water Resources 

Because of the size of the subterranean voids that exist in karst (10 to 30%), this type  
of landscape’s economic value lies primarily in its abundant water resources. Karst  
aquifers  have  been  used  as  resources  since  classical Antiquity,  and  they  enabled  
the growth of many cities around the Mediterranean, such as Rome, Nîmes, Fréjus,  
Carthage, etc.  
      Today, drought and pollution require us to better understand the aquifers in order  
to properly manage our water resources (delineating catchment basins, exploratory  
drilling in deep karst reservoirs, drawdown optimization, underground dams, etc.). The  
1992 French “Law on water” led to the creation of protection perimeters around water  

----------------------- Page 140-----------------------

                                                         Water Use and Management      127 

catchment structures, and the European Union’s Water Framework Directive requires  
that the state of European aquifers be well understood by 2015. These regulations  
prompted a large number of karst hydrogeological studies.  

13.3.1 Spring Catchments 

Humans have been using water from springs since the dawn of our species. In Classical  
Antiquity, major projects were built, like the 3-km-long aqueduct in Nîmes (France),  
which includes the Pont du Gard. It carries water from the Eure spring in Uzès. In  
Tunisia,  the  Zaghouan  aqueduct  supplied  the  city  of  Carthage  with  water  from  a  
spring 100 km away. 
     The advantages of diverting water right from the spring are the concentration  
of discharge at one point, the ability to immediately estimate the resource, and the  
absence of effects on the aquifer when water is collected. Only the water exiting the  
system is used. The disadvantages are the distances water must be transported over  
using only gravity, the variability of discharge, and the turbidity of the water during  
ﬂ oods. Additionally, there can be problems with bacterial contamination.  
     The invention of the steam engine in the 1  9th century, and later on the invention  
of electric pumps, meant that water could be lifted, and that springs could supply even  
regions that were at a higher elevation than the spring. The optimizations methods  
described below (cf. 13.4) can help to compensate for the irregularity of the discharge. 

13.3.2 Water Wells 

Drilling wells into an aquifer means that water can be drawn near where it will be used.  
Down-the-hole drilling techniques enabled rapid drilling to great depths, although  
without eliminating the risk of passing through caverns or areas of crushed rock. It  
is therefore important to plan on starting the drilling with a large diameter, so that  
difﬁ cult passages can be stabilized with injected cement and drilling can continue at  
a smaller diameter.  

13.3.2.1 Choosing borehole location 

The depth to the water table is generally easy to estimate based on the elevation of  
nearby springs, the structural context, and the information gathered by speleologists.  
The more difﬁ cult task is in choosing a location in a conductive zone that actually holds  
water. Often, boreholes that are drilled down to the water table stay completely dry  
because they never cut across a discontinuity that water can ﬂ ow through (a fracture  
or a karst conduit). To avoid such a scenario, it is necessary to allow for a signiﬁ cant  
margin of depth (at least 100 m below the top of the water table).  
      Ideally, the borehole would be drilled directly into a drainage conduit, but there  
is currently no technology that can detect passages more than a few tens of meters  
below the surface. When speleological reconnaissance is possible, a suitable location  
can be found using careful topographic surveys or electromagnetic location methods  

----------------------- Page 141-----------------------

128    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

(cf. chap. 10). The Féclaz Ski Station (Savoie, France), for example, draws its water  
from a borehole drilled down to the Trou du Garde, 300 m below the surface.  
     In  the  Guizhou  and Yunnan  plains,  when  the  water  table  is  near  the  surface,  
ponors and vertical shafts punctuate the course of subterranean rivers. A river’s path  
can be inferred from the locations of these features, and then used to choose drilling  
locations. The drilling depth is estimated based on the depth of the ponors, shafts,  
and uvalas (Mengxiong, 1988). 

13.3.2.2 Pumping tests 

These are used to evaluate the reservoir capacity and the characteristics of the well.  
There are several different methods (Detay, 1993), some of which work well in karst  
aquifers. The Collignon method (1986) for example, consists of slowly draining the  
aquifer through a long period of steady pumping, while carefully monitoring the water  
table through a network of piezometers. This allows for a simple, rapid, and precise  
evaluation of the available reserves in a karst aquifer. The pumping should be done  
when it will not be inﬂ uenced by rainfall, and must move a signiﬁ cant volume of water  
(several hundred thousand m3).  

     Based on a large number of tests in Algeria, Collignon demonstrated that when  
large volumes of water are pumped from a well in a karst aquifer, the resulting graph  
of the water table, as a function of the volume being pumped, was both reproducible,  
and marked by three distinct phases (Figure 97): 

   •  An immediate drawdown characteristic of the well, as the aquifer’s drainage  
      patterns adjust to the inﬂ uence of pumping, 
   •  A slow period of decline as the aquifer empties, 
   •  A more or less rapid rebound once pumping stops. 

     The residual drawdown indicates the slice of the aquifer that was affected by the  
pumping tests.  

             0                 PUMPING TEST                                          time 

                                  static level 
                                                                     residual drawdown 
                    rapid  
                    drawdown 

                                                     recovery 

                                  slow  
                                  emptying 

             Figure 97. Typical pumpi ng test drawdown curve (after Collignon, 1986). 

----------------------- Page 142-----------------------

                                                              Water Use and Management        129 

     A slow, linear decrease in the water table would indicate that the karst aquifer being  
tested had the same behavior as a cylindrical reservoir completely open to the well,  
with impermeable boundaries and a constant capacity as a function of depth (at least  
in the cross-sectional area being tested). The proportional relationship, between the  
drawdown and the volume of water being pumped out, can be used to easily calculate  
the speciﬁ c storage of the aquifer (S ) which refers to the volume of water extracted  
                                          s 
per meter of drawdown. In the example shown in Figure 98, the speciﬁ c storage S  is  
                                                                                               s 
                                                                3 
given by the ratio ΔV/Δh and has a value of 220,000 m /m.  
     This type of test can also be used to estimate the permanent reserves that can be  
pumped from (which represent the average volume of water stored in the aquifer), by  
multiplying the speciﬁ c storage by the usable height of the borehole being pumped  
from. 
     Drawing down the aquifer through pumping, during periods where there is no  
inﬂ uence from rainfall, is compensated for by recharge from effective rainfall. This  
recharge can be quantiﬁ ed graphically as the vertical distance between two drawdown  
curves, or it can be calculated by multiplying the speciﬁ c storage S  by the recharge  
                                                                               s 
height  ΔH.  In  the  example  in  Figure  98,  the  1986  recharge  volume  reached  1.1 
            3 
 million m . 

                                                                                         6  3  -1 
                 0                  1                   2        Pumped volume (10  m  s        ) 
              0 
                                                                             3 
                                    aquifer recovery  
                        e          during rainy season 
                         m 
                          p 
              2            t 
                 'h        y 
                            i 
                            n 
                             g 

                                                         e 
              4         'V                                m 
                                                           p 
                                           'H  
                                                             t 
                                                             y 
                                                              i 
                                                              n 
                                                               g 

              6 

                                                      recovered 
                                                       volume 
              8 

   Drawdown 
            (m)        1985                            1986                             1987 

   Figure 98. Example of a we ll b eing monitored over several years of use (after Collignon, 1986). 

     Alternating between periods of drawdown from pumping and periods of recharge  
from rainfall is also useful in order to evaluate the amount of renewable reserves  
available. These correspond to the volume of water that ﬂ ows into an aquifer every  
year, through the direct and indirect effects of precipitation.  
     Finally, these types of test can show changes in the drawdown curve over time,  
indicating changes within the aquifer, or the delayed effects of environmental changes.  
For example, an increase in slope is characteristic of a limited speciﬁ c storage, and  
can be a result of decreased permeability in the reservoir at a certain depth, or of a  
lateral inﬂ ow (a losing stream, an exchange with a neighboring aquifer) stopping  

----------------------- Page 143-----------------------

130      KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

suddenly. The  inverse,  a  decrease  in  slope,  is  characteristic  of  an  increase  in  the  
speciﬁ c storage, and can be a result of having reached a more capacitive layer of the  
aquifer, by a sudden inﬂ ow from a lateral reservoir, or by decreased leakage (if, for  
example, nearby springs run dry).  

13.4 Quantitative Management 

13.4.1 Goals 

 13.4.1.1 Problem and goals 

In regions with sharply contrasting dry and wet seasons, karst aquifers are characterized  
by their irregularity. They alternate between discharging high volumes that can lead to  
violent ﬂ oods, and supplying only a trickle of water or even drying up completely. It  
would therefore be useful to be able to store water during the wet season, to be used  
later when the discharge decreases, particularly since the water supply dries up during  
the summer, just when demand is highest. This is especially true in the south of France,  
where the population increases during the summer due to an inﬂ ux of tourists. The  
                                                                                                                     –1 
following diagram shows an example, a spring with a dry season discharge of 10 L.s                                     ,  
which could provide double that amount if water were stored during the rainy season.  

      Discharge in L.s-1 

       180 
       170 
       160 
       150 
       140 
       130 
       120 
                                                                                                     unused 
       110 
                                                                                                     floods 
       100 
                                                                                                     field 
        90 
        80 
        70 
        60 
        50 
        40 
        30 
                                                                                                 optimization 
        20                                                                                       field 
        10 
                                                                                                  classical 
         0 
                                                                                                  utilization field  
           summer           automn                   winter                    spring                summer 
                             u 

                             Figure 99. Optimization example for a karst spring. 

       The goal of a successful water management program is to regulate this type of  
resource, something that can be achieved through a number of different strategies.  
However, putting any of them into place requires a solid understanding of the system  
and of how it works, as well as a comprehensive monitoring system (piezometers,  
gauging stations, etc.). 

----------------------- Page 144-----------------------

                                                             Water Use and Management         131 

13.4.2 Optimization at Spring Catchments 

When karst is bounded by an impermeable layer, and the saturated zone is thick enough,  
water can be pumped out from the karst aquifer, below the spring. The idea is to over- 
exploit the aquifer, drawing the water table down to below the level of the spring. When  
precipitation occurs, instead of causing increased discharge and ﬂ ooding, it recharges  
the aquifer back to normal levels again. In order to do this several solutions exist: 

   •  inclined drainage boreholes drilled below the spring,  
   •  vertical wells into the deep aquifer, 
   •  pumps installed in the karst conduit.  

      One of the ﬁ rst installations of this type was at the Bou Merzoug spring (Algeria),  
where water was pumped from the aquifer in 1953–54, in 40 m boreholes near the  
spring, with a total discharge of 500 then 800 L.s–1 over almost 100 days, during  

                                               –1                                  3 
which the natural discharge was 450 L.s          . This resulted in 2,200,000 m  more water  
being made available for use. The water table remained low for three months after  
pumping stopped. The immediate yield varied from 20 to 43%. The apparent capacity  
                                                                    3 
of the karst reservoir was therefore evaluated to 700,000 m  per m of height (Margat,  
1981). In this example, it was therefore possible to temporarily overexploit the karst  
aquifer, by counting on natural recharge to return the water table to its previous level.  

                3 
          Q (m /s) 

          1,0                                 maxi = 0,81 m3/s  

                                                      3 
                                       2 200 000 m   

                                                                      e 
                                                                     c 
                                                                    i      recovering  
                                                                   d 
                                                                   u 
                                               gain               j 
                                                                 e         of reserve 
          0,5                                                   r 
                                                               p 

                                              pumping 

            0 
                 M     J     J    A     S    O     N     D    J     F     M    A      M 

                                  1953                                  1954 

                Figure 100. Pumping in the Aïn Bou Merzoug (after Margat, 1981). 

     This method was used at the Lez spring in Montpellier, under the direction of J.  
Avias, by installing a pump directly in the submerged karst conduit which had been  
explored to a depth of 75 m by cave divers.  
     The  installation  took  place  in  1981. An  underground  station  was  built,  and  
four 1.8 m in diameter boreholes were drilled into the conduit. Three pumps were  

----------------------- Page 145-----------------------

132      KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

installed, each with a maximum pumping capacity of 1000 L.s–1  (Figure 101). The  

aquifer is carefully managed so that it recharges completely during the autumn rains.  
Currently, the system is still in place and working perfectly. At the end of the summer,  
the water table is drawn down by 38 m, extracting 1700 L.s–1 . Part of this water is  

sent to Montpellier, and the rest is diverted into the Lez River, in order to maintain a  
minimum ﬂ ow of 160 L.s–1 , thereby maintaining good surface water quality. A network  

of sensors distributed over the spring’s catchment basin monitors the piezometry and  
the water quality of the aquifer. 
       The advantage of pumping directly from an underground conduit is that it is,  
by deﬁ nition, connected to the aquifer’s drainage network, whereas a well drilled  
into the limestone unit might end up in less permeable rock, or even in a completely  
impermeable area. 

                                                                                              control building 

                                                                                                          + 46 m 
                                                         exploration drill 

   first 
   pumping test 
   1968                                gallery and pipe                                                  underground 
                                                                                                         plant 

                                                                              - 9 m 
      entrance  
                                                                                            wells 
      pool 
                                                                                                           38 m  
                                                                                                          drawdown 

                                                                            sump  
                                                                 - 47 m     explored                       - 47 m 
                                                                            in 1979 
                                                                                             pumps 

                                                                                                         - 75 m   ? 

Figure  101. Example of pumping at a spring in order to optimize the karstic resource (Source du  
                                              Lez, Montpellier, France). 

       There is a similar example in Montenegro, in Opacica near Kotor Bay, where the  
karst aquifer was drawn down to 20 m below sea level, thanks to a favorable geologic  
context that protects it from saltwater intrusions. 

Blocking springs or karst conduits 

Completely blocking springs can make the water table rise, and thereby create large  
reservoirs both below and above ground. One of the ﬁ rst times this was tried was in  
Syria (Detay, 1997), in the Orontes valley. Slightly raising the level of various springs  
resulted in more water being stored in the aquifer. Gates installed on the springs were  
then opened during the dry season in order to increase discharge. Many similar projects  
were undertaken in China (cf. infra), and a prototype was built in France in Coaraze  
(Gilli and Mangan, 1994).  

----------------------- Page 146-----------------------

                                                                    Water Use and Management            133 

      The largest problem is of course leakage through the fracture network and through  
small karst conduits. In Uganjska Vrela (Croatia), this was mitigated by covering the  
limestone slope by an anchored concrete blanket (Mijatovic, 1993). A larger project is  
in the works in Ombla, also in Croatia, where a grout curtain will be built by drilling  
boreholes and injecting liquid cement into the rock from a grouting gallery (Breznik,  
1998). 

                                                                              level 
                                                                        water  
                                                              final ground  
                                                              
                                     + 725 m 

                     concrete curtain 

                                                                       level 
                                                                 water  
                                                     initial ground  
                                                       
                     + 706 m                          

               +700 m 

                                                                           limestone 
                             flysch 

                Figure 102. Uganjska Vrela dam (Montenegro) (after Mijatovic, 1993). 

                                                   gallery and grout curtain  

                                                                                                       l 
                                                                                                      e 
                                                                                                     v 
                                                                                                    e 
                                                                                                    l 
                                                                                                  r  
                                                                                                 e 
                                                                                                 t 
                                                                                                a 
                                                                                              w 
                                                                                             d 
                                                                                            n 
                                                                                           u 
                                                                                          o 
                                                                                         r 
                                                                                        g 
                                                                                      w  
                                                                                     e 
                                                                                    n 
                                                                                                      l 
                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                    v 
                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                  l 
                                                                                                 r  
                                                                                                e 
                                                                                               t 
                                                                                              a 
                                                                                             w 
                                                                                            d 
                                                                                           n 
                                                                                          u 
                                                                                        o 
                                                                                        r 
                                                                                       g 
                                                                                      l  
                                                                                     a 
                                                                                    i 
                                                                                   t 
                                                                                   i 
                                                                                  n 
                                                                                 i 
                                                                                   
                                                                                             e 
                                                                                           n 
                                                                                          o 
                        Ombla spring                                                     t 
                                                                                        s 
                                                                                       e 
                                                                                     m 
                                                                                    i 
                                                                                   l 

                                                                    flysch 

                                                                                           100 m 

      Figure 103. The Ombla dam, a project being considered in Croatia (after Breznik, 1998). 

----------------------- Page 147-----------------------

134     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      Numerous examples of underground dams can be found in China, in regions  
where the karst systems quickly became more entrenched, and water ﬂ ows near the  
geologic base level. The cockpitkarst terrain results in streams that go in and out of the  
ground, ﬂ owing at the surface in poljes and disappearing into tunnel-caves that link  
one polje to the next. Dams built inside these caves are meant to store water by using  
the underground voids already available, as well as using the depressions formed by  
dolines and poljes upstream of the dams. These dams come in a range of geometries.  
They can block the entire gallery or part of them. They can be located in the caves,  
or at springs (Mengxiong, 1988; Daoxian, 1991). 

                                Table 12. Examples of subterranean dams. 

 Name                Location          Purpose                Height      Storage      Reference 
                                                                       capacity (m3) 

 Coaraze             France            Experimental             9 m           -        Gilli and Mangan,  
                                                                                       1986 
 Port Miou           France            Preventing saltwater     3 m           -        Potié, 1973 
                                       intrusion 
 Kiveri              Greece            Preventing saltwater     1 m           - 
                                       intrusion 
 Almyros             Greece            Salinity reduction      6 m?           -        Arﬁ b, 2001 
 Yidong              Guangxi, China    Irrigation               10            -        Daoxian, 1991 
 Yuzhai              Guizhou, China    Irrigation                6         96000       Daoxian, 1991 
 Longwangdong        Sichuan, China    Irrigation                62      17 millions   Daoxian, 1991 
 Jijiao              Guangxi, China    Irrigation                30           -        Daoxian, 1991 
 Yuhong              Hunan, China      Electricity              115           -        Daoxian, 1991 
 Beilou              Guangxi, China    Electricity               24           -        Daoxian, 1991 
 Wanger              Guizhou, China    Irrigation                9        100,000      Yuan Daoxian,  
                                                                                       1991 
 Neiwan              Hunan, China      Irrigation               70        700,000      Daoxian, 1991 
 Uganjska Vrela      Cetinje,          Drinking water            20      3 millions    Mijatovic, 1993 
                     Montenegro        supply 
 Ombla (projected    Dubrovnic,        Electricity and           60      8 millions    Milanovic, 2004 
 for 2015)           Croatia           drinking water  
                                       supply 
 Daxiao              Guizhou, China                                           -        Mengxiong, 1988  

      Installation of this type of system requires a detailed understanding of the drainage  
network’s  geometry,  and  therefore  necessitates  careful  speleological  exploration.  
In order to avoid hydraulic short-circuits and leakage through newly cleared karst  
conduits,  the  sedimentary  deposits  around  the  construction  sites  and  across  the  
subterranean drainage basin must be carefully mapped and described. Flowstone ﬂ oors  
cannot be considered adequate natural barriers, as they may have been deposited on top  
of easily erodible clayey sediments. At the site of the Solue underground dam (Bama  
county, Guangxi, China), the conduit is 13 m across, but the subterranean alluvium is  
over 18 m thick. The twenty-foot underground dam at Port Miou (Cassis, Bouches du  
Rhône) (cf. 14.2.6) was meant to prevent saltwater intrusions while raising the height of  

----------------------- Page 148-----------------------

                                                                       Water Use and Management             135 

the water table in the karst aquifer. It was built directly on alluvium, and the ﬁ rst ﬂ ood  
destabilized it, requiring submarine construction efforts to shore it up (Potié, 1974). 

13.4.3 Artiﬁ cial Recharge 

Catchment  system  optimization  has  been  described  above. Artiﬁ cial  groundwater  
recharge is also possible, but so far it is not common in the karst regions of France.  
Artiﬁ cial groundwater recharge has been practiced in Israel for over 30 years, in the  
                                                                              3 
Yarkon-Taninim aquifer, by injecting 75 to 100 million m  of water from the Jordan  
River every year (Detay, 1997). 
      The concerns commonly associated with artiﬁ cial groundwater recharge include  
the eventual clogging of the aquifer’s pore spaces, and the poor quality of the water  
being injected. In karst regions, even more problems arise. Recharge effectiveness  
depends on the aquifer’s spatial organization. In fact, although the high transmissivity  
of limestone might initially appear to favor artiﬁ cial recharge, it also heightens the  
risk of concentrating recharge near drainage paths, thereby increasing spring discharge  
without re-establishing the aquifer’s reserves (Mijatovic, 1993). In such cases, artiﬁ cial  
groundwater recharge produces only short-term beneﬁ ts.  
      In addition, the absence of ﬁ ltration mechanisms means that water passing through  
the aquifer retains high turbidity levels, and is not naturally cleaned. It is therefore  
important that water being injected is carefully monitored for quality, or even treated  
before being used. 
      Another problem can occur in recharge wells when air in the well is subject  
to pressure, and then escapes violently up the well, causing serious damage to the  
equipment (Sternaut, 1967).  

           KOLUBARA River 
   0 

 100 
        NEOGENE 

 200 

       KARSTIFIED LIMESTONE 
 300 

400 
          SHALES 

Figure 104.  Water catchment system and injection wells on the Kolubara River (after Mijatovic,  
                                    3 –1 
1993). The catchment diverts 1 m .s      of water from the river, which is then treated preventively (ﬁ ltration,  
                   denitriﬁ cation, iron removal) before being injected through boreholes.  

----------------------- Page 149-----------------------

136   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

13.5 Qualitative Management 

13.5.1 Drinking Water Catchment Vulnerabilities and Protective  
         Measures in Karst Environments 

Circulation in karst environments, where drainage passageways have been enlarged  
through dissolution, does not ﬁ lter water at all. In addition, water can travel through  
these systems very rapidly, and residence times are generally shorter than pathogen  
lifespans. If part of the watershed is contaminated, that contamination can spread  
quickly  to  the  springs,  which  may  appear  misleadingly  limpid.  For  example,  a  
person who had been drinking spring water for years at the Siagne (Alpes-Maritimes)  
became almost fatally ill with a severe bacterial infection after the spring became  
contaminated. Later, a tracer test found that a defective wastewater treatment plant  
had been collecting and concentrating wastewater from a nearby village, and then  
directly injecting the untreated water into a swallow hole that led to the spring. The  
water emerging downstream was therefore little more than diluted sewage! 

13.5.1.1 Tracer tests 

Deﬁ ning a spring’s catchment area is a necessary ﬁ rst step in qualitative water resource  
management. The methods used to deﬁ ne and study aquifers are covered in Chapter  
12. These include tracer tests, which are of great value in estimating the potential  
transit times of introduced pollutants, which are then used to delineate protective  
perimeters around springs. 

13.5.1.2 Protection perimeters 

In France, the regulations governing the protection of drinking water sources are based  
around a system of concentric perimeters: 

   •  An immediate protection perimeter around the catchment system,  
   •  A tight protection perimeter that allows for a reasonable response time in case  
      of contamination, 
   •  A loose protection perimeter on the whole aquifer. 

     In the tight protection perimeter, qualitative and quantitative restrictions are in  
effect in order to preempt any actions that could contaminate the water. However, water  
quality and quantity are related, because a karst aquifer that drops below its normal  
drainage point, reversing the hydraulic gradient, is at risk of absorbing contaminated  
surface water. In such cases, water quantity problems lead to water quality problems.  
     These  perimeters  were  initially  designed  for  porous  aquifers  and  surface  
waterways. They are based on the idea that the farther a contamination source is from  
the catchment, the longer is will take for the contamination to reach the water source.  
The perimeters are usually designed to allow for a 50-day transit time, with the water  
ﬂ ow velocity being deﬁ ned by the permeability and the hydraulic gradient. However,  
in karst systems, where favorable drainage axes can rapidly carry water to a spring,  

----------------------- Page 150-----------------------

                                                              Water Use and Management        137 

with velocities of several hundreds of m/h, transit times can be very short. A 50-day  
limit would therefore require enormous perimeters, extending over the entire basin.  
     Deﬁ ning protection perimeters in karst regions is therefore a complex task, and  
is often divorced from the physical appearance of the watershed. In order to tailor the  
perimeters to offer the best protection, it is allowable to delineate satellite perimeters,  
protecting potential points where rapid inﬁ ltration occurs (ponors or dolines). Some  
licensed hydrogeologists even include subterranean rivers, restricting or forbidding  
access to cavers (cf. 10.4). 
     However, these measures are often subjective, and more targeted strategies are  
recommended, such as detailed preliminary efforts to map and quantify vulnerability.  

13.5.1.3 GIS 

GIS  (Geographic  Information  Systems)  are  useful  tools  in  studying  aquifer  
vulnerability. They  can  superimpose  layers  of  physical  information  (topography,  
hydrography, geology, pedology, karstic networks, karstic surface indicators, etc.),  
and  anthropological  information  (land  use,  human  activity,  agriculture,  etc.). The  
intersection of these different data sets facilitates the delineation of vulnerable areas.  
     Various cartographic methods (EPIK, RISKE, RISK) have been developed in  
Switzerland and in France, using 4 or 5 parameters to characterize the sensitivity  
of  karst  aquifers  to  anthropological  pressure,  with  the  goal  of  deﬁ ning  a  global  
vulnerability index (Doerﬂ iger et al., 1999). The vulnerability maps generated in this  
way are useful in deﬁ ning primary protection perimeters, as well as eventual satellite  
perimeters.  
     One  example  of  a  collaborative  effort  on  an  aquifer  scale  is  the Aqui  Brie  
association,  which  manages  the  qualitative  and  quantitative  management  of  the  
Champigny  limestone  aquifer  (Seine-et-Marne,  France). This  was  prompted  by  a  

     Figure 105. Drop in the water table in the Champigny limestone aquifer (doc. Aqui’Brie). 

----------------------- Page 151-----------------------

138    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

dramatic drop in the water table during the 1990s, resulting in problems with supplying  
enough  drinking  water  to  the  nearby  communities,  and  in  persistently  dangerous  
atrazine levels over more than 200 townships. 
     A GIS model of the aquifer was built, and is now used to manage the aquifer. It  
is used to integrate hydrogeologic data with anthropogenic, agricultural, transport,  
industrial, and recreational data. The organization also has an outreach and education  
branch, in order to educate users, both private and institutional, about the importance  
of rehabilitating the aquifer to a good hydrologic condition. 

13.5.2 Agriculture and Soil Erosion 

During phases of rhexistasy, inﬁ ltration of surface water into the epikarst is facilitated,  
and can lead to the movement of ﬁ ne-grained particles. In agricultural regions, this  
can result in the disappearance of all arable land, while also increasing the turbidity  
of water emerging at springs. Preventing soil erosion is one of the priorities of the  
Guilin (China) Institute of Karst Geology. 
     A  similar  problem  exists  in  areas  where  deforestation  has  led  to  fragile  soil  
conditions.  

----------------------- Page 152-----------------------

                                          1414 
               Coastal and Submarine  
                           Karst Aquifers 

Many of the world’s large limestone units border coastal areas. This type of geography  
has consequences for the morphology and evolution of karst, as well as on the workings  
of coastal aquifers.  

14.1 Morphology 

When limestone units come into contact with the sea, they form very particular features.  
This occurs because, although sea-water is normally saturated in calcium carbonate and  
does not dissolve limestone, brackish water, which is a mix of freshwater and seawater,  
can and does favor dissolution. The process of weathering through mixing is described  
in Chapter 4. The increased ionic forces in the solution can shift equilibrium to favor  
dissolution. In coastal areas, the contact between karst water saturated in CaCO  and  
                                                                                           3 
seawater can lead to more weathering. This mechanism also explains the formation  
of giant caves in the Nullarbor Plain (Australia) (James, 1992).  

Several coastal environments are therefore favorable for dissolution: 

   •  Areas subject to sea spray. 
   •  River estuaries. 
   •  The area around undersea springs. 

     These areas often display sea notches or visors, which cut horizontally the base of  
a sea cliff. They are being created when freshwater, which is less dense than seawater,  
forms a layer at the surface. Weathering occurs where the waters mix and is assisted  
by the organisms living in these areas. In intertropical zones, where precipitation is  
greater and creates a semi-permanent ﬁ lm of freshwater, sea notches occur all along  
the coast (e.g., Ha Long Bay in Vietnam, and Phang Nga in Thailand). The notches  
can extend for several meters, and were used to hide junks during the Vietnam War.  

----------------------- Page 153-----------------------

140    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

14.2 Coastal and Submarine Karst Aquifers 

14.2.1 Saltwater Intrusion 

Karst aquifers are by deﬁ nition in contact with seawater, which can  ﬂ ow into the  
heart of the limestone unit. Freshwater, being less dense, ﬂ oats on top of seawater.  
The geometry of the contact between fresh and salt water follows Ghyben-Herzberg  
Laws (Figure 106). The depth of the interface, the plane separating fresh and salt  
water, is located at a depth below sea level of approximately 40 times the value of the  
hydraulic gradient. The interface is more or less diffuse and is a zone of high corrosion  
rates (cf. chap. 4.3.4.4). 

                                                         infiltration 

                                                          c 
                                                           i 
                                                            r 
                                                            c 
                                                             u 
                                                              l 
                                                               a 
                                                                t 
                                                                 i 
                                                                 o 
                                                                  n 
                                                  H 

                                 freshwater 

                                                 40 . H 
                             i 
                              n 
                               t 
                               e 
                                r 
                                 f 
                                 a 
                                  c 
                                   e 
                    seawater 

                     Figu re 106. Ghyben-Herzberg lens in an island aquifer. 

     Anthropogenic pressure is generally high in coastal areas, and overexploitation  
of an aquifer can result in saline contamination. Understanding and managing coastal  
karst aquifer therefore requires a careful analysis of the contact.  

14.2.2 Submarine Springs 

There are many known submarine karst springs along the coastal limestone areas  
around the Mediterranean, as well as in Florida and in Cuba, where they have been  
carefully studied. They are almost all brackish, even when they are located a few  
meters above sea level.  
     The existence of such springs is a result of decreases in sea level, which leads to  
downward excavation of karstic passageways, and to the formation of new springs  
at low elevations draining these conduits. When sea level rises again, freshwater can  
no longer circulate in the deep conduits, and reuses older passageways. However, in  
some cases where there is a strong hydraulic gradient and favorable lithology, the deep  

----------------------- Page 154-----------------------

                                                    Coastal and Submarine Karst Aquifers          141 

                                                      BRINDISI 

                                                                         Idume (1100 ) 
        Galeso 
        (500) 

 Tara  
                 TARENTE                                                     LECCE 
 (3500) 

                                          Chidro (2400) 
  Salento deep 
  aquifer (Italy) 

                 1997 

                          position of the  
                 1989              -1  
                          0,5 g.L    isohaline 

                 1981 

                                                -1 
                 spring (discharge in L.s  ) 

                                                               from Del Prete & Caggiano, 2000 

Figure  107. Variation in saline intrusions in the Salento aquifer (Southern Italy)  (after Del Prete and  
                                           Caggiano, 2000). 

conduits can remain in use, feeding brackish submarine springs. These springs can form  
large caverns, accessible to humans, as is the case in Port Miou (Bouches-du-Rhône,  
France) and in Cabbé (Alpes-Maritimes, France), or they can emerge in alluvium,  
as is the case in the Vise, in Thau Pond (Hérault, France). In the areas humans can  
access, like Port Miou, undersea speleothems have been observed, conﬁ rming that  
the passage was once above sea level.  
      The presence of submarine or coastal springs is an indicator of important coastal  
aquifer systems. They are not generally directly usable, since they pick up salt upstream,  
but the signals they provide (variations in discharge, temperature salinity, etc.) are a  
source of precious information about the aquifers that feed them, and this data can be  
used to better manage the resource. 

14.2.3 Effects of the Messinian Regression on Mediterranean Coastal  
          Karst 

The Messinian Salinity Crisis resulted in a considerable drop in sea level around  
the Mediterranean Basin, which affected the karst systems upstream. The drop in  
hydrologic base levels resulted in lower karstic water tables, moving water downwards  

----------------------- Page 155-----------------------

142     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

until it reached impermeable structural units (the Keuper or the crystalline basement  
rock for example) (cf. chap. 8).  
      This period was followed by a sudden, synchronized rise in base level that occurred  
when water  ﬂ owed back into the Mediterranean Basin from the Atlantic Ocean. It  
has been estimated that this took place over only a few decades, and can therefore be  
considered instantaneous. Seawater ﬂ ooded the valleys, forming deep rias, blocking  
deep karstic circulation, and prompting a rise in hydrologic base level. The effects of  
the subsequent stable high sea level conditions were accentuated by sediment inﬁ ll  
in the rias and alluvial deposits in the valleys (Audra et al., 2004).  

14.2.4 Saline Contamination 

Almost all coastal or submarine karst springs are either permanently or periodically  
brackish. Generally, when the discharge increases, the salinity decreases, which means  
that source of the salt cannot be related to the Venturi effect. There are two hypotheses  
explaining the contamination: 

    •  Diffuse contamination: the karst conduit passes through a rock unit permeated  
       with salt water, and the spring water becomes saline when it comes into contact  
       with the rock. This mechanism is observed at the Almyros of Heraklion (Arﬁ b,  
       2000). 
    •  Concentrated contamination: secondary karst conduits take up seawater and  
       carry it to the principal drainageway. This mechanism is observed at Argostoli  
       (Greece) and in Port Miou (Marseille) (Gilli, 2001; Cavalera et al., 2010). 

                     karst 

                                                   brackish 
                                                   spring 

                       'H1                    'H2                            'H         sea 
                                                                                 3 
                                                                                         level 0 

                              U1                     U2 
                       +                                                  U      + 
                                                                           3 

                                                 seawater  
                                                   dilution 

Figure 108. Saline contamination via a seawater conduit, with a brackish spring located above sea  
level. At equilibrium: (H+ΔH )ρ = (H+ΔH )ρ = (H+ΔH )ρ. With depth H in the drainages; ΔH  hydraulic  
                              1            2  2          3  3                                    1 
gradient in the karst; ρ density of water in karst (considered a constant); ΔH  elevation of the brackish  
                                                                                2 
spring (constant); ρ density of brackish water (variable); ΔH  sea level variation; ρ density of sea-water  
                    2                                           3                      3 
                                          (considered a constant). 

----------------------- Page 156-----------------------

                                                     Coastal and Submarine Karst Aquifers          143 

      In the ﬁ rst mechanism, diffuse salt-water intrusion can be limited by increasing  
the pressure in the freshwater conduit. In the second mechanism, the situation is more  
complex, but it can be modeled using a system of 3 connected tubes. 
      A laboratory model shows that when the amount of freshwater increases (when  
precipitation feeds into the karst aquifer), a current forms moving towards the brackish  
spring. The density  ρ in the brackish water tube decreases due to dilution, which  
                           2 
creates disequilibrium in the seawater column and allows a negative ΔH . Since sea  
                                                                                          3 
level remains constant (in the Mediterranean), there is salt-water intrusion into the  
conduit. This occurs in the Argostoli Moulins (Greece). 
      This model works if there is a great deal of dilution (and therefore of freshwater  
discharge) without signiﬁ cantly increasing pressure (ΔH ). This implies large conduits,  
                                                                    1 
where losses of hydraulic head are minimal. 
      The motor driving salt-water intake is therefore the freshwater current, although  
geothermal ﬂ uxes can also have an effect, by inducing convection currents and the  
vertical  migration  of  seawater. This  mechanism  was  suggested  to  explain  saline  
contamination of springs in Florida (Henry and Kohout, 1972; Sanford et al., 1998). 

14.2.5 The Almyros of Heraklion (Greece) 

                               3  –1 
This high-discharge (8 m .s         ) spring has been defying attempts to use it for several  
decades. It has been the subject of numerous studies, because it has the potential to  
be an important water source for a region that, despite abundant precipitation, suffers  
from droughts that limit its economic development. It is located 6 km from Heraklion,  
at the foot of the Keri plateau, and 1 km from the coast, at an elevation of + 3 m.  
Unfortunately, it has very high salinity (5 g.L–1) during the dry season. 

      Several diving teams explored the conduits for 500 m; reaching a maximum depth  
of –51 m. Recession curve analysis shows a well-regulated aquifer with signiﬁ cant  
reserves. 
      Between 1968 and 1971, the F.A.O. (Food and Agriculture Organization) and  
the Greek government undertook a signiﬁ cant hydrogeologic study in order to solve  
the salinity problem. An 8 m dam was built around the spring; in an effort to increase  
the hydraulic head for freshwater, thereby shifting the saltwater/freshwater contact,  
according to the Ghyben-Herzberg Law. Unfortunately, the project did not have the  
desired effect (Soulios, 1987; Maire, 1993). 
      Arﬁ b (2000) demonstrated, based on salinity/discharge hysteresis curve analysis,  
that the contamination came from a porous rock unit saturated with seawater. When  
the discharge increases, the pressure prevents seawater entry. The contamination zone  
was estimated based on the delay between variations in discharge and variations in  
salinity. It is located at a depth of approximately 400 m. Theoretically, a dam over  
10 m high would be required in order to create enough pressure in the conduits to  
prevent saline intrusions.  

----------------------- Page 157-----------------------

144    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

14.2.6 The Port Miou System 

The submarine springs at Port Miou and Bestouan (Marseille and Cassis) are both exit  
points from the same aquifer, with submerged karst conduits that have been explored  
over several kilometers. They were described as early as the Classical Antiquity. These  
                                                                                            3  –1 
brackish karst springs, despite having a total discharge of approximately 7 m .s                 , are  
not currently being used. They feed the largest waterway in the southwest between  
the Rhône and the Argens rivers.  
      They have been under study since the 1970s, and an experimental catchment  
system was put in place, with an underground dam meant to increase the hydraulic  
head (SRPM, 1978). Despite these efforts, the residual salinity remained high, near 3  
g.L–1 , and the project was abandoned. The salinity is entirely marine in origin (Blavoux  

et al., 2004), and at Port Miou the water remains brackish 2 km in from the entrance,  
in a shaft that has been explored to a depth of 223 m. 
      These springs have a higher discharge than would be expected given their supposed  
impluvium, which includes the Urgonian ring around the Beausset basin, as well  
as part of the Ste Baume, totaling approximately 300 km2 . A large portion of Basse  

Provence, on the other hand, has a water deﬁ cit. It is therefore plausible to imagine  
that part of the water inﬁ ltrating into Basse Provence feeds into Port Miou. The basin  
                                              2                                     2 
is estimated to cover between 500 km  (Cavalera, 2007) and 1000 km  (Gilli, 2001). 
      Some karst features, such as the depth of the Port Miou conduits, or the presence  
of a submerged karst paleorelief 150 m deep south of the Calanques (Collina-Girard,  
1996), can be explained by the regional base level having once been much lower, more  
than 200 m below current sea level. Similarly, the Cassidaigne canyon, a submarine  
feature off the coast near Port Miou, displays a pocket valley morphology, without  
being attached to a large enough continental valley. The current hypothesis is that  
Cassidaigne may have been shaped by a paleo-Port-Miou-spring more than 250 m  
below current sea level, during the Messinian Salinity Crisis (Figure 44).  
      Given this context, the current spring may have become brackish due to salt- 
water ﬂ owing in through the Messinian paleo-conduit. The discharge is approximately  
     3 –1 
1 m .s   . This hypothesis is supported by the analysis of hysteresis curves, which do  
not indicate a diffuse contamination mechanism (Arﬁ b et al., 2006). Additionally, a  
layer of red sediment was observed upstream of the dam in the Port Miou conduit.  
The sediment may have come from the terra rossa in the catchment basin, or from  
the red marine clays deposited in the Cassidaigne canyon. This second hypothesis is  
supported by the composition of the metallic elements in the layer, which is similar  
to that of the Cassidaigne muds (Cavalera et al., 2010). This is further evidence for  
saltwater contamination via a paleo-drainage, as depicted in the following diagram  
(Figure 110). In Port Miou turbulence in the terminal shaft explain the sea water  
suction (Gilli, 2015). 

14.2.7 The Argostoli Sea-mills 

The Argostoli sea-mills are one of the most surprising karst features on the planet. On  
the western coast of Cephalonia (Greece), in Livadi Bay near the town of Argostoli,  

----------------------- Page 158-----------------------

                                         Lave 
                        Nerthe Range                               Etoile Mountain                                                                                        ? 

    Nord 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 North 
                                                    2525                             Allauch Mountain                                                P 
                                                                                                                                                      o 
                                                                                                                                                       r 
                                                                                                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                                         P 
                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                                                                                                                           n 
                                                                                                                                                             v 
                                                 50                                                                                                          a 
                                                 50                                                                                                           l 
                                                                                                                                                               l 
                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                y 
     
                                                                                                         Aubagne 
                                         75                                                                                                         Terminal 
                                         75                    MARSEILLE                                polje 
                                                               MARSEILLE                                                                            shaft     ? 

                              80 
                                                                                  r 
                                                                                  r 
                                                                                  rr 
                                                                                e 
                                                                                e 
                                                                                ee 
                                                                               v 
                                                                               v 
                                                                               vv 
                                                                              i 
                                                                              i 
                          polje ?                              Roucas         ii 
                                                                             RR 
                                                                             R 
                                                                             RR 
                                                                               
                                                                           e   
                                                               Blanc       ee 
                                                                          n 
                                                                          nn 
                                                                         u 
                                                                         uu 
                                                                       a 
                                                                       aa 
                                                                      e 
                                                                      ee 
                                                                     v 
                                                                     vv 
                                                                    u 
                                                                    uu 
                                                                  H 
                            75                                    HH 
                                                                    

     dolines 
                                                               Calanques block Calanques block Calanques block n                                                               Bestouan               CASSIS 
                                                                                                         a 
                                                                                            Port        u                                           Port Miou 
                                                                                                       o 
                                                                                                       t 
                                                                                                      s 
                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                   Sugiton  Miou    B   CASSIS                                      Cave                       Cave 
                           Planier 
                                  50 
                           Island 
                                    75 

            
          1001 
                                   sinkholes 
                                    i  khkh                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C 
                                                                  Riou Island 
                                                                  Riououu IsIsIs                                                                                u                  submarine 
                                                                                                                                                               q 
                                                                                                                                                              n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o 
                                                                                                                                                             a                     stream 
    present shoreline                                                                                                                                        l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                            a 
                                                          1001001000                                                                                       C 
    paleo-shoreline                                                                                                                                       u                                                                       s 
                                                                                                                                                         o                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                 ??                                                      i 
                                                                                                                                                        M 
    dépression                                                                                                                                         t                                                                          l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                       r                                             main spring 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                      o 
                                                                                                                                                     P 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n 
    spring                                                                      ?? 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d 
                                                                                                               1 
                                                                                                                2 
??  paleo-spring ?                               sinkholes                                                      5                                                                                    secondary spring 
                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                              0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S 
                             200                                                             6  0   400 
                                                                                               0 
                                                                                              5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  u 
    proved                                                                              0         300 200 
                                                                                       0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  b 
    connection                                                                         8                                                                                                             gallery explored 
       125                                           125                                               1 
                                                                                                        5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  m 
                      0                                                                                  0                                                                                           by cave divers 
    supposed          0  0                                                                           1 
                     3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                      2 
    connection          0                                                                              5                                          submarine 
                        5                     150 
                                                                                    0   Cassidaigne                                                                                                                               r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i 
                       Planier                                                     0                                                              stream                                             dry valley 
                                                                                  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n 
    Marseille                                                                           Canyon                                                                           500 m 
                      Canyon 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                    0                    5 km 
    Oligocene                                                                       0 
                                                                                   0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                  1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t 
F igure 109. Submarine karst topography off the coast of Marseille (Collina-Girard, 1996) and Port Miou system off the coast of Cassis (Bouches du Rhône).                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  u 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 f 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5 

----------------------- Page 159-----------------------

146        KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

       PORT MIOU SUBMARINE SPRING  (Marseille-Cassis, France)                                                 North 

                                                                              alumina plant 
                                                                          d 
                                                                        u 
                                                                      m 
                                                                    d  
                                                                  e 
                                                                 r 

                                                                                                   artificial access 

   depth                                                                                               traces of  
      0                                                                                                     mud                        3 
                                                                                                        red                          m /s 
                                                                                                                                  5  
                                                                                                                           water  
                                                                                                                 brackish  

          dolines 

    150 
                                                                 Miou 
                                                            Port                                  dam 
                                                                         m             ubmarine                                                          r 
                                                                      - 8             s                                                             wate 
                                                                                                                                              fresh  
           cave                                                                                                                                   m3/s 
                                                                                                                                        m       .5  
                                                                                                                                  -223         4 
                                                                                                                                   
                     submarine                                                                                   of exploration  
    250                                                                                                     limit  
                                                                                                    3/s      
                                                                                                 m 
                                                                                              0.5  
                                                                                               
                                                                                           d" 
                     waste of                                                          mu        
                                                                                 "red  
                                                                             and  
                                                                              
                                                                      water                                                                     zone  
                                                                  sea                                                                   250 m  
                                                                                                                                         
                     "red mud"                                                                                                        - 
                              d" 
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                           mixing  
                                                                                                                                        of  
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                         
    500                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   limestone 
                                                                        jurassico-cretaceous  

                                                                                            Keuper  
                                                                            impervious                                                  2200 m 
                                                                                                                                m 
                                                                                                                          1500  
     Cassidaigne                                                                                            1000 m 
                                                                                                 m 
     canyon and                                                             entrance        500  
      paleo-spring                                                                                                                              E. Gilli 2014 

    Fig ure 110. Potential model explaining the deep saline contamination of the Port Miou system. 

swallow-holes draw in several tens of liters of seawater per second. A 1963 tracer test  
with 100 kg of ﬂ uorescein demonstrated that there was a connection, with a 16-day  
transit time, between the sea-mills and the brackish Karavomilos springs near Sami,  
on the eastern coast of the island, approximately 15 km from Argostoli (Maurin and  
Zötl, 1965) (Figure 111).  

                                Fiscardo 
         North 
                                                                                                                    Kefalonia 
                                                                                                                    karst 

                                                          ITHACA 
                

                                                                                              negative  
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                              'H3   
                                                                                                                                         Karavomylos 
                                  Melisami                                         Argostoli                                             spring 
                              underground       Karavomylos Springs                Mills                                   'H1                'H2 

                                       lake 

                                                    Sami 

                                               Drograrati                                                              U1                  
                                                                                                U3            +                          U2 
                                              Cave 

                              Argostoli Mills 

                                                      KEFALONIA 

           10 km                                                                                              seawater dilution  
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                          

Figur e 111. Map and model of the Argostoli sea-mills (Greece). A current forms between the western  
         and eastern sides of the island. The system is driven by the karst aquifer’s hydraulic gradient. 

----------------------- Page 160-----------------------

                                                Coastal and Submarine Karst Aquifers      147 

     This  area  is  therefore  of  exceptional  interest,  since  the  sea-water  absorption  
mechanism described above is visible above ground, and there are known injection and  
restitution points, as well as openings into the karst aquifer at several different locations  
(Aggalaki, Melissani, Zerbati) where quantitative tracer tests could be undertaken. 

14.2.8 Cenotes and Blue Holes 

The Yucatan peninsula is scattered with coastal and submarine springs, as well as  
with cenotes, dolines that open directly into the aquifer, and that sometimes serve as  
access points to extensive networks of submerged cave. Several feats of technology  
were necessary for their exploration, particularly the use of diving bells that allowed  
explorers to rest during multi-day excursions. The cenotes were a source of water for  
the Mayans, and some of them were sacred sites used for sacriﬁ ce. Guided diving tours  
are available at the Dos Ojos cenotes (Tulum, Mexico), where tourists can explore  
a  submerged  cathedral-like  chamber,  with  powerful  lights  illuminating  beautiful  
underwater speleothems.  
     In coastal areas, divers generally pass through a layer of less saline water before  
reaching the underlying seawater. Divers have explored the Ox Bel Ha system (Tulum,  
Mexico),  ﬁ nding over 257 km of submerged passages reaching depths of 101 m.  
The halocline is, on average, 13 m below the surface. The neighboring Sac Actun  
system (Tulum, Mexico) is longer (333 km), and extends to greater depths, reaching  
a maximum of 130 m. There are many similar systems, with a maximum depth of  
120 m (at Dos Ojos), which is consistent with glacio-eustatic sea level ﬂ uctuations.  
     Blue  holes  (Belize,  Bahamas,  Honduras, Yucatan)  are  submarine  avens  
or  sinkholes. They  have  also  been  interpreted  as  submarine  cenotes.  However,  
explorations  have  found  that  some  of  them  are  not  connected  to  a  cave  network  
(C. Thomas,  spoken  communication). They  are  formed  when  an  aggressive  ﬂ uid  
dissolves per ascensum the limestone which forms a sinkhole when the phenomenon  
reaches the surface. This process is probably geothermally driven, as plumes of hot,  
less dense, water migrate through an aquifer (Sanford et al., 1998). This mechanism  
had previously been proposed to explain the behavior of coastal karst aquifers in  
Florida (Henry and Kohout, 1972). The rising plume enables dissolution as the waters  
mix and dissolved ions are evacuated. 

14.3 Deep Submarine Karst 

Many carbonate units that are currently submerged include closed depressions that  
can be attributed to a karst landscape (Florida, Corsica and outer shelf off the coast  
of Marseille in France). When such areas are an extension of a continental karst area,  
the features can be explained as being inherited from a period when sea level was  
lower and the limestone was exposed. When sea level rose again, due to glacioeustasy,  
tectonic uplift, continental ﬂ exure, or isostasy, the karst features were submerged.  
     Neoformation has also been considered, if freshwater circulation fed by continental  
sources dissolved the limestone, mixing with seawater could create a highly aggressive  
environment. This has been suggested, but not yet proven, as an explanation for the  

----------------------- Page 161-----------------------

148    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

linear distribution of large submarine avens on the continental shelf along the coast  
of Florida (Land and Paull, 2002).  
     However,  topography  that  looks  like  karst  one  has  been  observed  in  chalk  
deposits at depths of 1700 to 2600 m, along the Carnegie Ridge (Equator), east of the  
Galapagos. The depth and distance from any continent make this feature difﬁ cult to  
explain. It contains depressions that can reach depths of 300 m and diameters of 2 to 3  
km, larger than the features normally found in tropical karstic limestones (Figure 112).  
Although several mechanisms have been proposed, the explanation currently being  
favored is that the features are being formed through dissolution at depth (Michaud,  
2008). However, it is possible that classic karstiﬁ cation is responsible, during a period  
when the area was above sea level. The Galapagos Islands, located along the same  
ridge, are an example of an area that is currently uplifted. Such an explanation would  
require that at some point, the mechanics of subduction led to uplift of that area by  
several hundred meters, followed by 2500 m of subsidence.  

Figure  112. Topography along the Carnegie Ridge, at a depth of 2500 m, attributed to karstiﬁ cation  
                                (Paciﬁ c Ocean) (after Michaud, 2008). 

----------------------- Page 162-----------------------

                                                Coastal and Submarine Karst Aquifers      149 

14.4 The Study and Management of Coastal Aquifers 

Drawing water from coastal aquifers is problematic due to the relationship between  
the continental aquifer and the marine environment. The use and management of  
such aquifers must take into account three major difﬁ culties: evaluating discharge,  
understanding the mechanisms by which water becomes saline, and estimating the  
risk of saltwater contamination.  

14.4.1 Measuring Discharge at Sea 

Karst aquifers ﬂ ow out into the sea, either in a diffuse manner, through fractures in the  
rock, like other aquifers, or through coastal or submarine springs. The water discharge  
is  generally  brackish,  due  to  contamination  upstream  of  the  springs.  Measuring  
discharge, which is already difﬁ cult (as explained in Chapter 12), becomes even more  
challenging, since it involves measuring ﬂ uxes of water of varying salinity in a liquid  
environment with constant salinity. Additional difﬁ culties arise from the fact that in  
large conduits, like those at Port Miou, the water is stratiﬁ ed. Precise measurements  
are therefore impossible without completely isolating the spring from the surrounding  
sea-water, or taking measurements inside the conduit, as was done in Port Miou, where  
the SEM (Marseille Water Administration) dam was equipped with sensors. 
     Out at sea, a surface salinity map can be used for preliminary evaluations, by  
estimating the number of brackish springs. For example, in Port Miou and in Bestouan  
(Cassis, Bouches du Rhône) the surface salinity map shows isolated plumes, whereas  
a map of the surface around the Pissarelles Springs (Eze, Alpes Maritimes) shows  
multiple springs emerging from fractures around the main spring. In the latter case, the  
measured discharge must be increased by some factor, which is difﬁ cult to determine.  
     One method currently being developed relies on dissolved radon and radium  
isotopes to quantify groundwater ﬂ uxes in coastal regions. The isotopes are present  
in different amounts in freshwater and in seawater.  

14.4.2 Characterizing Saline Contamination 

Understanding contamination mechanisms is a necessary step in deciding how to  
exploit a resource. A terrestrial source can be excluded based on the Br/Cl ratio. A  
ratio (in mEq/L .10–3), around 1.51 is characteristic of seawater while a ratio between  

0.7 and 1.2 indicates the presence of evaporites. 
     If the marine contamination is diffuse, an increase in pressure could theoretically  
prevent salt-water intrusions, as is the case in Anavalos-Kiveri spring (Greece). If  
the contamination is occurring in the drainage network, one potential solution is to  
intercept the freshwater by drilling a borehole upstream of the mixing zone.  
     Analyzing hysteresis curves during periods of high discharge, with Qsea (sea-water  
discharge)/C  (salinity), can yield information about the mechanisms responsible for  
              T 
the salinity of the water (Arﬁ b et al., 2006). The curve (Figure 113) is characteristic  
of a limited diffuse contamination during high-discharge periods, when the hydraulic  
head in the conduit increases. 

----------------------- Page 163-----------------------

150    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                        6 

                                  1 
                   )    5                                                        2 
                   1 
                    - 
                    L 
                     . 
                    g 
                   ( 
                        4 
                    y 
                    t 
                    i 
                    n 
                    i 
                    l 
                    a 
                    s   3 
                    = 
                        
                     T 
                   C 
                        2 

                         1 

                                      3 
                        0 
                           0                   1                  2                  3 
                                           Q                         Q         3   -1 
                                              sea_ini                  sea (m  .s    ) 

Figure 1 13.  Hysteresis curve discharge/salinity, during the January 16th to 27th ﬂ oods in 2001 at  
the Almyros spring in Heraklion (Greece)  (after Arﬁ b et al., 2006).  The salinity (C  ) and intrusive  
                                                                                         T 
seawater discharge (Qsea) inducing the salinity are measured. The high-discharge period begins at 1, and  
the discharge increases without increasing the salinity until 2. Then from 2 to 3 the salinity drops and the  
seawater discharge decreases to less than the initial Qsea, because the increased hydraulic pressure in the  
                                 conduit prevents the entry of seawater. 

14.4.3 Exploitation Methods 

14.4.3.1 Catchments at the spring 

Anavalos-Kiveri. This is one of the rare examples of a successful catchment system at  
a spring. A semi-circular dam with sluice gates was built around the spring, separating  
it from the sea, and maintaining enough freshwater pressure to prevent seawater from  
intruding. The salinity determines how much the sluice gates are opened and how  
much water can be drawn. 

Tarento Springs (Italy). These are located on the Salentino Peninsula (Figure 107), in  
the Mar Piccolo at a depth of 20 m. They have been used since the Classical Antiquity,  
and Strabo described a catchment system involving copper and lead pipes. Out of  
the ﬁ fteen or so springs, the Galeso was chosen to be covered with a ﬁ berglass bell,  
encompassing the entire opening (Figure 114). The catchment system includes a siphon,  
where the seawater freshwater interface is located. Conductivity probes monitor the  
location of the interface, and the discharge being pumped out is adjusted accordingly  
in order to avoid contamination. Nevertheless, the system has thus far not been able  
to adequately decrease the salinity.  
Mortola Spring (Italy). This spring discharges approximately 100 L.s–1 and is located  

at a depth of 36 m off the coast of Menton close to the French-Italian bordure. An  

----------------------- Page 164-----------------------

                                                         Coastal and Submarine Karst Aquifers             151 

experimental catchment system was put in place during the 1960s, by placing a pipe in  
the conduit in order to feed a ﬂ oating fountain out at sea. By isolating the seawater, the  
hydraulic gradient was strong enough to creating an artesian spring that rose above sea  
level. However, the spring remained brackish the entire length of the several-month trial  
period, leading to the conclusion that the spring could not be used (Stéfanon, 1972). 
      A more recent attempt, with a catchment system based on the one at Tarento,  
ended in resounding failure, when the system drew in seawater and actually increased  
the salinity at the spring.  

                                                 fountain 

                                                                         sea surface 

                                                                  compensation 
                                                                  chimney 

                              catchment 
                                                    
                                                  control 
                                                  valves 

                                                            resin          resistivity 
                                            concrete        cap            probes 

                                              conduit  
                                       karstic  

      Figure 11 4. Catchment system at the Galeso Spring (Tarento, Italy) (after Stefanon, 1984). 

14.4.3.2 Boreholes 

The Chekka springs in northern Lebanon are a group of 17 springs, located between  
20 and 1500 m from the shore, at depths of –25 to –45 m. Their discharge is of  

----------------------- Page 165-----------------------

152     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

             3   –1                                                    –1                                     –1 
several m .s       . The salinity varies from 16000 mg.L                  in the summer to 46 mg.L               in  
the winter. At Point C, on land, the salinity is 24 mg.L–1 year-round. 

      The springs are fed by a conﬁ ned karst aquifer beneath a roof of impermeable  
marl. At Point C there is an artesian spring, and boreholes have conﬁ rmed that the  
aquifer can support artesian wells. The springs occur where there are faults through  
the marl (Figure 115).  
      The limestone aquifer is protected from salt-water intrusions by the marl, which  
forms a barrier. The springs are the only point of entry for seawater. When the hydraulic  
pressure is great enough, freshwater pushes the seawater back to point S12. If the  
discharge drops, seawater starts  ﬂ owing in from S12, preventing freshwater from  
exiting the system at that point, and directing it all towards S1. 
      Given  the  low  salinity  of  the  system,  the  water  is  usable  and  is  drawn  from  
boreholes upstream of the springs. 

   NW                                                                             C shaft                     SE 

                                                                                                                50 
                                      springs                                    and drills  
 50 
                                                                        F14      FC1  FC  F13 
            S12                      S6   S3 S2     S9     S1 
                                                                                                                0 
 0 

                                                                                                                50 
 50                          nonien 
                           Sé arls 
                        du   m 
                     es  ian 
                  arnnon 
                 m Se 
                     

                                                                                                                100 
 100 
                                           tones 
                                       imes 
                                       l 
                                   ian  
                               uron 
                              T 
                             d  
                       ian an                                                                                   150 
 150          Cenoman 
                

                        Figure 115.  Chekka springs (Lebanon) (after Kareh, 1967). 

 14.4.3.3 Drainage passageways 

In order to avoid disrupting the freshwater/salt water equilibrium, one method is to  
only extract water from the upper layer of the aquifer, using several shallow borewells,  
in order to minimize the drawdown. 
      Another option is to excavate subhorizontal drainage passageways at the top  
of the aquifer. Increased discharge is achieved by elongating the passage. There are  
numerous examples of such catchment systems, in Croatia, Cuba, and Malta (Breznik,  
1998). One advantage of this method is that the active fractures can be blocked off if  
their salinity increases too much. 

----------------------- Page 166-----------------------

                                             1515 
     Development in Karst Regions 

Construction projects in karst regions face two types of problems: those caused by  
anomalies or cavities below ground, and those caused by the hydrologic workings  
of karst systems, which can lead to water inﬂ ows during civil engineering projects,  
leaking dams, and ﬂ ooding in urban areas. 

15.1 Sub-soil Anomalies 

Anomalies can include voids, or highly uneven topography, with lapies and dolines  
beneath an unstable soil cover. These induce the risk of uneven compaction across the  
site, which can cause buildings to fracture if, for example, one corner of the foundation  
rests on limestone and another on clay. 
       In Sophia Antipolis (Valbonne, France), one building project was planned for an  
area of Bathonian paleokarst, with a complex geometry of clay layers ﬁ lling in dolines  
and caverns (Figure 116). This limestone paleorelief was gradually sealed off by clay  

                                                 place of the proposed building 

                        Bathonian 
                       limestone 

                                   palaeokarst 
                                   filled with  
                                   Bathonian clay 

                                                                          10 m 
                          Bajocian limestone 

Figure 116. Projected construction plans disregarding paleokarst (diagram based on the Life Sciences  
                                    building at Sophia Antipolis). 

----------------------- Page 167-----------------------

154      KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

spreading out and then by Bathonian limestone sedimentation. Part of the building’s  
foundation would rest on limestone, which can bear loads of over 1 MPa (10 bars),  
while another part rested on clay, which can have load-bearing capacities of less than  
0.1 MPa. In order to prevent differential compaction, foundation wells were drilled  
down beneath the clay levels.  
       In the absence of preliminary reconnaissance work, such problems are revealed  
only after the soil is cleared from a site. They are often easy to work around, but  
require costly and time-consuming accommodations. 
       More difﬁ cult problems arise if there are voids or cavities beneath a proposed  
foundation. Such spaces are often discovered by chance during construction, and the  
overseeing company often fails to report them. When they are near the surface, or  
directly beneath part of a foundation (pile, isolated pad), the roof of the cavern may be  
considered too thin to support additional weight, and the construction plans must be  
modiﬁ ed accordingly, either by changing the footprint of the foundation or by taking  
site-speciﬁ c measures. However, the mechanical strength of a cavern roof is difﬁ cult to  
estimate, and the rock may have been made less stable by the use of explosives nearby.  
In the following example at Sophia Antipolis (Alpes-Maritimes) (Figure 117) caverns  
discovered by chance were explored, and their stability analyzed. They could have  
simply been reinforced, but mining work had destabilized them, and the foundation  
had to be deepened to anchor below them (Mangan, 1985).  

                                                               GENERAL MAP 
        A 
                                                                                            CAVE 2 
                                                                                                        CAVE 1 

                                                                             CAVE 3 

                                       CAVE 4 

                                                CAVE 5 

                                                 B 

      B       cross section of north-west part           A 

          entrance 

                  excavation bottom 

                                                                                                       Ch. Mangan, 1985 

Figure  117.  Ca verns  discovered  during  construction  at  Sophia Antipolis  (Alpes-Maritimes)  
(Mangan, 1985). Signiﬁ cant excavation work had destabilized the cavern roof, requiring more than simple  
                                                reinforcement structures. 

       When the cavern is smaller than the projected construction, the foundation can  
be modiﬁ ed to form a bridge over the weak zone. The building can also be protected  
against future slumps or landslides by drilling deep foundations that pass through the  
cavern and are anchored on its ﬂ oor (Figure 118). 

----------------------- Page 168-----------------------

                                                               Development in Karst Regions          155 

                      surface                                                            suffosion  

                                                                                         doline 
                 karrens          pinnacle 

    cliff                                   rocks                        ALLUVIUM      subsidence 

                         overhang 
                                                                            collapsed  
                                                                            cave 

                                                       cave 

Figure 118. Sch ematic rendering of the civil engineering problems found in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia)  
(after Chang and Hong, 1986). The town of Kuala Lumpur is partially built on alluvium that ﬁ lled in over  
                                               paleokarst. 

15.2 Hydrologic Problems 

15.2.1 Water Inﬂ ows 

Dolines  and  poljes,  which  normally  absorb  all  the  water  ﬂ owing  into  them,  can  
occasionally become saturated and create temporary lakes, ﬂ ooding any buildings in  
the basin. Construction projects with deep foundations can also cause ﬂ ooding, by  
blocking groundwater circulation. 
      Groundwater circulation patterns, inherited from often-complex paleogeography,  
can sometimes behave in atypical ways as a result of the geometry and size of pre- 
existing conduits, which can only accept limited discharge. As a result, during rainy  
periods there can be sudden outﬂ ows due to the water table rising, sometimes over  
a hundred meters, which can lead to ﬂ ooded buildings. This may be a yearly event,  
or it may be a rare occurrence, in which case it quickly disappears from collective  
memory. For example, in an industrial zone called Fuon Santa (La Trinité, France) a  
warehouse containing household electronics was suddenly ﬂ ooded by water pouring  
from a temporary spring, whose existence had been completely forgotten. The aquifer  
feeding the spring had other exit points beneath a layer of alluvium from the Paillon  
River, which is the local hydrologic base level. Since all of the springs were hidden by  
alluvium, there had been nothing to suggest that the karst system was active. However,  
local toponymy provided clues as to the presence of a spring: Fuon Santa means “Holy  
Fountain”, a name commonly used for springs with mysterious behavior.  

----------------------- Page 169-----------------------

156     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

15.2.2 Aquifer Contamination 

Civil engineering projects, quarries, and underground construction projects in karst  
areas  can  lead  to  signiﬁ cant  groundwater  contamination  by  hydrocarbons  or  by  
chemicals used in cement grouting. This leads to drinking water contamination or to  
decreases in discharge. For example, the Larvoto springs (Monaco), which were used  
as a source of drinking water, were highly negatively impacted by the construction of  
nearby buildings and their foundations. 

15.2.3 Dams and Lakes in Karst Areas 

In limestone areas the prevalence of narrow gorges in canyons and the high mechanical  
strength  of  the  rock  have  favored  dam  construction  [some  as  high  as  105  m,  in  
Oymapınar  (Turkey)]. When  the  projected  reservoir  extends  over  limestone  units  
as well, there is a risk that water will ﬂ ow into underground passages and create a  
hydraulic short-circuit (Table 13). There are several examples of large dams that were  
never able to ﬁ ll their reservoirs, both in France (Bouvante Dam, Vercors) and abroad,  
such as the Montejaque Dam in Spain (Thérond, 1973) (Figure 119). 
      The leakage generally ﬂ ows out through pre-existing springs, or through empty  
or sediment-ﬁ lled karstic conduits. When the inﬂ ux of water clears out the sediment,  
there are sometimes very sudden increases in discharge. The water usually emerges  
back at the surface less than 2 km from the dam. Thérond (1973) demonstrated that  
the springs’ natural drainage basin, when subject to an increase in discharge due to  
leakage, extends out to the reservoir. He estimates that a karstic conduit presents a  
signiﬁ cant risk if it is less than 150 m away from a reservoir. The size of a spring’s  
drainage basin can be quickly evaluated if the speciﬁ c inﬁ ltration modulus of the  
                                                                                    –1     –2            –1 
relevant areas is known (for example, with a modulus of 10 L.s                        .km    , a 10 L.s      
                                     2 
spring corresponds to a 1 km  drainage basin).  
      In France, the Génissiat Dam on the Rhône (104 m), the Vouglans Dam on the Ain  
(130 m), the Castillon Dam (100 m) and the Sainte-Croix Dam (90 m) on the Verdon  
were built on karst terrain, and in some cases were faced with signiﬁ cant cave networks  
(Caborne  de  Ménouille,  Fontaine  l’Evêque  Cave).  Nevertheless,  time-consuming  
                                                                                2 
studies and the emplacement of large grout curtains (44,400 m  in Castillon, 50,000  
   2 
m  in Sainte-Croix) led to success for the dams.  

                Table 13. Examples of the magnitude of leakage from dams in karst areas. 

                                                                                                3 –1 
                   Name                              Country                   Discharge in m .s 
                   Keban                              Turkey                            26 
                   Vrtac                            Yugoslavia                          25 
                    Iliki                             Greece                            13 
                  Canelles                             Spain                             8  
                 Camarasa                              Spain                           11.2 
                    Lar                                 Iran                           10.8 
                   Marun                                Iran                            10 
                 Mavrovo                            Macedonia                           9.5 
                 Great Falls                           USA                              9.5 

----------------------- Page 170-----------------------

                                                   Development in Karst Regions   157 

     N-NW                                                              S-SE 

                                         Jurassic limestone anticline  

            proposed reservoir 

                                                leaks                 Rio  
   impermeable 
                                                                      Guadiaro 
   Cretaceous and Eocene 

                                                                      Cretaceous 

            p 
              r 
              o 
                p 
                 o 
                  s 
                   e 
                     d 
                       r 
                       e 
                        s 
                          e 
                           r 
                            v 
                             o 
                              i 
                              r 

                                                   e 
                                                  n 
                                                 o 
                                                z 
                                              s  
                                             k 
                                            a 
                                           e 
                                          l 

           1 km   

                                                             ) 
                                                             e 
                                                            v 
                                                           a 
                                                           c 
     North                                             o  ( 
                            E                          t     
                          T                           a  o 
                         N                           G   r 
                        O   E                        l  e 
                      M    U                           d 
                          Q                         e  i 
                         A                         d  d 
                        J                         a   n 
                                                  v  u 
                                                 e  H 
                                                u   l  
                                               C   e 
                                                  d 
                                                     
                                                 y 
                                                                          proposed 
                                                                          plant 

                                                             o 
                                                            r 
                                                           a 
                                                          i 
                                                         d 
                                                        a 
                                                       u 
                                                      G 
                                                    o  
                                                    i 
                                                  R 
                          main  
                          leaks 

                     other leaks 

 Benaojan 
spring group 

                 F igure 119. Leakage from the Montejaque Dam (Spain). 

----------------------- Page 171-----------------------

158     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

   Cheurfas Dam (Algeria) 

   After  it  was  rebuilt  following  partial  destruction  in  1885,  this  dam  required  signiﬁ cant  
   waterprooﬁ ng in order to mitigate losses from its reservoir, which was being drained through  
   the underlying karstiﬁ ed Tortonian limestone. The inﬁ ltrated water re-emerged immediately  
   downstream of the dam, at the level of several springs on the left bank of the Oued Mebtouh  
   River. On the right bank, a grout curtain was easily built, stretching down to the underlying  
   Helvetian sandy clays. On the left bank, the particular structure of the site (a faulted syncline)  
   meant that a conduit had to be excavated slightly above the water level in the reservoir, to  
   serve as a platform from which to build a grout curtain. The curtain itself required a total  
   of 5,824 m of injection wells, and 2,631 tonnes of grout. The construction, once ﬁ nished,  
   decreased the reservoir’s losses by 90%.  

   Keban and Atatürk Dams (Euphrates, Turkey) 

   Turkey undertook an ambitious development program along the Euphrates, consisting of  
   several large dams. Completed in 1974, the Keban gravity dam, 185 high, was built on the  
                                                                    3  –1 
   Euphrates (which has an average discharge of 655 m .s                ) on a marble unit, with the goal of  
                             3 
   creating a 30 billion m  reservoir to be used for irrigation and hydroelectric power generation.  
                                           3 
   During construction, a 100,000 m  karst cavern, the Crab Cave, was discovered 300 m below  
   the dam site. It was ﬁ lled with cement, and the unit beneath the dam was waterproofed using  
   a grout curtain. On the left bank, karst features were discovered during preliminary geologic  
   surveys, as well as during the excavation of a diversion. A 250 m deep grout curtain was put  
   in place in this area as well, although it appears to have been insufﬁ cient given the position  
   of the Crab Cave. When the reservoir was ﬁ lled, signiﬁ cant leaks appeared, creating a vortex  
                                                                                           3  –1 
   on the lake’s surface. Increasing leakage led, in 1976, to losses of 26 m .s                 , compared to  
                   3  –1 
   the initial 6 m .s   . The lake was partially drained, revealing an opening into a large cavern,  
   the Petek Cave. This opening was surrounded by a concrete chimney, in order to decrease  
   its absorption capacity, and was then ﬁ lled with one million m3 of material. Part of the left  

   bank was also waterproofed with a 50 cm-thick curtain wall. These modiﬁ cations brought  
                                         3  –1 
   the water losses down to 9 m .s            , which is only slightly over 1% of the Euphrates’ total  
   discharge, and its therefore economically viable. 

        An examination of the caverns led to the conclusion that they were hydrothermal in  
   origin (Bozovic et al., 1972). This may explain why the risk of karst-related problems was  
   underestimated. In fact, surface surveys during the preliminary studies for the dam did not  
   ﬁ nd very evolved karst features.  

        A similar problem occurred during the construction of the Atatürk Dam downstream of the  
   Keban Dam. The former rests on an area of dolomitic limestones interspersed with thinly  
   bedded limestones. A few springs were known to exist downstream, but their temperature  
   (24  to  26°C)  suggested  a  hydrothermal  source,  tied  to  deep  karstiﬁ cation  estimated  to  
   extend down 300 m. The risk of reservoir losses through these rocks had been considered  
   negligible. Nevertheless, when the dam was built in 1989, the discharge at the springs  
   increased gradually to over 10 m3 s–1 . The grout curtain that had been built extended down  

   to 200 m but did not reach an impermeable substratum, and so water was able to  ﬂ ow  
   around it (Ertunç, 1999). 

15.2.4 Water Storage in Poljes 

The sediments at the bottom of poljes are generally relatively impermeable, usually  
consisting of alternating layers of gravel and clay. It is therefore logical to use this  
natural impermeability to store water outside of the rainy season, by blocking up the  
ponors. Several examples of this type of use are known in the karst regions of the  
Dinaric Alps. Whether or not such a project succeeds depends on the type and on the  
thickness of the deposits that have accumulated in the depression, on the difﬁ culty of  

----------------------- Page 172-----------------------

                                                              Development in Karst Regions          159 

effectively clogging the ponors, and on the risk of water ﬁ nding other entry points into  
the epikarst. In addition, some ﬂ ood occur through estavelles when the water table  
rises, which complicates waterprooﬁ ng efforts. The rising water table exerts a force  
that comes from below rather than from above, which is what most reservoirs are built  
to handle. Rising water tables can also ﬂ ush air out of the conduits. The Popovo polje  
reservoir (Bosnia-Herzegovina) was built with a waterproof membrane, and a relief  
valve in a borehole, through which air can escape when the rising water table pushes  
it out of the passageways beneath the polje (Breznik, 1998).  
      There are also numerous examples of failed attempts, since water often ﬂ ows  
around structures meant to hold it in, and can clear out old karst conduits. The Slivje  
ponor, which drains the Nikšičko polje (Montenegro), for example, was surrounded  
in 1950 by a 50 m in diameter, 20 m high chimney, to create a reservoir. The chimney  
was built directly onto the limestone bedrock, under ten or so meters of clayey silt.  
As soon as water was put into the reservoir, new absorption points opened up around  
the chimney, and the water cleared out older passageways, resulting in major losses  
from the reservoir. Eventually, signiﬁ cant construction work involving grout curtains  
resulted in several functioning reservoirs on the surface of the polje (Breznik, 1998).  
      In Thorenc,  a  small  tourist  resort  in  the Alpes-Maritimes  (France),  a  similar  
project was undertaken around 1900, with the goal of creating a lake. It was  located  
in a small polje, at the contact between Cretaceous marl and Jurassic limestone, fed by  
a permanent stream and drained by two ponors at the lowest points of the depression.  
The  polje  is  located  at  an  elevation  of  1,165  m,  and  tracer  tests  demonstrated  a  
rapid linkage between the water absorbed at the ponors and the Mouna spring, at an  
elevation of 1,000 m. The ponors were isolated by structures anchored in the bedrock,  
concrete chimneys with valves to regulate the level of the lake and to accommodate  
overﬂ ows by directing them into the ponors. A lake did form when the project was  
ﬁ rst tested, but hydraulic short-circuits soon appeared in the immediate periphery of  
the chimneys, absorbing all of the accumulated water. The project was abandoned,  
but the two concrete chimneys remain, now standing in a grassy ﬁ eld, as reminders  
of this failed project (Figure 120).  

                                                                  ponor isolated 
                                        polje                     by a circular 
                                                                  dam 

                 proposed lake level                     valves 

                                      hydraulic short cuts 

                Figure  120. Thorenc polje (Alpes-Maritimes). Outline of the project. 

----------------------- Page 173-----------------------

160    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

15.3 Karstic Subsidence and Drawdown 

On a human timescale, the effects of dissolution on limestone are barely noticeable.  
However, pumping in karst aquifers can, by transporting ﬁ ne-grained sediment, clear  
out caves, which can collapse in on themselves. These collapses can have repercussions  
at  the  surface,  resulting  in  signiﬁ cant  damage  to  any  buildings  in  the  area.  Same  
mechanism may also occur in non karstic areas (Figure 121).  

                     Figure 1 21. Urban pseudokarst sinkhole in Guatemala. 

     In areas with gypsum units, given the high solubility of the rock, anthropogenic  
dissolution cavities can appear and evolve rapidly, as they did at the Kodak factories  
in Sevran (France), where large amounts of water had been pumped out to be used in  
processing photographic ﬁ lm (Toulemont, 1987). The Cannes-Grasse (France) highway  
collapsed suddenly for the same reason in 1998, due to pumping water to irrigate a  
golf course (Mangan and Gilli, 2002) (Figure 122). 
     A similar problem arose during the construction of the Toulon (France) highway  
tunnel, which collapsed in 1996. Construction of the tunnel, which was below sea  
level, required signiﬁ cant pumping over the course of several years. The pumping  
reactivated a paleokarst in the Keuper gypsum unit, which had originally formed  
when the Mediterranean was much lower, and had then been isolated and ﬁ lled in  
when sea-level rose again. 

----------------------- Page 174-----------------------

                                                                  Development in Karst Regions            161 

Figure 12 2. Cannes-Grasse highway collapse (Alpes Maritimes, France) in 1998. The damage was a  
result of gypsum in the underlying rock being rapidly dissolved due to groundwater pumping to irrigate  
                                                a golf course.  

   The 1996 collapse of the Toulon tunnel 

   Beneath  the  city  of Toulon  runs  a  highway  tunnel,  thirty  meters  below  the  surface  and  
   approximately  ten  meters  below  sea  level.  When  the  tunnel  was  designed,  preliminary  
   studies did not take into consideration the paleogeography or the state of the karst system  
   in the coastal area. This had serious repercussions: during the excavation process in 1996,  
   part of the tunnel roof collapsed, bringing construction to a halt. The accident, while it luckily  
   did not cause any deaths, was observed by an eyewitness who reported that the side walls  
   of the tunnel collapsed ﬁ rst, causing the roof to cave in. This suggested that a cave had  
   collapsed beneath the tunnel, rather than that the roof had failed.  

   • Hydrogeologic analyses demonstrated that signiﬁ cant inﬂ ows of water had been noted in  
     areas where the construction passed through karst. They were stopped up using grouting,  
     without any investigation regarding what happened to the water that was thereby diverted. 

   • Following the cave-in, geophysical measurements indicated a signiﬁ cant negative anomaly  
     in the area, which was attributed to a pocket ﬁ lled with loose material. 

   • Bathymetric surveys nearby had found karst paleorelief at depths of 120 m. A bathymetric  
     analysis  was  made  in  the  study  area,  based  on  SHOM  (Naval  Hydrographic  and  
     Oceanographic  Service)  data,  with  an  isobath  spacing  of  1  m. The  analysis  revealed  
     the following features: closed depressions peppering the sea ﬂ oor, and a narrow canyon  
     approximately 12 m deep cutting into it. Both are characteristic of karst topography.  

   • On land, a few kilometers from Toulon, divers exploring submerged karst systems (Ragas)  
     found passageways 90 m below sea level. 

   Deep karst systems are therefore present in the area, at least down to elevations of –100 m,  
   and probably as far as –150 m. Karstiﬁ cation occurred in the limestone units, but also in the  
   Keuper gypsum layers, which were probably affected by water rising up from the limestone.  

   Geologic surveys undertaken both before and after the accident revealed the existence, in the  
   gypsum units, of a depression ﬁ lled with weathering debris. Data archives, when analyzed,  
   contained evidence that similar cave-ins had occurred in the past. 

----------------------- Page 175-----------------------

162    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

   Based on all of this information, the following sequence of events was proposed to explain  
   the accident: 

   The Mont Faron limestone massif, which drains to the south, funneled large volumes of water  
   into gypsum-rich areas. During a period of much lower sea level, a strong hydraulic gradient  
   led to a high degree of karstiﬁ cation in the Jurassic limestones and the Keuper gypsum  
   units, as well as in the underlying Muschelkalk limestone. When sea level rose again, the  
   sea ﬂ ooded the karst area; gradually ﬁ lling sediment into the spaces that had been carved  
   out. When construction began, several years of pumping reactivated old circulation patterns,  
   clearing one of the old passageways and leading to its collapse. The process was ampliﬁ ed  
   by salt-water intrusion, which increased the gypsum’s solubility (Mangan and Gilli, 1997). 

15.4 Location, Detection, and Remediation of Cavities 

15.4.1 Goals 

During construction in karst regions, there are two essential questions to be asked: how  
to detect the presence of cavities, and how to work around them? Some preliminary  
reconnaissance work is necessary in order to choose the most appropriate strategy: 

   •  Re-locating the construction project 
   •  Modifying the foundation design 
   •  Implanting specialized foundations 
   •  Reinforcing the bedrock 
   •  Reinforcing the cavity 

15.4.2 Geophysical Detection Methods 

Geophysical methods are useful during preliminary surveys, but they are limited by  
several factors: the cavity may be empty, or it may be ﬁ lled with water, sand, or clay.  
The rock around it may be fractured, or completely solid. The space may be elongated  
or compact. Since the anomaly that is detected depends on the contrast between the  
cavity and the surrounding rock, it can be difﬁ cult to see a space if there is minimal  
contrast. 
     Numerous  attempts  to  detect  karst  conduits  from  the  surface  have  generally  
shown that it is impossible, unless the conduit is very large and close to the surface.  
However,  these  methods  can  shed  light  on  the  structure  of  the  rock  unit,  which  
inﬂ uences karstiﬁ cation (Guérin, 2004). This information can be used to determine  
which follow-up methods are appropriate, such as for example drilling boreholes. 

15.4.2.1 Microgravimetry 

This method entails measure the local variations in the gravity ﬁ eld, which indicates  
empty  spaces  as  a  mass  deﬁ cit. This  method  requires  very  precise  topographical  
mapping and corrections for elevation, and is generally used only in ﬂ at areas (for  
example the ﬂ oor of an excavated area). It reveals any areas that are less dense than  
the surrounding rock, and can therefore detect empty spaces, pockets ﬁ lled with water,  
and even cavities that were ﬁ lled in by debris. Measurements are not affected by the  

----------------------- Page 176-----------------------

                                                              Development in Karst Regions         163 

electric grid, making this method useful in urban areas. It works particularly well for  
man-made cavities.  

15.4.2.2 Electric resistivity 

This method involves sending an electric current into the ground using two electrodes,  
and then measuring the resistivity at the surface. It requires a signiﬁ cant contrast  
between the rock and the hollow area. When a cavity is empty, it forms a zone with  
poor resistivity. On the other hand, if it is ﬁ lled with clay, it will be more conductive  
than the limestone.  

   Resistivity in :.m            1          10         100        1000      10 000     100 000       

      
   METAMORPHIC ROCKS 

   IGNEOUS ROCKS 

   MASSIVE LIMESTONE 

   POROUS LIMESTONE 

   SANDSTONE 

   MARL 

   GLACIER CLAY 

   GRAVEL 

   SAND 

   SILT 
     
   WATER 

   SEAWATER 

                                  1         10         100        1000      10 000     100 000 

                      Figure 123. Average resistivity values in known contexts. 

Various mechanisms and techniques are available: 

Electric dipoles 

The current is sent between two electrodes, AB, and the resistivity is measured between  
two electrodes, MN. The depth that is revealed corresponds to AB/4. Electrodes A and  
B are gradually spaced farther and farther apart to measure greater and greater depths,  
building up a cross-sectional image. A dry cavity is more resistive than the fractured  
limestone surrounding it. A cavity ﬁ lled with clay will be wetter and therefore more  
conductive.  

----------------------- Page 177-----------------------

164      KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Electric panels 

Measurements are taken by moving around a mechanism with a ﬁ xed geometry, which  
can then be used to compare the characteristics of different locations. Another option  
is to install a network of electrodes.  

Depth     Iteration 4 Abs. error = 12.9% 
     0.0                           64.0                          128                           192                          m 
   0.7 
  6.5 

  13.3 

  23.9 

 31.2 

  40.4 
      Inverse Model Resistivity Section 

     115      248      538      1165      2522     5464     11834     25632 
                                Resistivity in ohm.m 
                                                                                                    Unit electrode spacing 4.0 m 

    Figure 124. Underground cavities revealed by electric panels in Lamalou (after Guérin, 2004). 

              Color image of this figure appears in the color plate section at the end of the book. 

Grounding 

The primary conduit in the Port Miou cave, which contains a brackish underground  
river,  was  detected  from  the  surface  using  an  alternating  current  loop,  with  one  
electrode at the spring and one electrode on the ground 1 km upstream. The current  
ﬂ owed through the brackish water, which served as a natural conductor (Figure 125). 

           North                                                                        Port Miou Calanque 

                                                            S 
                                                            O 
                                                              L 
                                                               V 
                                                                A 
                                    t                             Y 
                                    ra 
                                      i                              
                                      l                             Q 
                                                                     U 
                                                                       A 
                                                                        R 
                                                                          R 
                                                                           Y 

                                                                                               110                 spring 
                                                                                               1 
                              0 
                              0 
                             1                                                               115 
                                                                                             1 
                                                 5         base line 
                                                0 
                                               1 

            well                               110                         0 
                                                                          10 
    5                                             115                    111                             Shaft 
   0 
  1                                   1151115155 
                                           110110                            5 
                                                                            0 
                                                                           1 
   105 
                                                                            100 
                                    105      0 
                                            0 
                                           1 
                                                                                                               100 m 

Figure 125. Ge ophysical detection of the Port Miou conduit (Marseille, Cassis) (after Cornet et al., 1963). 

 15.4.2.3 Magnetic and electromagnetic methods 

These  methods  involve  measuring  natural  or  artiﬁ cially  induced  variations  in  the  
Earth’s magnetic ﬁ eld. 

Georadar 

An antenna sends high-frequency electromagnetic waves into the ground, as a series  
of very short pulses. The waves are reﬂ ected by ﬂ at surfaces and by anomalies in the  

----------------------- Page 178-----------------------

                                                                      Development in Karst Regions             165 

subsurface. Georadar is primarily used in civil engineering to detect cavities a few  
meters below roads. In well-suited terrain, with low-frequency antennas (10 to 200  
Hz), georadar can reach depths of up to thirty meters. Figure 27 depicts a doline,  
its sediment ﬁ ll, and the vertical conduit that drains the area. Figure 126 shows one  
application of this method, in detecting cavities in an urban area in order to manage  
the risk of slumps and subsidence.  

                  Distance (m) 
   H       0                       50                      100                      150 
                                                                                                            0 
        0 

                                                                                                               [ 
                                                                                                               f 
  )                                                                                                            o 
  s                                                                                                            r  D 
  n                                                                                                            v  e 
                                                                                                                =  p 
  ( 
     
                                                                                                             5    t 
     100 
                                                                                                               0  h 
  e 
                                                                                                               .    
                                                                                                               1 ( 
  m 
  i                                                                                                               m 
                                                                                                               m  ) 
  T 
                                                                                                               / 
                                                                                                               s 
                                                                                                               ] 

     200                                                                                                    10 

                                               Cave                                        Cave 
   I 

  J        0     Distance (m)      50                       100                     150 
                                                                                                         
          
        0                                                                                                   0 

    ) 
    m                      C 1C 1                         C 2 
    ( 
       
    h 
    t                                                                                                      
                                                                                                            5 
        5 
    p 
    e 
    D                                                                   C 3 

                                                                                          C 4 

       10                                                                                                   10 

Figure 126. Geor adar survey and cavity detection in the town of Zaouit Ech Cheikh (Morocco) (after  
                                           El Khammari et al., 2007). 

Magnetic resonance sounding 

MRS, or Magnetic Resonance Sounding, works by exciting the hydrogen protons  
in water with an electromagnetic  ﬁ eld, and then measuring their resonance signal  
after they are no longer being stimulated. An alternating current is used to generate  
an electromagnetic ﬁ eld, which excites the protons in water molecules. The current  
is stopped abruptly, and the protons emit a signal that can be detected at the surface.  
This signal is proportional to the amount of water present below ground. This method,  
which is used to measure the size of groundwater reservoirs, can only detect water- 
ﬁ lled cavities. Tests on the Hortus Causses (Hérault, France) found that MRS could  
detect a karst conduit 40 m below ground, feeding the Lamalou spring (Gard, France)  
(Vouillamoz et al., 2002) (Figure 127).  

----------------------- Page 179-----------------------

166   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

  n 
  o 
 i 
 t 
  c 
  e 
  s 
                                                                    . 
                                                                   ) 
  s                                                                 e 
                                                                   l 
  s                                                                ﬁ  
  o                                                                   
  r                                                                M 
  c                                              t 
                                                 i                 G 
 R                                               u                 R 
                                                 d                 B 
 M                                               n                 (  
                                                 o                 S 
 P                                               c                 R 
                                                 n                 M 
                                                                      
                                                 w                  y 
                                                                   b 
                                                 o                    
                                                 n                 ) 
                                                                   d 
                                                 k                  r 
                                                                    a 
                                                                   G 
                                                                   ( 
                                                                      
                                                                    g 
                                                                    n 
                                                                   i 
                                                                    r 
                                                                    p 
               )m( htpeD         )m( htpeD          )m( htpeD       s  
                                                                    u 
                                                                    o 
                                                                   l 
                                                                    a 
                                                                    m 
                                                                    a 
                                                                   L 
                                                                      
                                                                    e 
                                                                   h 
                                                                   t 
                                                                      
                                                                    g 
                                                                    n 
                                                                   i 
                                                                   d 
                                                                    e 
                                                                    e 
                                                                   f 
                                                                      
                                                                   t 
                                                                   i 
                                                                    u 
                                                                   d 
                                                                    n 
                                                                    o 
                                                                    c 
                                                                      
                                                                    e 
                                                                   h 
                                                                   t 
                                                                      
                                                                   f 
                                                                    o 
                                                                      
                                                                    n 
                                                                    o 
                                                                   i  
   p                                                               t 
   a                                                                c 
                                                                    e 
                                                                   t 
  M                                                                 e 
                                                                   D 
                                                                      
  R                                                          e      . 
                                                                    7 
                                                            l 
                                                            i       2 
  M                                                         f       1 
  P                                                          o      e  
                                                             r      r 
                                                            P       u 
                                                                    g 
                                                                   i 
                                                            R      F 
                                                            M 
                                                            P 

----------------------- Page 180-----------------------

                                                        Development in Karst Regions     167 

Very Low Frequency 

VLF, or Very Low Frequency, sounding relies on the propagation of very low frequency  
hertzian waves, which can pass through bedrock and water. This type of wave is used  
by various military organizations to communicate with submarines. There are therefore  
stations constantly emitting these waves, which are modiﬁ ed as they pass through  
subsurface anomalies: mineral deposits, faults, etc. These variations can be measured  
at the surface with a simple receptor setup. Although this method is simple in practice,  
it is not often used in karst environments. It has, however, been used on occasion,  
for example, to locate a subterranean passage in Alcala (Spain) (Ogilvy et al., 1991).  

15.4.2.4 Seismic and acoustic methods 

These methods rely on the analysis of sound waves travelling through the ground,  
generated by some type of shock: a weight dropping, explosives, etc. Planar surfaces  
(bedding planes, faults) can be detected because they reﬂ ect or refract the waves.  
However, sound waves generally pass around cavities, so these are not visible unless  
they are very large or very near the surface.  
     It seems possible to pick up and locate, from the surface, the sound of subterranean  
waterfalls  using  geophones,  but  as  yet  there  are  no  examples  of  this  being  done  
(N. Florsch, verbal communication). However, one interesting experiment can be noted,  
by Breznik (1998). In an attempt to locate the karstic conduit draining the Fatničko  
polje (Bosnia-Herzegovina), three “geo-bombs” were detonated at intervals. The 1 kg  
spherical bombs had a density similar to that of water, so that they would be carried  
along by the current after being thrown into a ponor. The explosions, spaced 1 hour  
apart, were detected from the surface by a network of geophones extending as far as  
150 m from the insertion site. 

15.4.3 Controlling for Geophysical Anomalies 

Geophysical surveys can generally provide a good image of a known cavity, after  
adjustments and transformations, but creating an image of an unknown cavity is a  
more delicate operation. The various methods described above only reveal anomalies,  
which are often difﬁ cult to interpret. It is therefore prudent to consider that any single  
method  is  inadequate,  and  that  only  the  intersection  of  information  from  several  
different methods, with convergent results, is enough to support the presence of a  
subterranean cavity. 
     Once this is done, the best method to determine whether or not a cavity is indeed  
present is to drill a borehole. As a result, cavity detection is often done directly by  
drilling a more or less closely spaced array of boreholes. Before the construction of  
the Besançon Hospital (France), in a karst area, a tightly spaced array of boreholes  
was drilled in order to detect any potential cavities. When no karstic indicators were  
found, construction began. However, during the construction process, several cavities  
and conduits were found. Upon comparing the locations of these anomalies and the  

----------------------- Page 181-----------------------

168    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

borehole grid, it became apparent that, by unlucky coincidence, the cavities all fell  
in areas between boreholes.  
      The degree of precision achieved is therefore a function of the borehole spacing,  
and the survey team must therefore balance the high cost of careful reconnaissance and  
the need for adequate information. The combination of relatively cheap geophysical  
surveys over the entire area and more expensive borehole drilling in the potentially  
risky areas indicated by the geophysical surveys is a good way of optimizing costs.  
During drilling, recording the drilling speed can provide useful information. A sudden  
increase in drilling speed suggests a clay-ﬁ lled pocket, whereas a large empty space  
can result in the drill bit dropping suddenly (Figure 128). 

    Site . METZ - NANCY GEODERIS N2004 

     Sondage. Sxxx                         Profondeur (m) : 14.51        Tracé le : 27/12/2004 

    Prof           VIA                     PO                   PI                   CR 
     (m)          (m/h)                   (MPa)               (MPa)                 (MPa) 

         0  100  200 300  400  500  0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 0    1     2     3  0   5    10  15   20 
       0 

       1 

       2 

       3 

       4 

       5 

       6 

       7 

       8 

       9 

       10 

       11 

       12 

       13 

       14 

       15 

       16 

       17 

       18 

       19 

F igure 128. Borehole in which the drill bit dropped suddenly (GEODERIS ﬁ le). The drop is visible  
on the VIA (instantaneous penetration velocity) and is accompanied by a drop in PO (bit pressure) and  
                                         CR (torque rotation).  

----------------------- Page 182-----------------------

                                                                Development in Karst Regions          169 

15.4.4 Examining Hollow Cavities 

Once a cavity has been detected, the best option is ﬁ rsthand exploration by speleologists  
(cf. Speleology chapter), which sometimes requires widening the entrance passageway.  
This is not possible if the cavity is located far below the surface, or if it was discovered  
by drilling. In these cases, it can be roughly mapped with equipment lowered through  
the borehole and controlled remotely from the surface: laser telemetry in a dry space,  
sonar if the cavity is submerged. These methods can be paired with video footage or  
stereo-photography.  
      Laser  telemetry,  with  specially  adapted  setups  for  downhole  measurements,  
can be used to directly map the visible areas of cavities. One such specialized setup,  
“La Taupe” (the mole) from Ginger-CEBTP ﬁ rm, includes a laser telemeter and a  
rotating step motor, which are gradually lowered down a borehole, recording a three- 
dimensional array of data points that can then be used to calculate the volume of the  
cavity (Figure 129). 

        horizontal sections 
                                                                 North view 
                                                                10° overhang 

Fi gure 129. Laser measurements and 3D image of a cavity discovered by drilling (after GEODERIS, 2005). 

15.4.5 Working with Cavities 

When a hollow cavity is discovered on a construction site, the question becomes what  
to do about it. Are the geometry and the mechanical strength of the roof solid enough  
to support the building? If the building cannot be moved and the foundation design  
cannot be modiﬁ ed to create a bridge over the void, or to shift loads to the rock beneath  
the cavity, reinforcements may be necessary. When the cavity is accessible to humans,  
bricked support pillars can be built. Other methods, such as those traditionally used to  
reinforce cliffs and rock faces, can also be used in a subterranean context (shotcrete,  
bolting, anchors, injection, etc.) (Besson, 2005).  
      If the cavity is not accessible, it can be ﬁ lled in from the surface by the injection  
of inert material from the surface, using hydraulic or pneumatic mechanisms. Vertical  
reinforcements can also be put in place: artiﬁ cial stalagmites created by injecting  
successive layers of quick-setting grout (Figure 130) or by ﬁ lling in geotextile sleeves.  
However, this requires a good understanding of the cave’s geometry, and is dependent  

----------------------- Page 183-----------------------

170     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                                                       piliar 

                                                                             CONCRETE 

                                                                 inclined drill 
                                         altered zone   

                                                                     concrete around  
                                            manual                   the micropile 
                                            excavation 
                                    video   of clay                  hand made 

                                                                     formwork 

                                                          micropile 

               unsuccessful filling 
               with concrete                                              

                    Figu re 130. Cave underpinning by constructing a concrete pillar. 

on the stability of the unit that the supports are being built upon. Hydraulic cleanings  
may be necessary to clear out clayey ﬁ ll. 
      Unfortunately,  there  is  a  strong  tendency  to  minimize  the  time  spent  in  
reconnaissance,  and  to  simply  fill  the  cavity  with  concrete  before  continuing  
construction. The  problem  is  only  considered  complex  if  the  required  volume  of  
concrete is unusually large! However, heedlessly ﬁ lling in a cavity makes it completely  
inaccessible, and prevents any further monitoring. This can lead to problems such as: 

    •  ineffective cavity treatment,  
    •  uncontrolled spreading of the ﬁ ll material, 
    •  changes in the natural circulation paths of groundwater, 
    •  destruction of an unknown underground heritage, 
    •  needless costs, as the natural strength of the cave roof may be enough to support  
       the building. 

   Examples of construction problems in Sophia Antipolis 

   Towards the end of construction work for a multi-story building in Sophia Antipolis (France),  
   an inaccessible cave was discovered, by chance, very close to the building. The construction  
   company decided to ﬁ ll it with concrete. Three truck-mixer-drums of concrete were dumped  
   into the cavity, without ﬁ lling it. A video inspection was then undertaken, which revealed a  
   cavern large enough to be explored by speleologists. The entrance was widened and the  
   cavers noted that the lower parts of the cavern were blocked off by concrete, preventing  
   further exploration. They did ﬁ nd a lateral passageway extending beneath the construction  

----------------------- Page 184-----------------------

                                                             Development in Karst Regions          171 

site, directly below one of the load-bearing columns supporting the building. More surprising  
still, they found two micropiles passing through the conduit. Preliminary geologic surveys  
had  indicated  that  the  limestone  in  this  area  was  highly  fractured,  and  recommended  
micropiles for stabilization. However, a micropile is useless if it is passing through a cavern  
and not anchored in rock. Underpinning was therefore needed. The clay covering the ﬂ oor  
of the cavern was cleared away, casings were put in place around the micropiles, and a  
precise topographic survey was undertaken in order to choose a location for a directional  
borehole. Cement was injected into the casing through the borehole. Once the cement set,  
the casing was removed to verify that the micropiles were indeed solidly anchored all the  
way to the cavern roof. 

This example demonstrates three major errors: 

• Lack of preliminary surveys looking for cavities in an area well known for being highly  
  karstiﬁ ed 

• Lack of geologic monitoring and quality control while the micropiles were being put in  
  place (the drill bit dropping suddenly during drilling for the micropiles could not have gone  
  unnoticed)  

• Lack of any examination of the cavity before injecting cement.  

The problem of stabilizing the load-bearing pillar was therefore resolved, but the concrete  
that  was  haphazardly  poured  into  the  cavern  blocked  off  further  exploration,  making  it  
impossible to see if the cavern extends out below other parts of the building and if it has  
water ﬂ owing through it. 

----------------------- Page 185-----------------------

                                       1616 
                                  Tourism 

Water resource management is the primary application of karstology, but karst-related  
tourism is also an important economic activity. 

16.1 Touristic Regions 

Karst landscapes have the power to attract large crowds. In France, the writing of  
E.A. Martel in the 19th century played a signiﬁ cant role in popularizing the karst areas  
of France. A few famous locations draw several million visitors every year: 

   •  The Calanques near Marseille, 
   •  The Fontaine de Vaucluse,  
   •  The Loue and Lison Springs, 
   •  The Gorges du Verdon, 
   •  The Causses and the Cévennes, 
   •  The Gorges in the Tarn and the Ardèche. 

Notable sites in other parts of the world include: 

   •  the Karst region in Slovenia, 
   •  the Dalmatian Coast and islands (Croatia), 
   •  the Stone Forests in the Yunnan Province (China), 
   •  natural parks in many karst areas, 
   •  the Guilin towers and the Li Jang River (China), 
   •  Ha Long Bay (Vietnam), 
   •  the Tsingy of Bemaraha and the Ankarana Reserve (Madagascar). 

Among the 180 sites classiﬁ ed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites (2010) twenty or  
so are karst areas or caves: 

   •  Shillin, Lubo, and Wukong karsts (Southern China),  
   •  Vézère Valley caves (France), 
   •  Carlsbad Caverns (New Mexico, USA), 
   •  Mammoth Cave (Kentucky, USA), 

----------------------- Page 186-----------------------

                                                                                  Tourism    173 

    •  Pirin National Park (Bulgaria), 
    •  Yagul Cave and Mitla Cave, prehistoric sites in Oaxaca (Mexico), 
    •  Altamira Cave (Spain), 
    •  Skocjan Caves (Slovenia), 
    •  Plitviçe National Park (Croatia), 
    •  Desembarco del Granma National Park (Cuba), 
    •  Ohrid Lake region (Macedonia), 
    •  Mont Perdu (Spain, France), 
    •  Gunong Mulu National Park (Sarawak, Malaysia), 
    •  Dolomites (Italy), 
    •  Tsingy de Bemaraha (Madagascar), 
    •  Durmitor National Park (Montenegro), 
    •  Kotor region (Montenegro), 
    •  Western fjords (Norway), 
    •  Puerto Princesa Underground River National Park (Philippines), 
    •  Aldabra atoll (Seychelles), 
    •  Pamukkale Springs (Turkey), 
    •  Ha Long Bay (Vietnam), 
    •  Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park (Vietnam). 

      Several  historic  sites  in  karst  areas  can  be  added  to  this  list,  including Tikal  
National Park (Guatemala), the Mayan site of Copán (Honduras), and various Mexican  
archeological sites. 

16.2 Karstic Trails and Itineraries 

There are numerous examples of sites that have been developed to accommodate  
visitors and show off the most spectacular aspects of the karst landscape.  
     The trails meandering through the Shilin stone forests, where visitors wander  
through mega-lapies on pathways carved into the rock and ornamented with pools and  
pagodas attract thousands of visitors (Figure 21). In Montpellier-le-Vieux (France) a  
little train runs through a ruiniform landscape; in Rakov Skocjan (Croatia) trails lead  
into eclipsed valleys. In Plitviçe (Croatia), tufa waterfalls are accessible via a network  
of suspended walkways. In the Gorges du Verdon (France), E.A. Martel oversaw the  
construction of a famous trail that now bears his name. In Ha Long Bay (Vietnam),  
junks carrying tourists ﬂ oat in and out of the limestone spires. In Guilin (China), a boat  
trip up the Li Jang River, through a landscape of limestone towers, is a must-see for  
tourists. In Turkey, the Pamukkale Springs, with its pools separated by white travertine,  
has been a tourist destination since the Classical Antiquity. In France the great springs,  
like the Loue or the Lison (Doubs) have been developed to accommodate visitors. At  
the Fontaine de Vaucluse, a recent discovery by a diving expedition found hundreds  
of coins, indicating that the site had been drawing visitors since Gallo-Roman times.  
     Many similar sites exist all over the world. Often tourist accommodations consist  
primarily of facilitating access to the site, but the recent rise of eco-tourism and cultural  
tourism has led to the creation of discovery trails, where visitors are directed towards  
informational signs. For example, in the Grande Corniche Departmental Park (Alpes- 

----------------------- Page 187-----------------------

174   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Maritimes, France), a trail leads visitors to signs explaining the general structure of  
the region, and guided tours into a small cavern are available upon request. 

16.3 Tourist-accessible Caves 

Caves and the subterranean landscapes they offer draw tens of millions of visitors each  
year. France is ranked third in the world after China and the United States (Pissard  
and Mantovani, 1997). It is home to hundreds of commercial caves, which receive  
approximately 4 million visitors every year. The oldest show cave in France is the  
Osselles Cave, which has received organized visits since the beginning of the 16th  
century. 
     When caves are located in areas that are struggling economically, tourism can be  
the starting point for regional development. The Padirac Chasm is often described as  
the “tourism lighthouse” of the Midi-Pyrénées region in France. Subterranean tourism  
began in the 19th century, with the advent of the railroad, the invention of electric  
lighting, and the rise in fashionability of taking the waters at hot springs.  
     Most developed caves are economically viable, but during the 1990s, the number  
of visitors began to drop, although it has now re-stabilized. The decrease was tied to  
discrepancies between the public’s expectations and the actual infrastructure inside  
the  caves,  which  was  often  very  old. The  problem  was  addressed  by  renovating  
some of these structures, and by enhancing the presentation of these natural wonders  
(Gauchon, 1997). 

16.3.1 Tourist-accessible Caves in France 

   •  Orgnac (Ardèche) (140,000 visitors per year),  
   •  Padirac (Lot) (350,000 visitors per year), 
   •  Aven Armand (Lozère) (150,000 visitors per year), 
   •  Dargilan (Lozère) (120,000 visitors per year), 
   •  Cocalière (Gard) (100,000 visitors per year), 
   •  Grotte de Betharram (Pyrénées Atlantiques) (250,000 visitors per year), 
   •  Clamouse (Hérault) (130,000 visitors per year), 
   •  Choranche (Isère) (180,000 visitors per year), 
   •  Grotte des Demoiselles (Gard) (120,000 visitors per year), 
   •  Lascaux facsimile (Dordogne) (300,000 visitors per year). 

     However, the most heavily visited sites are those with religious signiﬁ cance,  
such as the Massabielle Cave in Lourdes, which receives 6 million visitors per year. 

16.3.2 Tourist-accessible caves around the world 

   •  Caves of Altamira (Spain) (UNESCO World Heritage Site), 
   •  Grotte de l’Observatoire (Monaco), 
   •  Han Caves (Belgium), 
   •  Cueva del Drach (Balearic Islands, Spain), 

----------------------- Page 188-----------------------

                                                                                  Tourism    175 

   •  Grotta Gigante (Italy), 
   •  Postojna (Slovenia) (900,000 visitors per year),  
   •  Skocjan (Slovenia) (UNESCO World Heritage Site), 
   •  Carlsbad Caverns (New Mexico, USA) (UNESCO World Heritage Site), 
   •  Mammoth Cave (Kentucky, USA), 
   •  Eisriesenvelt (Austria),  
   •  Deer Cave (Sarawak). 

16.3.3 Underground Safaris 

Not  all  caves  are  heavily  altered  to  accommodate  visitors.  Several  sites  offer  
underground safaris, where the necessary caving equipment is provided: “Coufﬁ n- 
Chevaline  traverse”  in  the  Choranche  Caves  (Vercors,  France);  “Orgnac  2  and  3  
visit” in the Orgnac aven (Ardèche, France); “Subterranean Safari” in the Trabuc  
and Cabrespine Caves (Gard, France); “Adventure Caving” in Mulu Park (Sarawak,  
Malaysia); “Carlsbad adventure tour program” in Carlsbad Caverns (New Mexico,  
USA). 
     In some caverns, like the Via Souterrata (Caille, France) cables and ladders have  
been installed, mimicking mountain via ferratas (Figure 131). 

              Figure 131. Via souterrata i n the Yvon aven (Caille, Alpes-Maritimes). 

----------------------- Page 189-----------------------

176    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

     This type of experience, which is rooted in eco-tourism, is likely to become more  
and more popular. Other new concepts include “Obscuricole Events” (or LÉO, Les  
Évenements Obscuricoles), where visitors explore the cave in its natural state, with no  
light, and with an emphasis on the other senses. This type of experience is currently  
being offered in the Lacave Caves (Lot, France).  

16.4 Developing Caves for Tourism 

16.4.1 Current Trends 

The ways that caves are developed for tourism have changed a great deal over the  
past several years. Large structures with bright lighting, trails, guardrails, stairs, and  
elevators have given way to structures with a lighter footprint, using materials that  
blend into the surroundings and discreet lighting, allowing visitors to get a better feel  
for the atmosphere inside a cave. The increasing use of LEDs to replace incandescent  
or ﬂ uorescent lighting should accentuate this trend. Quaint commentaries pointing out  
the ever-present stalagmite in the shape of the Virgin Mary, the Ghost or the Octopus  
have been replaced with descriptions more focused on natural science. Subterranean  
tourism is becoming more interested in the science and culture of sites. 

16.4.2 Legal Difﬁ culties 

Under French law, private property extends down the center of the Earth, but natural  
resources (petroleum, mineral deposits) belong to the state. Caves are considered a  
part of the ground, not a natural resource. Water, however, is a shared resource. 
     The owner of the land above a cave therefore also owns the cave itself, and can  
do with it what he sees ﬁ t, unless it contains prehistoric or archeological artifacts. It is  
unusual for a cave to be contained to only one parcel of land, and so the development  
of a cave requires an agreement between all of the landowners concerned. 

   The Orgnac cave system in France 

   Conﬂ ict over a cave put into opposition two towns in Ardèche for many years. The Orgnac  
   aven was explored in 1935 by Robert de Joly, who immediately saw the touristic value of the  
   cavern. It was quickly developed. The entrance and the area accessible to tourists (Network  
   1) were in the district of Orgnac, but the cave network extended out under the neighboring  
   district of Issirac. Magniﬁ cent areas were explored in 1965 in these further reaches (Networks  
   2 and 3), which could have been developed for tourism if a suitable access point could be  
   found. However, access to the 2 and 3 networks was slowed and even blocked by the district  
   of Orgnac, up until the creation of the Orgnac-Issirac SIVU (an inter-district syndicate).  
   After signiﬁ cant renovation and construction, the Orgnac cave system was awarded the  
   label “Grand Site de France” (Great French site). In the networks 2 and 3, visits have been  
   allowed since 1998, but only accompanied by a specially trained guide, and in groups of  
   no more than 8 people.  

16.4.3 Technical Difﬁ culties 

The primary difﬁ culties are changes in the subterranean climate, and vegetation growth  
that can cover walls and speleothems. 

----------------------- Page 190-----------------------

                                                                                   Tourism    177 

     A  cave  is  a  carefully  balanced  environment.  Speleothems,  which  are  often  
the features that draw visitors to a cave, can be degraded if they dry out or if they  
are covered in vegetation. CO  and water vapor breathed out by visitors alter the  
                                    2 
composition of the air inside the cave, and can increase the acidity of the ﬁ lm of water  
covering the rock, causing changes in the rates of dissolution and precipitation that  
can alter prehistoric cave art along the walls.  
     Vegetation can grow inside a cave when artiﬁ cial lighting enable photosynthesis,  
colonizing the area through spores and seeds carried in by visitors or by ﬂ owing water.  
In the past, this problem was dealt with by simply cleaning off the affected surfaces  
with  soap  or  fungicides. Although  it  would  be  difﬁ cult  to  control  contamination  
carried in by visitors, it is much easier to control the lighting situation, by choosing  
lamps that emit a spectrum of light that is not sufﬁ cient for photosynthesis, and by  
limiting the amount of time that the cave is illuminated. The following ﬁ gure (Figure  
132) shows that red and yellow light is not favorable for plant growth, whereas blue,  
green, and orange light is. 

               e 
               c            chlorophyll b 
               n 
               a 
              b 
               r 
               o                                                chlorophyll a 
               s 
               b 
               a 

                  400               500             600                   700 
                  blue              green           yellow                red 

              Figure 132. Parts of the light s pectrum favorable to vegetation growth. 

     In order to limit the amount of time the cave illuminated, the lights can be turned  
on and off as visitors pass through a cavern, either manually or with an automated  
system. At  the  Souterroscope  in  Baume  Obscure  cave  (Alpes  Maritimes,  France)  
visitors follow an automated tour, led by light and sound from speakers placed along  
the underground path, without a guide.  

----------------------- Page 191-----------------------

178     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

   The example of Lascaux (Dordogne, France) 

   Following  the  discovery  of  the  Lascaux  cave,  a  landmark  site  for  prehistoric  cave  art,  
   unrestricted tourist access, with 1000 visitors every day for 15 years, put the prehistoric  
   paintings  at  risk  for  serious  damage.  Signiﬁ cant  changes  were  made,  particularly  the  
   closing of the original cave and the creation of a facsimile, but conservation efforts are still  
   inadequate. Lascaux has served as an important example upon which current strategies  
   for preserving and displaying prehistoric caves are based. The timeline below outlines the  
   major events in the Lascaux story: 

   1940—The cave was discovered by M. Ravidat, J. Clauzel, M. Queyroi, L. Périer and their  
   dog Robot. 

   1948—The cave was developed to accommodate visitors.  

   1955—The ﬁ rst signs of damage appeared on the walls, caused by excess carbon dioxide  
   from visitors’ breath.  

   1957—A climate control system was put in place to limit the amount of CO . 
                                                                                          2 

   1960—First appearance of the “green blemishes”, caused by algae colonies on the walls,  
   and of the “white blemishes”, caused by calcite deposits on some of the paintings.  

   1963—Ozone ﬁ lters are installed, and Lascaux is closed to the public. 

   1965—A new system to regulate thermal and hygrometric conditions is installed, to re-create  
   the cave’s initial condition.  

   1970—A facsimile of the cave is built, which opens in 1983.  

   2000—A new climate control system is installed.  

   2001—Black stains appear on the cavern roof and near the entrance, caused by a fungus.  
   Emergency measures are taken (fungicide and antibiotic compresses, spreading lime along  
   the cave ﬂ oor, application of biocides). 

   2002—Creation of an International Scientiﬁ c Committee to monitor the Lascaux Cave. 

   2007—Black stains reach the deeper zones of the cave.  

   2008—Biocide applications. 

   2008—The climate control system installed in 2000 is updated.  

   2009—Symposium on preserving the cave. 

   2009—The painted caves in the Vézère Valley, including Lascaux, are named UNESCO  
   World Heritage Sites.  

   2010—A  scientiﬁ c  committee  is  established,  headed  by Yves  Coppens,  to  ensure  the  
   preservation of the cave. 

----------------------- Page 192-----------------------

                                        1717 
                     Mineral Resources 

17.1 Karstic Traps 

Karst  creates  natural  traps  in  the  form  of  underground  cavities.  Paleokarst  (cf.  
chap. 8.3) can therefore hold economically valuable ore bodies that have formed as  
clay minerals change over time or as detritus accumulates, such as, for example, the  
remains of iron-rich hardpans. 

17.1.1 The Provence Bauxites 

Bauxites  are  an  aluminum  oxide  ore,  used  in  the  production  of  aluminum. They  
are named for the Baux-de-Provence (France), where they were ﬁ rst identiﬁ ed and  
studied during the 19th century. They are common in intertropical zones. They are  
variable by nature, composed of a mixture of clays, oxides, and hydroxides of various  
metals, including aluminum. They come primarily from the transformation of silicates  
when they are deposited in laterites in tropical regions. Oxides and hydroxides form  
aluminum-rich  horizons  of  primary  bauxite,  which  can  become  secondarily  more  
concentrated when the laterite is eroded and the resulting sediment becomes trapped  
in karstic depressions.  
     Lateritisation can also occur directly in clay-rich limestone. The primary bauxites  
that form in the process are then carried into the underlying karst and accumulate in  
caves and sinkholes, combining with the terra rossa deposits already present.  
     The bauxite in Provence were deposited at the beginning of the Cretaceous, in a  
humid tropical climate, when the Durancian isthmus was exposed (where Languedoc  
and Provence are currently), between an Alpine sea to the northeast and a Pyrénéan  
basin, corresponding to the opening of the Atlantic to the southwest of Languedoc  
and Provence. This led to intense karstiﬁ cation in the Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous  
limestone, creating terra rossa deposits in the process. The lateritisation of the adjacent  
crystalline and metamorphic rock led to the formation of primary bauxites. Both the  
bauxites and the terra rossa were subsequently trapped in the sinkholes and caves of  
the underlying karst. This karst was then sealed off by Middle and Upper Cretaceous  

----------------------- Page 193-----------------------

180    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

deposits (Guieu and Rousset, 1978), and then caught up in the various steps of the  
Provençal orogeny (Figure 133). 
      These bauxites form a discontinuous unit across a large part of Provence. In  
the process of exploiting the ore, disconnected underground pockets were cleaned  
out, revealing the original karstic terrain, which consisted of numerous depressions,  
in some cases featuring karren, as well as caves. The Provence bauxite is no longer  
being mined, having been replaced by more economically viable deposits in Guinea. 

Figure  133.  Bauxite deposit in Combecave-Pins Bâtards (after Gouvernet et al., 1979). 1—Middle  
Jurassic (Dogger) marly limestone; 2—Upper Bathonian limestone; 3—Bauxite; 4—Upper Cretaceous  
    ﬂ uvio-lacustrine deposits (Campanian sand and sandstone); A, B, C—Bathonian limestone beds. 

17.1.2 Kisanga Iron 

The ferruginous products of lateritisation can accumulate in karstic pockets in much  
the same way as bauxites. They are eroded away and then re-deposited in karstic  
depressions,  forming  deposits  of  iron  ore. The  deposits  in  Kisanga  (Zaire)  are  a  
result of one of the oldest known karstic cavities ﬁ lling up with debris from iron-rich  
hardpans (Buffard, 1993). 

17.1.3 Guano and Phosphates  

Guano is primarily used in its raw state as fertilizer. It comes from accumulated bat or  
bird excrement. Phosphate deposits are also used to produce fertilizer. They contain  
mostly apatite (Ca (PO )3(F,Cl,OH)). They are primarily of marine origin, but some  
                       5    4 
karstic deposits are in use.  
      Caves, particularly in tropical regions, can host large bat colonies reaching several  
million individuals, such as the colony in Deer Cave (Mulu, Sarawak). Excrement  
from the colony accumulates in thick layers, forming guano deposits that can be mined  
for fertilizer. Similarly, in karst regions, bird guano can be eroded and carried into the  

----------------------- Page 194-----------------------

                                                                      Mineral Resources     181 

endokarst. As it is transported through the system, it turns into calcium phosphate.  
These deposits often contain fossils, reminders of their organic origins. Karst can  
also act a trap for secondary deposits of phosphates from a primary marine source. In  
most cases, karstic deposits do not exceed a few hundred or thousand tonnes. They  
are most commonly found in the Salomon Islands, in the Philippines, in Thailand,  
and in Mexico (Tournis  and  Rabinovitch, 2010). In France, the deposits in Quercy  
were heavily mined up until the 19th century, when they were gradually abandoned  
in favor of more abundant marine phosphates from abroad (cf. chap. 21.2). 

17.1.4 Metal-bearing Mineral Formations 

Karst can also contain mineral formations tied to hydrothermal speleogenesis. Aside  
from neo-formed gypsum deposits, which are not generally mined, metallic sulfur  
formations sometimes cover the walls of karstic caves. In France, the Oilloki Cave  
(Pierre Saint-Martin) was the site of galena mining. The Grande Vernissière mine  
(Cévennes) also contains accumulations of ﬂ uorite, barite, smithsonite, and galena  
(Audra, 2008). 
     In the Djebel Hallouf mines (Tunisia) sulfur minerals (blende, galena, jordanite,  
and microspheres of pyrite) are present (Rouvier, 1971). 

17.2 Hydrocarbons 

17.2.1 Distribution and Plays 

Approximately half of the world’s classical hydrocarbon reservoirs are located in  
limestone or dolomite. These include 30 to 50% of hydrocarbon production in the US.  
These reservoirs are often marked by low matrix permeability, problems with ﬂ uid  
control, and low hydrocarbon extraction rates. Karstiﬁ cation can play an important  
role in determining the overall porosity of deposits, such as Rospo Mare (cf. infra).  
Understanding and modeling karstic cavities is therefore key for petroleum geologists  
seeking better extraction methods.  
      Models are constructed based on well logs, but these do not always provide a  
representative data set. Petrographic analyses on core samples or during drilling do  
not generally take into account karstic cavities, and therefore only provide a partial  
representation  of  the  heterogeneity  in  the  subsurface. This  makes  any  attempt  to  
extrapolate volumes from point data fairly hopeless.  
     Aside from attempts to evaluate reservoir size, a good understanding of karstiﬁ cation  
is also necessary during the extraction process, in order to ﬁ nd better ways of recovering  
hydrocarbons  (cf.  17.2.6—Rospo  Mare)  and  of  minimizing  brackish  water  inﬂ uxes  
during pumping. In order to select the best well locations, 3D seismic surveys are used to  
determine the heterogeneity of the rock; by estimating to what extent fractures inﬂ uence  
the karstiﬁ cation. 

----------------------- Page 195-----------------------

182    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure  134.  3D  seismic  imaging  of  the  Mississippian  Reservoir  (Colorado,  USA)  and  structural  
    interpretation (doc. Kansas Geological Survey & University of Houston Geophysical Lab). 

17.2.2 Diagenesis in Carbonate Platforms and the Evolution of Organic  
         Material 

Hydrocarbons form naturally during sedimentation, when there is some organic matter  
in the sediment. This organic material is preserved in reducing environments (Vatan,  
1967). Mud deposits and sedimentary features can incorporate a signiﬁ cant amount of  

----------------------- Page 196-----------------------

                                                                    Mineral Resources    183 

organic material, which is then quickly altered by bacteria into a solid product called  
kerogen. Kerogen evolves into hydrocarbons through a process called maturation,  
which requires the sediment to be exposed to heat. This occurs as the sediment is  
buried deeper and passes through the geothermal gradient (approximately 1°/30 m),  
where it is exposed to higher and higher temperatures at greater depths. The heat  
cracks the kerogen and turns it into hydrocarbons (Durand, 1987). Tissot and Welte  
(1984) deﬁ ne three steps in the maturation process: 

   •  diagenesis: sediment turns to rock through compaction and water loss, at depths  
      of up to 2 km. 
   •   catagenesis: kerogen turns into oil and gas, at depths of up to 5 km. 
   •  metagenesis: oil, gas, and any remaining kerogen turn to methane. 

     The second important step in the creation of hydrocarbon reserves is primary  
migration; during which pressure drives the lighter oil and gas out of the rock that  
they formed in.  
     The  third  step  is  secondary  migration  of  oil  and  gas  towards  geologic  traps,  
reservoir-rocks where they accumulate in favorable structural features. These can  
include anticlines with a layer of permeable rock beneath an impermeable roof, or  
karst units sealed off by impermeable deposits. Finally, the petroleum and gas may  
also escape from these traps and migrate to secondary reservoirs.  
      The origins of carbonate rocks are described in Chapter 3, which highlights  
the importance of bioclastic sediments and of reef structures. Carbonate rocks that  
incorporate organic material during their formation can theoretically be subject to the  
processes described above, if they are buried rapidly enough. However, maturation  
requires low permeability in order to store the kerogen for a long enough period of  
time, over a million years, for maturation to occur. Carbonate rocks (limestone and  
dolomite) serve primarily as reservoirs during migration, rather than as sources.  

17.2.3 Karstic Reservoirs 

Carbonate units are triply porous: 

   •  Primary microporosity of the rock, which is less than 1% for massive limestone  
      (like Urgonian units), and can be up to 50% for chalk and limestone reefs, 
   •  Secondary fracture-related macroporosity, caused by tectonic activity, 
   •  Tertiary macroporosity due to karstiﬁ cation. 

     The following ﬁ gure (Figure 135) shows, as an example, the heterogeneity of  
karstiﬁ cation in a limestone butte in the Ankarana (Madagascar). The caverns present  
today are the result of several phases of karstiﬁ cation, tied to changes in the ﬂ ow of  
water through an ancient NE-SW-oriented system, which was cut down by erosion,  
and over which recent east-west circulation superimposed more recent conduits. The  
resulting heterogeneity is enormous. 

----------------------- Page 197-----------------------

184    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                   Figure 135. A nalamisondrotra Butte (Ankarana-Madagascar). 

17.2.4 The Capitan Reef (Texas) 

The Permian Delaware Basin, which extends across New Mexico and Texas, is famous  
for its petroleum reserves, which lie in the dolomitic limestones formed by an ancient  
coral reef: the Capitan Reef. These limestones also contain Carlsbad Caverns and the  
Lechuguilla Caverns, which formed by hypogenic excavation, which was assisted by  
H S coming from hydrocarbon deposits (cf. chap. 7.5).  
  2 
                                                                     2 
      The basin, which covers approximately 30,000 km , is made up of a series of  
500 to 600 m thick units of alternating limestones and clayey schists, accumulated  
over a long period of subsidence during the Upper Permian. When the subsidence  
stopped, the sedimentary basin was ringed by a 560 km-long coral reef, made up of  
sponges and stromatolites. The whole area was uplifted at the end of the Permian,  

----------------------- Page 198-----------------------

                                                                       Mineral Resources      185 

which led to signiﬁ cant karstiﬁ cation. A marine transgression deposited a thick layer  
of evaporites (the Castille formation), which was followed by terrestrial deposits,  
effectively sealing off the karst.  
     Another  period  of  uplift  exposed  the  limestone  again  and  led  to  further  
karstiﬁ cation. During the Tertiary, the Laramide orogeny lifted and folded the area,  
creating the Guadalupe Mountains, which thrust over the basin.  
     The petroleum that formed in the schist units migrated vertically into the different  
limestone units, which had different degrees of karstiﬁ cation, and included the thick  
Capitan reef unit. 

             NEW 
             MEXICO 

               
             Guadalupe 
                                       Carlsbad 
             Mounts 

                             DELAWARE BASSIN   
                                              SIN 
                                                                               TEXAS 

                         Apache 
                                                                                    N 
                         Mounts 

                 Oil fields 

                 Capitan Reef outcrops 
                                                                   Glass Mounts 
                          100 km 

           Figure 136. Hydrocarbon deposits in the Capitan reef (after Ward et al., 1986). 

17.2.5 Reservoirs in the Middle East 

These are thought to be the largest petroleum reserves in the world, but the actual  
amount of available petroleum is unknown. The deposits are found in limestone and  
in sandstone units. 

----------------------- Page 199-----------------------

186    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                         TURKEY 

                                      SYRIA 

                                                                        IRAN 
                                                IRAK 

                   EGYPT 

                                                                       UAE 
                                                                                  OMAN 
                                                  
                                                SAUDI 
                                                ARABIA  

                         SOUDAN 
                                                             YEMEN 

                    Figure 137. Extent of petroleum deposits in the Middle East. 

   The Rospo Mare deposits 

   Rospo Mare is a 75 million ton petroleum reservoir in the Adriatic Sea, 20 km off the coast of  
   Italy. Wells have reached oil at 1500 m in Cretaceous limestone. These deposits have been  
   exploited since 1988, based on careful interpretation of the area’s paleogeography by Elf  
   engineers (Dubois et al., 1993). The Cretaceous limestone was karstiﬁ ed during a period of  
   tropical climate (cf. chap. 6), which led to the formation of a series of mogotes, which, once  
   covered by a thick layer of impermeable Mio-Pliocene deposits, created numerous reservoirs.  
   Petroleum is extracted through horizontal wells intercepting the summit of the mogotes. 

   The area’s geologic context was described over the course of numerous complementary  
   studies: 

   • A 3D seismic survey showing the locations of dolines and mogotes, which was used to  
    make a precise topographic map of the paleokarst. 

   • A series of 7 boreholes, which yielded 1100 m of core, used to determine the spatial  
    organization  of  the  karst  and  which  found  vertical  zonation  characteristic  of  a  highly  
    evolved karst, with an epikarst, a vertical inﬁ ltration zone, a horizontal drainage zone, and  
    a saturated zone. 

   • High-resolution well logs, used to determine the size of the underground spaces and what  
    they were ﬁ lled with. 

   • A comparative study of a different paleokarst of the same age, exposed at the Apricena  
    rock quarry 40 km to the southeast of Rospo Mare, where the large quarry walls exposed  
    the paleo-morphology both at the surface and at depth. 

   These studies demonstrated that karstiﬁ cation had affected the upper portion of a group of  
   Jurassic and Cretaceous limestones and dolomites, more than a thousand meters thick.  
   These units were exposed from the Upper Cretaceous to the Oligocene, during which time  

----------------------- Page 200-----------------------

                                                                                     Mineral Resources           187 

a highly developed karstic drainage network evolved. It was sealed off at the end of the  
Oligocene by marine sediments and evaporites, which fossilized the karst system and created  
an impermeable cap. Tectonic shifts bent the units into an anticline, and petroleum was  
trapped at its roof. These reserves are found in a layer approximately 150 m thick, beneath  
which the karstic cavities are ﬁ lled with either fresh or brackish water. 

The morphology of the top layer of karst, where the oil migrated to, was the object of intense  
scrutiny, in order to select the best drilling locations. The approach chosen involved drilling  
vertical boreholes that curved out horizontally at the bottom for 500 to 1300 m, in order to  
cut across the maximum number of fractures. The wells were drilled in the highest parts  
of the paleokarst, while remaining beneath the faulted or clay-ﬁ lled areas in the epikarst. 

The success of this endeavor, in an unusual context that was not initially easy to understand,  
was due to the efforts of karstologists. Other similar reserves are known in the Adriatic Sea,  
in Hungaria, and in Spain (the Ampostona ﬁ eld for example). 

                                                    directional drilling 

                   sea 

     Plio-Quaternary 
            sediments 

  Miocene anhydrit  
and clay limestone  
                                                      palaeo cockpit karst 
                          

          Cretaceous  
karstified limestone                                                                                oil migration  
                                                                                                      
                          

                                           oil migration  

     Figure 138. Simpliﬁ ed cross-section of Rospo Mare reservoir (after Dubois et al., 1993). 

----------------------- Page 201-----------------------

                                        1818 
   Hydrothermal and Geothermal  
                                 Processes 

18.1 Hot Springs 

Hydrothermal karst speleogenesis is described in Chapter 7.5. Warm, mineral-rich  
karstic water makes karstic hot springs popular spa and bath destinations. There are  
several such locations in France: 

   •  Aix-les-Bains (Savoie), with the 44°C Alun spring, the Gouffre Chevalley (42°C)  
      and the Grotte des Serpents, which are all part of the same hydrothermal system.  
      The Sulfur Spring has a temperature of 43°C (Hobléa et al., 2010), 
   •  Salins-les-Thermes, with the 33°C Salins spring; whose waters carry carbonic  
      acid and NaCl (12 g.L–1), as well as iron carbonate and radioactive elements.  

      The temporary Massiago spring is at 33°C and has an NaCl concentration of 35  
      g.L–1 , 

   •  Gréoux-les-Bains (Alpes de Haute Provence), 
   •  Saint-Paul-de-Fenouillet (Eastern Pyrénées), the Fou spring is radioactive, 
   •  Rennes-les-Bains, 
   •  Ussat-les-Bains. 

     In the rest of the world, notable hot springs include the Cap Bon springs in Tunisia  
(Figure 139), the Buda springs in Hungaria, the Pamukkale springs in Turkey, and  
many others. The karst systems feeding these springs are often impassable, and have  
not been explored, due to the dangerously high temperature of the water. However,  
a  few  passageways  have  been  explored  by  cave  divers.  One  such  example  is  the  
Salins spring, which was explored to depths of –70 m below the opening (Salins-les- 
Thermes, Savoie).  
     Often,  hot  springs  only  appear  warm  because  they  emit  water  at  a  constant  
temperature, while the surrounding air temperature ﬂ uctuates. During the winter, the  
springs appear warm by comparison, and they may even give off plumes of steam.  
True hot springs are generally deﬁ ned as having a temperature of at least 5ºC above  
the neighboring springs.  

----------------------- Page 202-----------------------

                                                 Hydrothermal and Geothermal Processes            189 

Figure 139. Cap Bon hot spr ings (Tunisia). Water ﬂ ows through the deep limestone units in the Tunisian  
                                           mountain ridges. 

18.2 Natural Climate Control 

During prehistoric times, caves were often used as a natural shelter, because during  
the cold months they maintain a constant temperature warmer than the surrounding  
landscape. The temperature of a cave is generally near the average of the temperatures  
in the surrounding area. In the winter, they therefore tend to stay warmer than the  
exterior. This characteristic could eventually be used to create heat pumps. 
      The inverse situation also exists. For example, the Flying Tiger Cave Hotel in the  
Piduhe Valley (Hunan, China) was built facing the cave entrance, so as to beneﬁ t from  
the cold air currents ﬂ owing out in the summer and the warm air currents ﬂ owing out  
in the winter. However, the air coming from the cave has a very high humidity, which  
leads to a great deal of condensation in the hotel. 
      In Provence (France), in the Sainte Baume massif, some karstic shafts were used  
as natural iceboxes up until the end of the 19th century. Twenty or so sites are known  
to have been used this way. In the winter, water was set out to freeze in shallow basins  
and snow was collected, and both were then packed into the cave shaft. The ice could  
then be used to supply the naval dockyard of Toulon and the city of Marseille. 
      The karst in these cases was acting as a natural icebox. Cold, dense air accumulated  
in the shafts, and the ice was protected from incoming solar radiation. Occasionally  
an air current would evaporate some of the moisture and decrease the temperature  
even further. The thermal mass of the surrounding rock kept snow and ice frozen  
during the summer. 

----------------------- Page 203-----------------------

  190   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 140. Flying Tiger Cave and Hotel in the Piduhe Valley (Hunan, China). The hotel (on the left)  
      has natural air conditioning because of the air currents ﬂ owing out of the Flying Tiger Cave. 

----------------------- Page 204-----------------------

                                       1919 
                           The Study of  
                    Paleoenvironments 

19.1 Karstic Archives 

19.1.1 Karstic Recording Properties 

Karst is useful in several fundamental realms of research. Because of the number and  
complexity of factors that govern its development, it is a remarkable natural recording  
of paleo-environmental indicators. In addition, because sediment deposits in caves  
are protected from rain and other forces of erosion, they preserve objects and imprints  
for thousands of years. 
     The most well-known cave research has to do with prehistoric life. Primitive  
human life (tools, habitat, diet, artwork, etc.) was recorded over the course of several  
tens of thousands of years, through artifacts buried in sediment and kept safe from  
erosion. Paleolithic art has survived until the present day after having been protected  
for thousands of years in caves with remarkably stable environments, with no light or  
vegetation to degrade the paintings. But prehistoric life is not the only event recorded  
by karst. Others include:  

   •  neotectonic activity, which is recorded in morphology and in speleothems (Gilli,  
      1986, 2005; Jeannin, 1990); 
   •  past earthquakes, which can break speleothems (Gilli, 1995a; Forti and Postpichl,  
      1985); 
   •  changes in the hydrologic base level (rivers, lakes, or sea-level), which determines  
      the elevation of caves; 
   •  paleoclimate, which shapes the landscape and the type of speleothems that form,  
      and which is also recorded in stalagmite growth laminae; 
   •  prehistoric fauna fossilized or preserved in sediment; 
   •  many other types of information as well. 

     Karst, speciﬁ cally the endokarst, can therefore be thought of as a vast library of  
information on the Earth’s past environments, where only a few books have as yet  

----------------------- Page 205-----------------------

192    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

been opened (Gilli, 1995b). It is a much richer source of information than ice cores  
or coral reefs when it comes to studying paleoclimate. In addition, karst regions are  
found across most continents, and are even present in some marine environments.  
However, the drawback to such a trove of information is that it is enormously complex,  
and therefore difﬁ cult to analyze. 

19.1.2 Subterranean Sediment Deposits 

These deposits reﬂ ect climate variations. Speleogenesis and speleothem formation  
occur in hot and temperate climates, and come to a halt during the ice ages when varved  
silt deposits form, or in arid climates when dust deposits form. The study of cave  
sediments can therefore reveal the sequence of climatic phases in a particular region.  
     The elements and the fossils found in cave sediments also provide information  
on climate variations. Megafauna bones indicate what climate they were deposited  
in. For example, bison and reindeer are characteristic of cold periods, while deer and  
aurochs indicate temperate periods.  
     Similarly, analyses of spring travertine with a large amount of vegetative debris,  
snail  shells,  charred  wood,  etc.  can  reveal  information  about  the  environmental  
conditions near where they were deposited. A detailed analysis of this type was done  
in Saint-Antonin (Bouches-du-Rhône, France) at the foot to the Sainte-Victoire range,  
and the results compared with the cycles of regional prehistoric human settlement and  
with global climate shifts (Guendon et al., 2003). 

19.1.3 Speleothems in Caves 

As they are growing, speleothems trap particles from their environment (dust, pollen,  
etc.),  and  undergo  changes  in  growth  rate  or  deformations,  all  of  which  provide  
information about the environment inside the cave (Figure 141).  
     The laminae that make up a speleothem also hold useful information. They can  
change color, luminescence, and reﬂ ectivity. 

   •  UV luminescence is a function of the amount of humic acid in the rock, and  
      indicates  period  of  vegetation  growth.  In  intertropical  zones,  luminescent  
      laminae can be correlated to wet periods (Baker et al., 1998). Low luminescence  
      correspond to dry periods.  
   •  The color is a result of impurities. The greater the discharge ﬂ owing through the  
      cave, the cleaner and clearer the calcite. 
   •  Reﬂ ectivity is more complex to interpret. 

     Inspection of laminae under UV light, which highlights ﬂ uorescent humic acids,  
can yield very precise analyses. It is generally considered that alternating light/dark  
laminae indicate yearly wet season/dry season cycles. However, some authors have  
been able to detect individual precipitation events, by greatly magnifying the laminae  
(Shopov et al., 1994).  

----------------------- Page 206-----------------------

                                                              The Study of Paleoenvironments          193 

Fi gure 141. Waxy layer and traces of clay, indicating the presence of speleologists. The passage where  
this stalagmite was found was opened in 1960. Aside from the clay deposit, there is also a distinct color  
change, with several brown layers indicating clay tracked in by cavers as they passed through, which was  
then spread out over the speleothem by percolation. They gray tint of the calcite above the wax could be  
                            a result of blackening from carbide lamps smoke. 

      When paired with radiometric dating (U/Th or 14C), laminae analysis can identify  

periods during which the speleothems stopped growing, which can be interpreted as  
very low precipitation episodes, such as dry periods or ice ages. 
      Thanks  to  technological  advances,  the  sample  size  required  for  dating  has  
decreased signiﬁ cantly, from a few grams in 1970 to a few centigrams today, which  
allows us to measure samples from within the speleothems. 

                                 Table 14. Evolution of dating methods. 

     Time period        Method                                           Calcite sample size (grams) 
      1970–1990          α counting                                                  1–10 
      1990–2000         Mass spectrometry (MS)                                      0.1–2 
     2000–present       Multicollector inductively coupled plasma                  0.01–0.2 
                        mass spectrometry (MC-ICP-MS) 

19.2 Dating Methods in Karstology 

19.2.1 Relative Dating 

The principle of relative dating is based on the premise that in a normal sedimentary  
sequence, the more recent units are deposited on top of the older units. For example,  
speleothems that formed on top of a clay layer are younger than the clay layer. Similarly,  
a lava ﬂ ow that  ﬁ lled up a doline is younger than the doline. Certain stratigraphic  
markers of known age can then be used as reference points, such as volcanic tephra  
deposits from the 19th century (Tambora or Krakatoa eruptions).  

----------------------- Page 207-----------------------

194    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                         The stalagmite  
                          is a "mirror" of  
                         the stalactite 

Figure 142. Pair of speleothems slanted by air currents (Folacci ﬁ les). The stalagmite recorded variations  
in the growth axis of the stalactite, which was feeding it through percolation. In this example, the two  
      speleothems grew at the same rate, and the stalagmite formed a mirror image of the stalactite. 

      Morphological features also follow chronological relationships, so that in a cave  
network, a canyon would a priori be considered younger than the cave ﬂ oor that it  
is incising.  
      However, in practice it is often difﬁ cult to be certain of different features’ relative  
ages, because karst landscapes are usually polyphasic. For example, subterranean  
alluvial deposits overlap one another as a result of variations in base level and in  
stream discharge, while being conﬁ ned by the dimensions of their conduits (Figure  
143). This can make a spatial analysis difﬁ cult, because younger deposits may be  
located underneath older ones. 

19.2.1.1 Fossils and other objects trapped in sediment 

Speleothems and other subterranean deposits can cover over or incorporate objects  
with known ages (prehistoric tools and pottery, ancient coins, etc.), which can be used  
to bracket the age of the sediment. While examining a stalagmite that had been cut  
and polished to reveal the laminae, we were surprised to ﬁ nd, 4.5 cm from the top,  
a layer of modern wax covered by young calcite (Figure 141). It was an old candle  
that had been left on top of the stalagmite by explorers at the entrance to a narrow  
passageway in the 1960s.  
      For older deposits, fossils can provide some age indications. For example, Ursus  
speleus remains indicate that the sediments are at least 10,000 years old, since that  

----------------------- Page 208-----------------------

                                                        The Study of Paleoenvironments     195 

               Chevallier Cave 
   (Dent de Crolles-Chartreuse-France) 

                 Karstic filling  
         stratigraphic cross section 
                          

                                                            11 
                                          7                        9 

                                             6 
         1 m               5                                       8                  10 
                        4                                                      5 
                     3 
                                         2                                    4 

                        1                                                           3 

      0 

   limestone 
   bedrock                                                                    Audra, 1994 

Fi gure 143. Stratigraphic cross-section of the Chevallier Cave (after Audra, 1994). The numbers indicate  
                           relative age, from 0 (oldest) to 11 (youngest). 

species of bear had completely died out by then. Small rodents teeth are also useful,  
since they tend to evolve quickly. They are generally well preserved in cave sediments  
and are chronological indicators.  

19.2.1.2 Paleomagnetism 

Analyzing the orientation of iron oxide particles trapped in clayey sediment and in  
certain  types  of  stalagmite  coatings  can  indicate  the  inclination,  declination,  and  
in some cases the reversals of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁ eld when the sediments were  
deposited. The variations in Earth’s magnetic ﬁ eld over time are well known, and can  
therefore be used to date the sample (Thompson and Oldﬁ eld, 1986). 
     This method is often used to date subterranean clay deposits. The precise location  
and orientation of samples must be carefully noted. The easiest marker to look for  
is the most recent reversal of the magnetic poles, the Brunhes–Matuyama reversal  
(approximately  780,000  years  ago).  If  the  clay  deposits  show  a  normal  magnetic  
orientation, they are more recent.  

----------------------- Page 209-----------------------

196    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

19.2.2 Absolute Dating 

 19.2.2.1 General concept 

Absolute dating is done using natural chronometers, which can directly indicate the  
age of a sample (speleothem, clay, charcoal, etc.) when it is subjected to various  
technical operations.  

Note : In order for speleothem dating to be reliable, the sample must come from a  
closed system with no possibility of dissolution and recrystallization, which is not  
always easy to determine. Recrystallization, which is described in Chapter 7.7, are  
therefore a problem in absolute dating.  

 19.2.2.2 Radioactive families 

In  one  radioactive  family,  a  parent  element  decomposes  into  a  daughter  element  
at a known speed. The parent/daughter ratio indicates the age of the sample. Mass  
spectrometers make it possible to date very small samples of material.  

                                                   AGE 

                             2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9 
                   10      10      10       10      10       10      10       10      10  years 
        3H 
                           14C 

                                  234U/230Th  

                                            238U/234U 

                                                         K/Ar  

                                                             U/Th/Pb 

                Figure 144. Dating ranges for the most common radioactive families. 

 19.2.2.3 Carbon-14 (14C)  

14                                               14 
  C forms in the upper atmosphere from   N being bombarded by incoming radiation.  
It is a part of all living organisms, at a roughly constant level, as long as the organism  
is alive. Once the organism dies, the amount decreases, and the remaining fraction  
indicates the age of the remains.  14C dating is primarily used for organic material,  

which  can  be  found  in  cave  deposits  (wood  charcoal,  bones,  etc.),  allowing  the  
deposits themselves to be dated as well. This method can also be used to directly date  
speleothems made of CaCO .  
                                  3 

----------------------- Page 210-----------------------

                                                             The Study of Paleoenvironments         197 

      However, dating speleothems is made more difﬁ cult by the presence of inorganic  
carbon. The carbon of calcite that makes up a speleothem comes both from limestone  
and from atmospheric CO , as described in the dissolution equations in Chapter 4.  
                                 2 
The measured age is therefore more recent than the actual age of the sample. Genty  
et al. (2001) found that the percentage of inorganic carbon is usually around 20%. 

19.2.2.4 Uranium/thorium  

Uranium-238, which is soluble, is transported by percolating water and incorporated  
into calcite’s crystal structure, where it gradually decays into thorium-213. The ratio  
of the two elements therefore indicates when the calcite crystallized. 
      However, thorium-213 can also come from detrital sources, which can alter the  
ratio and makes the measured age appear older than the actual age of the sample.  
This makes it difﬁ cult to date younger speleothems. If the detrital thorium is carefully  
measured in order to correct the measurement, this method can be used for rocks as  
young as 500 years (Pons-Branchu, 2001). 

                                                   10     26 
19.2.2.5 Cosmogenic nuclide dating (  Be/                   Al) in karst 

                                                                                                   3 
Cosmic  radiation  creates  different  isotopes  at  the  Earth’s  surface:  hydrogen  ( H),  
          3                   10               14            21                   26 
helium ( He), beryllium (       Be), carbon (    C), neon (   Ne), aluminum (       Al), and chlorine  
(36Cl). Those found in quartz (10Be and 26Al) are of particular interest in dating cave  

deposits. These two isotopes are being produced at a constant rate at the surface. If  
quartz is carried into a cave, the sediments there are protected from the production of  
more cosmogenic nuclides, and the isotopes already present decay radioactively. 26Al  
disintegrates faster than 10Be, so the ratio of these two isotopes indicates the amount  

of time that has passed since the sediment was deposited in the cave.  
      This method was used to date the sediments in Mammoth Cave (Kentucky, USA),  
showing that the passageways they were found in were formed before the Pliocene  
(Granger et al., 2001). 
      This method was also used in the caves of the enormous Siebenhengste system,  
above Thoune  Lake  (Switzerland). The  oldest  sediments  were  4.4  ±  0.6  Ma  and  
therefore indicate that karstiﬁ cation happened during the Pliocene (Hauselmann and  
Granger, 2005).  

19.2.2.6 Isotopes of anthropogenic origin 

Some radioactive elements are of anthropogenic origin, and can therefore be used to  
date very recent events. 210Pb comes from leaded gasoline, which has been outlawed  
since 1975 (in France). Cesium isotopes, 137Cs and 134Cs, were released during nuclear  

testing  in  the  1960s,  and  after  the  disaster  at  Chernobyl  (Ukraine)  in  1986. The  
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) nuclear power plant catastrophe in 2011 had a similar effect. 

----------------------- Page 211-----------------------

198    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

     137Cs activity in Bq 

     1000 

                                                n 
                                                 a 
                                                   t 
                                                   u 
                                                    r 
                                                     a 
                                                      ld 
                                                        e 
                                                         c 
                                                          a 
      500                                                  y 

                                                                                       Fukushima 
                    nuclear                                   Chernobyl                accident 
                    tests                                     accident 
        0 
             1960           1970           1980           1990           2000          2010 

                Figure 145. Cesium 137 peaks, from nuclear testing and Chernobyl. 

19.2.3 Comparative Dating Methods 

19.2.3.1 Concept 

The idea is to look for clues indicating a climatic period of known age (ice age, dry  
period, etc.). The characteristics and appearance of clay deposits and of speleothems can  
provide clues as to what the climate was like when they were deposited. For example,  
speleothems grow in warm climates, and stop during ice ages, which instead deposit  
varved silt. Ice intrusion into a cave system will break the speleothems, which then  
serve as a record of the glacial event.  

19.2.3.2 Paleotemperature correlation 

If the climatic history of an area is known, the age of a speleothem can be found  
by  looking  at  the  amount  of  18O  in  the  CaCO   molecules,  which  indicates  the  
                                                            3 
Paleotemperature (cf. infra) and can be used to estimate which climate period the  
speleothem was formed during. 

19.2.3.3 Palynology 

As a speleothem grows, it incorporates spores and pollen carried into the cave by  
percolating water. Theoretically, it is therefore possible to examine these spores and to  
determine what type of vegetation was present at the surface, which would indicate the  
climate and therefore provide a potential age range, in much the same way as oxygen  
18 dating. However, the number of spores is very small, and this type of analysis  
would require very large samples (Bastin, 1978). 

----------------------- Page 212-----------------------

                                                            The Study of Paleoenvironments         199 

19.2.3.4 Counting laminae 

Many authors have attempted to date stalagmites and stalactites by counting growth  
laminae, in much the same way that dendrochronologists count tree rings. 
      The results are disappointing since, although is seems possible that climate cycles  
are responsible for alternating layers, and that white or transparent layers correspond  
to rainy periods while brown layers rich in humic acid correspond to drier periods,  
it is much more difﬁ cult to assign absolute ages to these periods (Baker et al., 1998;  
Shopov, 1994; Railsback et al., 1994). Do the laminae record individual precipitation  
events or do they characterize the dry season versus the wet season? If the latter, are  
there two or four laminae per year? 
      Improvements in dating technology and methods, and the possibility of dating  
very small samples, now allow measurements of individual laminae, which bodes well  
for a more and more frequent use of speleothems as climatic markers. 

19.3 Environmental Factors 

19.3.1 Oxygen-18 (18O) and Monsoon Tracking 

Because stalagmite laminae are made up of CaCO , they contain oxygen, and the ratio  
                                                            3 
of 18O and 16O may indicate the amount of rainfall at the time of deposition. Dissolved  

carbonate takes on the isotopic composition of the rainwater it is suspended in, and  
when the carbonate precipitates out, it records that composition. In the Wanxiang Cave  
(Gansu, China), for example, a single stalagmite recorded monsoons from the 190 to  
the year 2003. The 18O/16O ratio was measured in 703 samples taken along the length  
of the stalagmite. An intense monsoon was indicated by a decrease in 18O, and vice  

versa. This analysis revealed that variations in the intensity of monsoons followed the  
temperature variations in the Northern Hemisphere, including the slight drop during  
the Little Ice Age (1550–1850), and that the monsoons were correlated with solar  
activity cycles and variations in alpine glaciers (Zhang et al., 2008).  

19.3.2 Oxygen-18 (18O) and Temperature 

18O is also useful in determining the temperature of the cave when speleothems were  
forming. For any given sample, the 18O/16O ratio (in number of atoms) is compared to a  

                                               18 
standard, and the resulting difference, δ O, expressed in ‰, indicates the temperature.  
This type of analysis, like ice core or coral reef studies, can be used to re-create  
paleotemperatures by taking samples of CaCO  at different heights on a stalagmite.  
                                                         3 

19.3.3 Carbon-13 (13C) and Vegetation 

       13 
The δ C recorded in speleothems can be used to analyze changes in vegetation at  
the surface, which are indicative of climate. Analysis of speleothems in 3 caves in  
Guangxi and Guizhou (China) revealed monsoon patterns reaching back 15,000 years  
(Xiaoyan et al., 2006). 

----------------------- Page 213-----------------------

200     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

      Plants  can  photosynthesize  in  two  different  ways,  producing  different  initial  
molecules, which can have either 3 or 4 carbon atoms, with different amounts of 13C,  

which indicate the type of environment the plants grew in. Forest plants produce C ,  
                                                                                                         3 
                                                                     13 
while grasses produce C , which has higher amounts of   C. Speleothems are generally  
                              4 
considered to contain only 20% inorganic carbon, as a result of exchanges between  
the air, soil, water, and rock (cf.19.2.2.3). 
      The amount of  13C in a speleothem will therefore be highly dependent on the  

vegetative cover.  

     13 
   G C 

         -33      - 32      -31       -30       -29       -28      -27       -26       -25       -24       -23      -22       -21      -20        -19 

                          decidual 
                          FOREST 
              dense                       clear 

                                         evergreen                lichens 
                                          FOREST 
                                                 
                                        dense or clear 

                                                     PRAIRIES 
                                                    graminoids 

                                         tallgrass                   shortgrass  

                                                                                       lichens 
                                                              TOUNDRA 

              13 
Figure 146. δ C in C  plants according to the type of environment (after Drucker and Celerier, 2001). 
                       3 

19.3.4 Spatial Organization of Karst Conduits 

In  a  limestone  massif,  the  process  of  karstification  affects  the  pre-existing  
discontinuities, and is organized as a function of local hydrologic conditions. Karst  
systems, as they are being emplaced, record the fractures in the rock and the base level  
at the time. These records are being created throughout the process of karstiﬁ cation.  
      For example, if an area is uplifted, the base level becomes relatively lower, and  
the karst system adjusts by excavating lower conduits. The presence of several levels  
of  dry  galleries  indicates  several  phases  of  uplift  (cf.  chap.  8).  Conversely,  when  
the area subsides, lower passageways ﬁ ll in and the upper conduits are re-used, or  
new conduits are excavated higher up. In mountainous areas, large systems like the  
Dent de Crolles (Figure 55) were created by glacial meltwater, and as a result some  
passageways record the presence and geometry of the glaciers. Similarly, the perched  
caves in the fjords of Norway are indicators of post-glacial rebound.  

----------------------- Page 214-----------------------

                                                                The Study of Paleoenvironments          201 

19.4 Records of Deformation 

19.4.1 Faults 

The stability of large civil engineering projects (dams, nuclear power plants, etc.)  
depends on understanding the stability of the landscape over long time periods, by  
identifying active faults and evaluating the risk of future seismic shocks. There is a  
relationship between the length of a fault and the magnitude of the earthquakes it  
produces. The seismic risk can also be evaluated by looking for past evidence of activity  
along major faults. The study of damage to ancient architecture (archeo-seismicity)  
and geomorphologic studies (paleoseismicity) have long been used to provide this  
kind of information for delicate civil engineering projects that are generally expected  
to last 50 years. However storage facilities for radioactive waste must remain safe for  
several thousands of years making it necessary to estimate the seismic risk over very  
long periods. This makes caves an appealing location to evaluate the risk.  
      Karst systems are formed when dissolution occurs along the discontinuities of a  
limestone unit, and the slightest tectonic shifts can readjust discontinuities and therefore  
the speleothems or conduits along them. The karst terrain can therefore provide clues  
about the past seismic and tectonic activity of a region, with records stretching back  
several tens of thousands of years. 
      In the endokarst, speleothems and clay deposits mark off the horizontal and vertical  
planes. If an area is tilted, that tilt will be recorded in the speleothems, which will  
change their direction of growth to remain vertical. For example, the Castellaras cave  
(Le-Tignet, France) is located into a limestone scree slope that is slowly sliding down  
the underlying bedrock. A record of this motion over 30,000 years was created by a  
sodastraw that curved as the limestone slid downslope (Gilli et al., 1994) (Figure 147).  
      When karstic conduits are aligned with active faults, the speleothems inside are  
modiﬁ ed by motion along the fault. This occurred at the Frassino Cave (Campo dei  
Fiori, Italy) (Bini et al., 1992), in Barrenc-du-Haut-Paradet (Eastern-Pyrénées, France)  
(Figure 148) or in the Cueva Corredores (Costa Rica) (Figure 149). 
      Given the absence of soil and vegetation, millimeter-scale displacement can be  
observed in a cave that would not be visible at the surface (Figure 150) (Gilli, 1986b). 

                                                                                 curved sodastraw 
                                                              e 
      stalactite                                             e            NW 
                                                            r 
                                                           c 
                                                          s 
                                                        g                                            30 000 
                                                      n 
                                                      i 
                                                     p 
                                                   p 
                                                   i 
                                                  l 
                                                 s 
                                               w  
                                             o 
                                             l 
                                            s 
                              SE 

                                        entrance 
                                                                                                      20 000 

                 9,5 cm 

            8,5 cm 
                                                                                                     10 000 

                                                              limestone 
       N 130°                                                 bedrock 

                                                                    5 m                               0 
              stalagmite                                                              120 100  80  60  40  20   0 ages BP 

          Figure 147. Br oken and offset speleothems in the Tignet Cave (Alpes Maritimes). 

----------------------- Page 215-----------------------

202          KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                                                                  Barrenc du Haut Paradet 
        fault 
                                                                     Pyrénées Orientales 
          0  entrance                                                         France  

  South                                      North 

                                                         F 
                                                          a            recent movement  
                                                          u 
                                                           l 
                                                           t 
                                                              
                                                            p       that breaks speleothems 
                                                             l 
                                                             a 
                                                              n 
                                                               e 
                       old movement that 
                         prokoked voids                                       stalactite crash  
                            formation                                     on its facing stalagmite   

    South 

                                                             2 m                 stalagmitic pillar failure  
                                     - 60 m                                         by compression 

               Cross section                                                   Detail 

                                                                                                     e. gilli - 2005 

Figure 148. Rec ord of fault motion in speleothems in Barrenc du Haut Paradet (Eastern Pyrénées)  
                                                                           (Gilli et al., 1999). 

Figure 149. Offset  of part of a cave in a subsiding region (Cueva Corredores, Ciudad Neily, Costa  
                                                                           Rica) (Gilli, 1995). 

----------------------- Page 216-----------------------

                                                             The Study of Paleoenvironments        203 

   fault 

                              folded 
 fractured                    flowstone 
 flowstone 

                                               fault 
                                                                                           10 cm 

Figure 150. Record  of fault motion in speleothems in the Deux Gourdes Cave (Alpes Maritimes)  
                                             (Gilli, 1986b). 

   Cévennes fault in France 

   The Cévennes fault, which runs over almost 180 km at N 35°, separates the older terrain  
   in the southern Massif Central from the Languedoc Meso-Cenozoic fold belt. Geologists  
   from the IPGP (Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris) and from Montpellier university hold  
   contradictory views of the fault. The Paris researchers suggested that the Cévennes fault  
   was an active sinistral fault moving between 0.1 and 2 mm/year (Lacassin et al., 1998),  
   whereas, for Montpellier geologists, the classical interpretation had been that the Cévennes  
   fault was dextral, and had been formed during the Variscan orogeny, after which it reactivated  
   sinistrally 40 Ma during the formation of the Pyrénées. Then it had been inactive since the  
   Oligocene (30 Ma) due to the collapse of the Golfe du Lion mountain range responsible for  
   the creation of normal faulting (Mattauer, 1998).  

   If the fault’s Quaternary activity could be conﬁ rmed, it would, because of its length pose the  
   risk of a magnitude 7 earthquake in a densely populated area. However, karstologic evidence  
   supports the second interpretation. In fact, observations in the Garrel cave system, which  
   cuts across one of the NE-SW parts of the fault, revealed that the karstic conduits were not  
   offset by the fault, and that the speleothems inside have remained undisturbed for at least  
   466 thousand years (Camus et al., 2001). 

19.4.2 Submarine Indicators 

Along sea notches (chap. 14), living organisms like shells and seaweed build up a  
crust over the limestone, which means that Holocene platforms can be dated using  
14C. These sea notches are excellent sea-level markers, and can be used to calibrate  

models of sea-level change that incorporate eustasy, tectonics, and isostasy.  
      These submarine karstic markers were used by Collina-Girard (1999) to compare  
the  relative  motion  of  areas  that  were  separated  by  active  faults.  By  carefully  
mapping the submerged topography in southeastern France, he was able to identify  
a  succession  of  benches  and  sea  notches,  records  of  past  sea-level  variations. At  
–55 m, which corresponds to 10,000 years ago, there are a number of submarine caves  
and overhangs. Differences in depth for the notches observed on both sides of a fault  
suggests it is an active one. In the area around Nice, the same sequence is present,  
but it is offset by two meters on either side of the Var River. This may indicate the  
presence of an active fault along the Var River. 

----------------------- Page 217-----------------------

204    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

  10 % 

                                 EAST     VILLEFRANCHE-SUR-MER 

  5 %                   13,5          19                     29 
                                                                        34 
             8,5 
                                                                                  38 
                                                 24 

                                                                                             43 

     5          10          15          20         25          30          35          40 

                                                                                                 44 
                                                                                     39 
                                                                             36 
  5 %                                   20          25        30 
                10 

                                                   ST. RAPHAEL 
                               16        WEST      CANNES 
  10 %                                             ANTIBES 

Figure 151. Comparative bathymetry for overhangs and the base of submarine cliffs on either side  
of the Var River (Alpes Maritimes) (Collina-Girard, 1999). The area to the east of the Var (Villefranche/ 
                 Mer) appears to be 2 meters higher than the area on the western bank. 

     In  Barbados,  the  Miocene  cuesta  is  scarred  with  numerous  sea  notches,  the  
highest of which is 300 m above sea level, indicating rapid uplift (Nicod, 1972). The  
Gulf of Bodrum (Turkey) is aligned along an east-west axis, and contains submarine  
sea notches to the west and perched sea notches to the east, indicating that the coast  
has tilted slowly to the west. A similar situation can be observed on the island of  
Cephalonia (Greece), where the sea notches are at different elevations on the eastern  
and western shores of the island. 

19.4.1 Applications in Paleoseismicity 

19.4.1.1 Seismically induced breakage of speleothems 

Broken or tilted speleothems, which have been observed on the ﬂ oors of many karstic  
or volcanic caves, are often interpreted as the result of seismic activity, and they have  
been studied in great detail (Becker, 1929; Gospodaric, 1977; Schillat, 1977; Forti  
and Postpichl, 1986; Agostini et al., 1994; Delaby, 2000). When the features that are  
observed are correctly interpreted, study of the endokarst can yield a great deal of  
information about the paleoseismicity of an area, as was seen in Switzerland with the  
PALEOSIS program (Becker et al., 2006). 
     However, recent work done in labs and  in situ indicates that speleothems are  
more resistant to seismic shock than was previously thought. Only the more elongated  
formations (sodastraws and long candle-shaped stalagmites) are likely to break due to  
seismic activity. Other mechanisms, such as sediment creeping in caves (Gilli, 1999)  
or ice intrusions (Gilli, 2004; Kempe, 2004) have been identiﬁ ed, which could explain  
the majority of the damage that has been described by previous authors (Figure 153). 

----------------------- Page 218-----------------------

                                                                              The Study of Paleoenvironments                   205 

             Figure 152. Seismic activity recorded by the speleothems in a cave (Gilli, 1999). 

                                               broken stalactites  

                                                            unbroken stalactites                rotation 

                   ice 
                   intrusion  
                     
                                                                                           b             
                                                                    broken and              reak 
                                                                    displaced 
                                                                    stalagmite 
             s 
              t                                                       
              a 
               l 
                a 
                g 
                  m 
                   i 
                    t 
                    e 

                    Fi gure 153. Effects of ice intrusions into karstic conduits (Gilli, 2004). 

 19.4.1.2 Mechanical tests on speleothems 

In order to determine whether or not seismic shocks could damage speleothems, the  
mechanical properties of stalactites, stalagmites and sodastraws were studied, to ﬁ nd  
their static breaking point (Cadorin et al., 2000), as well as their resonant frequencies  
and their damping (Lacave et al., 1999).  
       These tests found not only the average mechanical strength of the speleothems,  
but also its variability, which makes it difﬁ cult to estimate the acceleration needed to  
break any one speleothem. A statistical approach is therefore needed. The speleothems  
thought to be potentially most vulnerable (whether they were already broken or not)  
were  measured  in  Milandre  Cave  (Switzerland).  Dynamic  ampliﬁ cation,  as  well  
as the heterogeneity of each individual speleothem’s potential strength were taken  
into account. This approach found that at least one medium-strength earthquake had  
occurred in the past, in this particular study area (Lacave et al., 2002).  

----------------------- Page 219-----------------------

206    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Table 15. Geometry and eigenfrequencies for 10 stalactites measured in the Milandre Cave (Switzerland).  
The frequencies that fall within the range of seismic vibrations are highlighted in gray (after Lacave et  
                                               al., 2002). 

19.4.1.3 Paleoseismic indicators 

The relationship between earthquakes and fallen speleothems is difﬁ cult to prove, and  
observations of caves shortly after an earthquake are needed to determine whether  
or not speleothems will eventually be useful in determining paleoseismic activity.  
This has already been done in a few locations, following recent earthquakes, and the  
following observations were made: 

    •  Saint-Paul-de-Fenouillet (Ms5.2) earthquake in 1996 (France, Eastern Pyrénées), a  
       few fallen sodastraws, blocks of fallen rocks and dust deposits (Gilli, 1999); 
    •  Colﬁ orito (Ms6) earthquake (Italy) in 1997, rock fragments ﬂ aking off the cave  
       walls; 
    •  Limón (Ms7.5) earthquake (Costa Rica) in 1991, speleothem coating on the cave  
       walls cracked, ﬂ ow reversals in subterranean rivers, blocks of fallen rock (Gilli et  
       al., 1995). 

19.4.2 Tsunamis 

The karstic record may also show traces of prehistoric tsunamis, in marine cave deposits  
or on cave walls. Some studies have been done in Thailand, on Koh Phi Phi Island, after  
the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami (Gilli, 2010). They discovered that the sea waves, which  
reached heights of 8 m in places, had barely affected the underwater cave of Tham Phaya  
Nak, and only left a few pieces of coral debris near the entrance (Figure 154).  

----------------------- Page 220-----------------------

                                                                                       The Study of Paleoenvironments                         207 

        However, another layer of coral fragments, dated as being 6000 years old, was  
observed, which reached all the way to the bottom of the cave, and may have been  
deposited by a large wave (cyclone or tsunami). In the same area, along the limestone  
cliffs, the stalactites on the exterior walls are all broken below 10 m of elevation  
(Figure 155). This could support the hypothesis that large waves occurred in the past  
during a prehistoric tsunami. 

           
 Tham Phaya Nak                                                                                        2004 tsunami :   
                                                                        sea                            coral debris 
                                                  peer 

                                                                                                                   
                                                    nests collectors  
                                                    camp                    blocks barrier 
                Nord 
                                                                                                                         0 m 

                 10 m 

                                    paintings      +3 m 

                                                                                                 +2 m 

                                         +4 m                               

                                                                                              old 
                                                                                             coral 
              coral debris                                                                  debris 

              blocks                                 stalagmite 
                                                                                                 
                                                                                              +3 m 

              column                               hole                                                              E. Gilli & C. Dorrian 02/2005 

                 Figure 154. Record of a paleotsunami in Tham Phaya Nak Cave (Thailand). 

                                                                                                             unbroken 
                                                                                                             stalactites  
                                                                                                               

                                                                                                           broken stalactites   

                                                                                                3 

                                                                                                         10 m 
                                                                                                2 
                                                                                                                      palaeo sea notch 

                                                                                                1 
                                                                                                                  present sea notch         tide 

Figure 155.  Wave-cut platforms indicating previous sea-level elevations.  1—current overhang, 2— 
                                             ancient overhang, 3—broken stalagmites. 

----------------------- Page 221-----------------------

208   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

19.5 Applications in the Study of Paleoclimate 

The role of climate in the evolution of karst systems and in the formation of speleothems  
opens up the endokarst as a place to study paleoclimate. 

19.5.1 Climate Forcing 

Monsoon analysis in China was described earlier (cf. 19.3.1). Interesting observations  
were also made in the Corchia Cave (Italy), going back to 1 Ma (Drysdale et al.,  
2009). By correlating very careful records of precipitation in northwestern Italy,  
oxygen isotope analyses, and U/Th dating, the end of the second-to-last ice age  
was dated to 141,000 years ago, conﬁ rming the inﬂ uence of obliquity cycles on  
the Earth’s climate.  

19.5.2 Fall of the Mayan Empire 

Archeologists  have  deﬁ ned  three  periods  in  the  Mayan  Empire:  the  Pre-Classical  
period, the Classical period, and the Post-Classical period. The end of the Classical  
period, around the year 900, was marked by decadence from which the empire never  
managed to recover, leaving a civilization in disarray to the conquistadors. Various  
causes  for  the  Mayan  Empire’s  decline  have  been  proposed:  earthquakes,  wars,  
overpopulation, famine, the disappearance of the elite, monoculture, and so on.  
     A stalagmite from the Macal Chasm on the Vaca Plateau, west of Belize, was the  
subject of careful examination, including laminae luminescence, 18O and 14C content.  

The luminescence of the laminae yielded interesting information. Luminescence  
occurs when humic acid is present, which indicates the density of vegetation at the  
surface. Paleoenvironmental information is therefore recorded in the laminae, in  
this case going back 3,300 years. Analysis suggests that signiﬁ cant droughts, which  
is characterized by decreased luminescence due to less production of humic acid,  
hit the Mayan Empire at least four times within a span of 1500 years (Webster et  
al., 2007) (Figure 156). These droughts coincided with the collapse of the Classical  
Mayan Empire. These ﬁ ndings highlight the Mayan civilization’s dependence on  
water, and the impact that decreased resources had on a civilization that could not  
adapt to environmental change. 

----------------------- Page 222-----------------------

                                        The Study of Paleoenvironments  209 

                            climate 
                         dry         wet 

                                               Present 

                                                             P 
                                                             O 
                                                             S 
                                                             T 
                                                             C     
                                                             L 
                                                Spanish      A 
                                                             S 
                                                             S 
                                                conquest 
                                                             I 
                                                             C 
                                                             A 
                                                             L 
                                               Mayan Empire 
                                  long period  
                                                 collapse 
                                  of drought 

                                                             C 
                                                             L 
                                                             A 
                                                             S 
                                                             S 
                                                             I 
                                                             C 
                                                             A 
                                                             L 

                                                             P 
                                                             R 
                                                             E 
                                                             C 
                                                             L 
                                                             A 
                                                             S 
                                                             S 
                                                             I 
                                                             C 
                                                             A 
                                                             L 

                                         Age 
                           Luminescence 

Figure 156.  Luminescence in a stalagmite in Mayan territory in Belize (after Webster et al., 2007). 

----------------------- Page 223-----------------------

                                        2020 
 Geodesy and Rock Deformation 

20.1 Value of Karst Systems 

Karst systems are rigid environments within which structural deformation can be  
studied. Caves, which are protected from temperature variations, are well suited to  
hold sensitive monitoring equipment. 

20.1.1 Tiltmeters 

Long-base tiltmeters, which can have an angular resolution of 10–9 radians, can measure  

elevation changes of 1 mm over 1000 km. They are used to measure earth tides, tectonic  
and gravitational shifts, and deformation caused by hydrologic forces (Boudin, 2004). 
     They are useful in studying the behavior of subterranean bodies of water in karst. 

20.1.1.1 The Calern karst plateau (Alpes-Maritimes, France) 

The  Calern  karst  plateau  (Figure  157)  is  home  to  a  geodesic  observatory  where  
geodesic variations that have long gone unexplained are now being measured. The  
plateau itself undergoes an annual vertical oscillation of up to 6 cm. In order to study  
the relationship between geodesy and hydrology, two long-base tiltmeters (5 m and  
9 m) were installed in the Cipiernaum Chasm, and several other hydrogeologically  
relevant sites were equipped with CTD (Conductivity, Temperature, Depth) probes.  
The plateau drains to Bramafan Spring, above which the Revest Chasm is located,  
where there is an access point to the karst aquifer and where the water table has been  
observed to ﬂ uctuate by over 100 m. 
     Tiltmeter  observations  show  a  general  loading  of  the  plateau  in  the  N100°E  
direction, beginning a month after the start of the rainy season, then an unloading in the  
N90°E direction during the dry season. The maximum clinometric gradient is 8 μrad. 
     There  is  a  strong  hydrologic/clinometric  correlation  in  the  karst  aquifer  near  
Revest-Bramafan. The ﬁ rst autumn rains have no effect, but starting in November  
there is a strong correlation between the water table and the incline, when increased  
precipitation provokes a water loading in the N100°E direction. The long-term tilting  

----------------------- Page 224-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Coursegoules 
               
                                                                                                 
                                                                 

                                                                                                            Gréolières 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                 600                   
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                    
      
                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                  Foulon Spring             
                                                                                                                       Cipières                                                       Pey Subert 
                                                                                          008 
                                                                                                                                                  Pesquiers Spring 
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                       Pounch 
                                                                Gros  
                                                                  
                                                          
                                                              e                                                                                                                                         1208 
                                                     1 
                                                             L  
                                                    0 
                                                  0 
                    r 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                 0 
                                                                                   Combe 
                   e                                                               Combe 
                 v                                                                                                                                                
                 i 
               R                                                                                                                                                                    S 
             p                                                                     Ponor 
           u                                                                       Ponor                                                                                              t 
          o                                                                                                                        Fontaniers 
        L                                                                                                                                                                              - 
      e                                                                                                                                                                                B 
     L 
                                                                                                                                      Spring                                             a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           r 
                                                                     17                              7                                                                                      n 
                                                                        0 m                           5                                                                                      a 
             La Pinée                                                        /h                          m                                                                                     b 
                                                                                                           / 
              Ponor                                                                                         h                                                                                    é 
                                                     Haute CombeHaute CombeHaute C                                                                                                                 P 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     l 
                                                          Ponor             00002211                                                                                                                  a 
                                                          Ponor                                                                                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                      9                                   a 
                                                                                            Moustiqueoust qq                                                                                                u 
                                                                                            Moustique                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                      0              
                                                                             uu                 Shafta                                                                 0 
                                                                        tteeaa                  Shaft 
                                                                      llaa 
                                                                    PP                                                                                                            
                        Sommet                           CCCaaallleeerrnn                                                                                            Bramafan Spring 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                              
                      de Canaux                               
                                                                                    Baoudillouns                                                                                                          
                                                                                    Baoudillouns 
                                                                                                                                                                   Laquet Spring 
                                                                                         Shaft 
                                                                                         Shaft 
                                                                                                             Calernaumau 
                                                                                                             Calernaum                                         00 
                                                    Signal                                                                                                     0 
                    1436                              ignalal 
                                                                                                                                                               0                                       LEGEND  
                                                                                                                Shaft 
                                                                                                                Shaft     133413  4 
                                                  de Calern                                                               1334                                 6             Mane                           Puy de  
                                                      Calernalern                     inclinometers 
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tourettes 
                                                                                                                              Colle de Rougiés                               Spring                  Cretaceous 
                                                             14571  577                                                       Colle de RougiCo de RRoRougiééss 
                                                             1457 
                                                                                                                                                             Revest CaveRRRR 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jurassic 
                                                                                                    h 
                                                                                                   /                                                                                                          1268 
                                                                                                 m 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G 
                                                                     CaussolsC 
                                                                      Caussols                0                                                                                                     Triassic 
                                                                                             0 
                                                                                           4                                                                                                                                 NordNord 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   11                                            e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      00 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    5                   Nord 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     spring          00 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                           d 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0              00 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e 
                     1                                                                   Caussols 
                      2                                                                   Caussols 
                        0 
                         0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     cave - shaft 
                                                                                                                     Fourchu 
                                                                                            Ponor                                                                       
                                                                                            Ponor 
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                       Shaft                                      Fugerets                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a 
             1553 
                                                                                                                                                                   Spring                            ponor 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     dye test                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1248 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bramafan watershed 
                                                                                                                u 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k 
         towards                                                                                               a 
                                                                                                            te 
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                         la 
                                                                                                       P                                       Gourdon                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D 
    Siagne Springs                                                                      Caussols                                                                                                     mount 
                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     crest                                      f 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                                                                          Haut Montet                                                        Frache 
                                                  1417                                            Shaft                                                       Cave                                                                               r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m 
                                                          Colle                                                                                                                                     fault 
                                                                
                                                       de Maçon                     Le Haut 1335                                                                                                                                                 a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 km 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                                                                     Montet 
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
    009                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2 
Figure 157. Geologic and hydrogeologic outline of the Calern Plateau (Alpes-Maritimes). The water collected in this drainage basin is concentrated on the eastern part                                                                           1 
                                                                            of the plateau and ﬂ ows out through the Bramafan Springs.                                                                                                           1 

----------------------- Page 225-----------------------

212    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

of the plateau seems to be tied to the lowering of the water table during the dry season.  
In the fall, the ﬁ rst rains recharge the epikarst aquifer that emptied during the dry  
season, without inﬂ uencing the tilting of the plateau. The winter rains ﬂ ush down the  
water towards the deep aquifer on the eastern side of the plateau. Occasional changes  
are then observed by the tiltmeter in the N320° direction (Figure 158). 
     A  simple  ﬂ exure  model,  based  on  the  Boussinesq  principle,  can  be  used  to  
calculate the clinometric effect of a water loading in a given location, with the direction  
of maximum tilting between 90 and 100°E. Based on a structural analysis of the  
                                                                                                 3  
catchment basin, it is estimated that following a precipitation event, 25 million m  of  
                                    2  
water accumulates in an 8 km  area between the tiltmeter and the Bramafan Spring.  
The corresponding ﬂ exure was calculated to be 4  μrad at the tiltmeter station, the  
same order of magnitude that had been observed by the tiltmeters (Gilli et al., 2010). 

                              Water bodies migration and plateau tilting 

                      West                       epikarst                  East 

                                         u 
                                          n 
                                           s 
                                            a 
                                             t 
                                              u 
                                               r 
                                                a          flush effect 
                                                 t 
                                                  e 
                                                   d 
                                                     z 
                                                      o 
                                                       n 
                                                         e 

                                                                               spring 
                    inclinometer                              deep reserves  

Figure 158. Clinometric variations on the Calern plateau, correlated with ﬂ uctuations in the water  
                  table of the Revest-Bramafan karst aquifer (Alpes-Maritimes). 

20.1.1.2 Durzon Spring (Larzac, France) 

                                                            2 
The Durzon Spring drains approximately 100 km  on the Larzac Plateau. Geodesic  
observation stations (GPS unit and absolute gravimeter) were installed in Salvetat,  
La Blaquerie and Les Canalettes, and 4 tiltmeters were set up in avens 50 m below  
the surface. 
     The  observed  clinometric  variations  (Figure  159)  were  correlated  with  the  
variations in discharge at the spring. During the fall of 2006, the plane deﬁ ned by the  
clinometers tilted towards the spring after each increase in discharge, then returned to  
its original position. Models showed that the measured tilt is also related to hydraulic  
changes in the fractures near the tiltmeter (Jacob et al., 2008). 

20.1.1.3 Applications 

Tilting of a karst massif appears linked to the hydrologic state of the aquifer it contains.  
It is therefore theoretically possible to estimate the size of karst aquifers using geodesy.  

----------------------- Page 226-----------------------

                                                                      Geodesy and Rock Deformation                213 

               Tilting in Prad 

              9 
                                     EAST-WEST INCLINOMETER  
                 
              8 

              7 

              6 
                   Aug           Sep         Oct          Nov          Dec          Jan          Feb         Mar 

               Tilting in Prad 
              9 
                                     NORTH-SOUTH INCLINOMETRE  

              8 

              7 

              6 
                   Aug           Sep         Oct          Nov          Dec          Jan          Feb         Mar 

                Discharge in m3.s-1 

                                                     DURZON SPRING 
              8 

              6 

              4 

               
              2 

              0 
                   Aug           Sep         Oct          Nov          Dec          Jan          Feb         Mar 

                                                   2006 - 2007  

                      Figure 159. Surface til ting above the Durzon Spring (Larzac). 

20.2 Rock Mechanics 

An underground dam prototype was built in Coaraze on a karst spring (Figure 160)  
that drains a small Neocomian limestone unit. The spring was blocked off by a sluice  
gate, which can be closed to artiﬁ cially raise the water table of the karst aquifer until it  
overﬂ ows through a perched outlet 8 m above the spring. When the sluice gate is open,  
water ﬂ ows from the spring and drains the reservoir. Several tests demonstrated that  
closing the sluice gate would, on the one hand, ﬂ ood karst conduits, and on the other  
hand, recharge the network of discontinuities in the limestone unit, thereby creating  
an underground reservoir (Gilli and Mangan, 1994). 
      This prototype was later modiﬁ ed to serve as an in situ laboratory for studying the  
hydro-mechanical coupling of rock discontinuities. The reservoir was equipped with  
monitoring probes that measured the water pressure and the mechanical strain on the  
rock at different points within the limestone unit, while under controlled hydraulic  
conditions. This arrangement was used to study the effects of ﬂ uctuations in the water  
table on the network of fractures.  

----------------------- Page 227-----------------------

214    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                                                           COARAZE PROTOTYPE 

                                                                   overflow 
                                                                   by an upper outlet 

                cracks                                                           8 m 
                network 

            karstic conduit 

                                                                          concrete dam 
                                                                          and valve 
                            impermeable substratum 

                              Emptying of Coaraze prototype -  18-05-93 trial 
        discharge in L.s-1 

         35 

         30 

         25 
                   karstic  
         20        conduit 
                   emptying             cracks draining 
         15 
                  discharge before closure 
         10 

          5 

          0 
            1                         10                        100        time in mn     1000 

Figure 160. Drainage and  interpretation of the Coaraze prototype dam (Alpes Maritimes) (Gilli and  
                                           Mangan, 1994). 

      In fact, the hydrometric conditions inside a fracture are a function of both its  
hydraulic and mechanical properties, as well as its orientation, the magnitude of the  
stresses being applied, the degree of interconnectedness with other fractures, and the  
surrounding large-scale structural context (Cappa et al., 2005). A ﬁ eld laboratory like  
the Coaraze prototype is therefore useful because it enables the study of all of these  
parameters in the same place.  
      The fracture network can be subdivided into three distinct groups (Figure 161).  

   •  3 subvertical faults oriented N50/N70,  
   •  11 subvertical faults oriented N120/N140,  
   •  12 stratiﬁ cation joints oriented N40 with a 45° dip to the SE. 

----------------------- Page 228-----------------------

                                                       Geodesy and Rock Deformation      215 

  N 
  O 
   I 
   T 
   A 
   V 
   E 
   L 
    E                                                                  14 FAULTS 

                                                                       12 JOINT PLANES 

                                                                               FAULTS 

                                                                               JOINT PLANES 

                                                                    LIMESTONE 

                                                                     IMPERVIOUS LEVEL 
                                     G 
                                    N 
                                   I 
                                  R                                  IMPERVIOUS FAULT 
                                 P   E 
                                S   V 
                                   L 
                                  A 
                                 V 
                                                                     ARTIFICIALLY  
                                                                     SATURATED ZONE 

                                                                     NORMAL  
                                                                     SATURATED ZONE 

Figure 161. Fracture netw ork upstream of the Para spring (Coaraze, Alpes-Maritimes) (after Cappa  
                                         et al., 2005). 

     Measurements indicated that the limestone matrix is impermeable (k = 9,8 ×  
   –17  2 
10    m ) and has low porosity (0.2%), whereas the fractures are highly interconnected.  
The experimental setup also revealed differences in behavior between the faults and  
the stratiﬁ cation joints. Several experiments involving increasing and decreasing the  
hydraulic load found that faults have a high hydraulic conductivity (0.57 × 10–4 to 1.9  

     –4    –1                                                 –6            –6     –1 
× 10    m.s  ), while in joints it is much lower (0.9 × 10      to 7.6 × 10    m.s  ). When  
the sluice gate was closed, the faults opened as soon as the pressure increased, and  
stabilized around 1.5 à 2 × 10–6 m in measured locations. When the sluice gate was  

raised, the system returned to its initial conditions after two minutes of hydraulic  
discharge (Guglielmi and Mudry, 2001; Cappa et al., 2005). 
     Further study is needed on the relationship between this behavior and speleogenesis  
(cf. chap. 7.2). 

----------------------- Page 229-----------------------

216  KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                                                  FAULTS 
                                                  JOINT PLANES 

     E 
     R 
     U      G 
     S       N 
     S       I      HYDRAULIC LOADING           HYDRAULIC  
     E       L 
     R       L                                  DISCHARGE  
     P       I 
             F 
               
            O 
             N 

                                                        TIME 

    T 
    N 
    E 
    M 
    E 
    C 
    A 
    L 
    P 
    S 
    I 
    D 
       
    L 
    A 
    M 
    R 
    O 
    N 

                                                         TIME 

     Figure 162. Coupled hydraulic and mechanical cycles in Coaraze (Cappa et al., 2005). 

----------------------- Page 230-----------------------

                                        2121 
        Paleontology, Archaeology,  
                              and Biology 

21.1 Traps and Conserving Environments 

The endokarst is protected from light and precipitation, has no vegetation, and remains  
at  stable  climatic  conditions,  with  the  result  that  it  protects  records  of  events  for  
thousands of years. Cave deposits preserve traces of the animals that inhabited the cave  
(bears, cats, bats, rodents, etc.), or that fell into it. The following photograph (Figure  
163) depicts a fossilized lemur skull that was preserved in a cave in Madagascar after  
it fell into a chasm. In addition to fossils, caves also preserve the traces of animal  
activity,  such  as  bear  claw  marks  or  the  hollows  they  excavated  to  hibernate  in.  
Prehistoric humans also left behind numerous traces of their activity, in addition to  
their bones and tools.  

21.2 The Quercy Phosphorites 

In southwest France, the Quercy phosphorites are phosphate-rich sedimentary deposits  
trapped in a karstic paleorelief. During diagenesis, the sediment, through sorting,  
compaction, leaching, and possibly the circulation of mineral-rich ﬂ uid, turned into  
rock that could be mined and turned into fertilizer.  
     During  the  mining  process,  karstic  depressions  and  caves  were  excavated,  
revealing a large number of fossils. This location, which contains 130 fossil beds and  
millions  of  exceptionally  well-preserved  individual  remains,  has  provided  source  
material  for  several  signiﬁ cant  paleontological  discoveries  (Pelissié,  2010). The  
species diversity that is represented is extraordinary, with more than 500 species of  
mammals alone.  

----------------------- Page 231-----------------------

218    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

                 Figure 163. Fossil lemur skull. Anka rana Massif (Madagascar). 

21.3 “Cavemen”   

The concept of cavemen is a misrepresentation, since early hominids actually spent  
only part of their time in caves. When they did choose to dwell in caves, they preferred  
south-facing entrances near a water source. Various types of habitations were found  
in caves: temporary hunting camps, nomadic encampments, religious or burial sites,  
sources of useful materials, or even simply traces left by curious explorers. 
     In Asia and in Madagascar, funeral rites that take place in caves are still practiced.  
In Central America, descendants of the Mayans also still use caves for ritual purposes,  
in order to communicate with their ancestors. 
     Early humans left traces of their passage, either intentionally or by chance, which  
were preserved for thousands of years, making caves a rich source of information  
for archaeologists and paleontologists, thereby leading to the “caveman” stereotype.  
Early humans lived outside caves, but the traces of their encampments have for the  
most part been erased by erosion and vegetation growth. The traces found in caves  
are varied: tools, paintings and grafﬁ ti, footprints, buildings, ﬁ replaces, middens and  
graves. One set of 30,000 year-old prehistoric cave paintings in the Chauvet Cave  
(Ardèche, France) was preserved so well that they were thought to be fakes when  
they were discovered. Footprints and even ﬁ ngerprints are visible in clay deposits in  
Niaux Cave and in the Tuc d’Audoubert cave, in French Pyrénées. Today also even  
the briefest human incursions leave traces: soot from carbide lamps, mud deposited  
over speleothems, boot prints on ﬂ owstones, etc. Although these may be of interest  
to future archaeologists, human trafﬁ c can then cause signiﬁ cant damage, and can  
obscure older clues. For example, in Niaux Cave, archeologists found that the footprints  

----------------------- Page 232-----------------------

                                              Paleontology, Archaeology, and Biology    219 

left by modern-day visitors have almost completely erased those of the cave’s early  
hominid visitors! 
     The endokarst is not solely studied for the objects it has preserved. It also records  
information about the relationship between humans and their environment. Similarly,  
more and more studies have been focused on the relationship between humans and  
caves, in order to understand what would have motivated early hominids to begin  
exploring underground.  
     Studies in the greatest French archaeological cave sites, like Tautavel, Cosquer,  
Chauvet, and Lascaux can provide enough context to sketch a picture of primitive  
humans in their environment, which left records in the endokarst. For the Holocene  
and early human history, anthropogenic environmental changes (controlled burns,  
deforestation, soil erosion, etc.) left their marks on speleothems and in rhythmic detrital  
deposits, which can yield useful information when carefully analyzed.  

21.4 Isolation and Genetic Divergence 

The endokarst preserves information about organisms found there in the past, but it  
can also isolate and conserve living populations, which, due to their isolation, evolve  
along a different path and become genetically distinct from their parent population.  
Caves act as “islands”, where divergent evolution can lead to the creation of new  
species, such as blind, colorless ﬁ sh. As a result, one region may be home to several  
different species of the same genus, each living in isolated caves. 
     The  same  phenomenon  occurs  in  aquifers,  and  the  work  of V.  Prié  (verbal  
communication) on gastropods shows that one species may encompass a great deal of  
genetic diversity across aquifers, which, although geographically near each other, are  
separated by an unsaturated zone. These differences could be used to better describe  
karst aquifers. 

21.5 Extremophiles 

Some plants and animals can survive in area once thought to be uninhabitable, such  
as ice, hot springs, and anoxic or acidic environments. 
     In karstic hot springs, bacteria colonies can be observed, ﬂ oating in ﬂ akes through  
the water. They indicate the presence of life at great depths, where it survives without  
light or oxygen. 
     At the Pestera de Movile, discovered in 1986 in Romania, near Mangalia, there is  
an entire ecosystem of organisms that do not depend on sun for their survival. These  
60-odd species live in an environment with very low oxygen levels (7–10%), but  
high levels of carbon dioxide (2–3.5%), methane (1–2%) and hydrogen sulﬁ de. They  
survive by metabolizing sulfur. 
     Studies have been done on hypogenic or hydrothermal caves, such as Lechuguilla  
(New Mexico, USA) or Cueva de Villa Luz (Tabasco, Mexico), rich in hydrogen  
sulﬁ de. On the roof of Villa Luz, they found ﬁ laments of bacteria called snottites. These  
colonies live in acidic environments and derive energy from metabolizing sulfur. The  
role they play in speleogenesis is as yet unknown. Studies of these types of organisms  

----------------------- Page 233-----------------------

220   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

have led to new thinking about what conditions are necessary for extraterrestrial life,  
and about how life may have originated. This is particularly relevant for the Mars  
exploration missions, where water is known to exist below the surface. 

----------------------- Page 234-----------------------

                                       2222 
                               Conclusion 

Karst is an immense ﬁ eld, and vast parts of it remain almost completely unexplored,  
including hydrothermal karst, deep karst, and submarine karst.  
     It is a well-deﬁ ned entity that cannot be fully understood without linking surface  
and subterranean features, nor without the concept of carbonate cycle. Karstology  
is a ﬁ eld in which an interdisciplinary approach is necessary, calling on a number  
of different areas of study. As with most scientiﬁ c disciplines, general studies and  
specialized  sub-disciplines  exist  side-by-side,  each  with  their  own  problems,  and  
often grappling with either a too-narrow focus or a too-broad superﬁ cial approach.  
Luckily, the karstologic community, which includes both speleologists and geologists,  
is  working  to  bridge  interdisciplinary  gaps.  In  France,  the  Rencontres  d’Octobre  
(October Meetings), Rik Raks, and speleological conferences are opportunities for  
fruitful exchanges, as are the Slovenian Karst Schools and numerous international  
conferences.  
     In terms of geographic understanding, the relationship between karstology and  
speleology  has  developed  considerably  thanks  to  technical  advances,  which  have  
allowed humans to explore almost all of the known caves in the world, aside from  
those where water is still an obstacle, either because of its velocity, its temperature,  
or the important distances and depths to reach. As a result, further exploration of the  
greatest ﬂ ooded cave networks in France, such as the Fontaine de Vaucluse or Port  
Miou,  is  dependent  on  specially  adapted  new  diving  techniques. As  of  yet,  there  
are  no  systems  that  can  support  exploration  over  several  kilometers  within  these  
underwater cave networks to discover their secrets. Technological improvements to  
support exploration could be a worthy challenge for the private sector, with immediate  
applications in water resources management. 
     On the conceptual level, there are many questions that have as of yet only partially  
been explained: 

   •  What is the maximum depth at which karstiﬁ cation can occur? 
   •  Where are karstic water reserves located? Are they only present in the deep  
      saturated zone, or do comparable volumes also exist in the epikarst and in the  
      unsaturated zone? 

----------------------- Page 235-----------------------

222    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

    •  What  respective  roles  do  fracture  networks  and  drainage  conduits  or  paleo- 
       drainages play in water storage? 
    •  What is the role of microorganisms in speleogenesis? 
    •  How do subterranean speleothems form and evolve? 
    •  How can speleogenesis and karst systems be modeled? 

Important goals in applied karstology remain out of reach as well: 

    •  Surface detection of deep cavities and water conduits. 
    •  Detailed analysis of the vulnerability of karst aquifers. 
    •  Estimating  and  modeling  cavities  and  the  resources  they  contain  (water,  
      petroleum, etc.). 
    •  Tapping coastal karst aquifers and submarine springs. 
    •  Tapping deeper reservoirs. 
    •  Water resource management, including, for example, artiﬁ cial recharge in karst  
       aquifers.  

      Thus many questions remain unanswered, and that can therefore serve as the focus  
of research and study. In addition to these questions, there is also a need for study of  
the catchment basins for most karstic springs. All of these areas are employment and  
study opportunities for generations of karstologists. 
        

----------------------- Page 236-----------------------

                                     Bibliography 

Agostini, S., Forti P. and Postpichl D. 1994. Gli studi sismotettonici e paleosismici effetuati nelle grotta del  
      Cervo di Petrasecca nel periodo 1987–1991. Mem. Ist. Ital. Speleol., 2(5): 97–104. 
Archer, D. 1996. An atlas of the distribution of calcium carbonate in sediments of the deep sea. Global  
      Biogeochem. Cycles, 10: 159–174. 
Arﬁ b, B. 2001. Etude des circulations d’eau souterraines en aquifère karstique côtier: observations et  
      modélisations de la source de l’Almyros d’Heraklion, Crète (Grèce). Thèse de doct. Univ. Paris VI,  
      343 p. 
Arﬁ b, B., Cavalera T. and Gilli E. 2006. Inﬂ uence de l’hydrodynamique sur l’intrusion saline en aquifère  
      karstique côtier. C.R. Geosciences, 338: 757–767. 
Aucant, Y., Petrequin P. and Urlacher J.P. 1971. Relevés topographiques dans les grottes de Franche-Comté.  
      Méthodes et résultats. Actes du colloque d’hydrologie en pays calcaire. Annales scientiﬁ ques de  
      l’université de Besançon, 3(15): 93–109. 
Audra, Ph. 2007. Karst et spéléogenèse épigènes, hypogènes, recherches appliquées et valorsation. Mémoire  
      d’HDR Géographie, Univ. Nice, 457 p. 
Audra, Ph. 1994. Karsts alpins. Genèse des grands réseaux souterrains. Karstologia Mémoires, 5, 280 p. 
Audra, Ph., Bigot J.Y., Camus H., Clauzon G., Gilli E. and Mocochain L. 2004. The effect of the Messinian  
      Deep Stage on karst development around the French Mediterranean sea. Geodinamica acta, 17(6):  
      27–38. 
Audra, Ph., Gilli E., Mangan Ch. and Michelot N. 2006. Les traçages karstiques des Alpes Maritimes. UMR  
      Espace Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis, 32 p.  
Babault, J., van-den-Driessche J., Bonnet S., Castelltort S. and Crave A. 2005. Origin of the highly elevated  
      Pyrenean peneplain, Tectonics, 24, TC2010, doi:10.1029/2004TC001697. 
Bakalowicz, M. 1970. Hydrodynamique karstique: Etude du bassin d’alimentation de la Manavgat (Taurus  
      occidental, Turquie). Thèse doct. géol., Paris VI. 
Bakalowicz, M. 1979. Contribution de la géochimie des eaux à la connaissance de l’aquifère karstique et  
      de la karstiﬁ cation. Thèse. Univ. Paris VI. 
Baker, A., Genty D. and Smart P.L. 1998. High-resolution records of soil humiﬁ cation and paleoclimatic  
      change from variations in speleothem luminescence excitation and emission wavelengths. Geology,  
      26: 903–906. 
Barton,  H.  and  Luiszer  F.  2005.  Microbial  metabolic  structure  in  a  sulﬁ dic  cave  hot  spring:  potential  
      mechanisms of biospeleogenesis. J. Cave Karst Stud., 67(1): 28–38. 
Bastin, B. 1978. L’analyse pollinique des stalagmites: une nouvelle possibilité d’approche des ﬂ uctuations  
      climatiques du Quaternaire. Ann. Soc. Géol. Belg., 101: 13–19. 
Battistini, R. 1985. Formes de relief pseudokarstiques sur Mars, Karstologia, 6: 53–59. 
Bazalgette, L. 2004. Relations plissement/fracturation multi échelle dans les multicouches sédimentaires  
      du domaine élastique/fragile. Accommodation discontinue de la courbure par la fracturation petite  
      échelle et par les articulations. Possibles implications dynamiques dans les écoulements des réservoirs.  
      these doct. géol, Université de Montpellier II, 252 p. 
Becker, H.K. 1929. Höhle und Erdbeben: Mitt. über Höhlen - u. Karstf., 1(4): 130–133. 
Becker, A., Davenport C.A., Eichenberger U., Gilli E., Jeannin P.Y. and Lacave C. 2006. Speleoseismology:  
      a critical perspective. J. Seism., 10(3): 371–388. 
Bellaiche, G. 1972. Les dépôts quaternaires immergés du golfe de Fréjus (Var, France). pp. 171–176. In :  
      Stanley D.J. (ed.). Stanley, The Mediterranean Sea a Natural Sedimentation Laboratory, Smithsonian  
      Institution. 

----------------------- Page 237-----------------------

224     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Besson, L. 2005. Les risques naturels: de la connaissance pratique à la gestion administrative. Editions  
      Techni. Cités, 38506 Voiron. collection dossier d’expert technique, réf 442, juillet, 610 p. 
Beulé, C.E. 1855. Études sur le Péloponnèse, Firmin Didot Frères, Paris. 
Bini, A. 1994. Rapports entre la karstiﬁ cation périméditerranéenne et la crisede salinité du Messinien:  
      l’exemple  du  karst  lombard,  Italie  (Relations  between  perimediterranean  karstiﬁ cation  and  the  
      Messinian crisis: the Lombardy karst example, Italy), Karstologia, 23: 33–53. 
Bini, A., Forieri A., Remy F., Tabacco I.E., Zirizzotti A. and Zuccoli L. 2003. Un karst sous la glace de  
      l’Antarctide ? Karstologia, 42: 45–49. 
Bini, A., Quinif, Y., Sules, O. and Uggeri, A. 1992. Les mouvements tectoniques récents dans les grottes  
      du Monte Campo dei Fiori (Lombardie, Italie), Karstologia, 19: 23–30.  
Birot, P., Corbel J. and Muxart R. 1967. Morphologie des régions calcaires à la Jamaïque et à Puerto Rico.  
      Mém. et Doc. du CNRS, Phénomènes karstiques, 4: 335–392. 
Blanc, J.J. 1993. Le paléokarst littoral de Provence (Estaque, calanques, zone de bando), Karstologia, 22:  
      21–34. 
Blavoux, B. 1995. Apport des techniques isotopiques à la connaissance des gisements d’eau minérale— 
      LaHouille Blanche, 2(3): 51–58. 
Blavoux, B., Mudry J. and Puig J.M. 1992. Bilan, fonctionnement et protection du système karstique de la  
      Fontaine de Vaucluse (Sud-Est de la France), Geodinamica Acta, 5(3): 153–172.  
Bögli, A. 1980. Karst Hydrology and Physical Speleology. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 284 p. 
Bonacci, O. 1987. Karst Hydrology with Special References to Dinaric Karst. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 184 p.  
Boudin, F. 2004. Développement et validation d’un inclinomètre longue base de subsurface à silice et  
      mercure: Application à des mesures géophysiques de haute résolution sur le chantier pilote du Golfe  
      de Corinthe. Thèse doct. géophysique, IPG Paris, 300 p. 
Bourrouilh-le-Jan, F. 1992. Evolution des karsts océanienss (karst, bauxites et phosphates), Karstologia,  
      19: 31–50. 
Boynton, W.V., Ming D.W., Kounaves S.P., Young S.M.M., Arvidson R.E., Hecht M.H., Hoffman J., Niles  
      P.B., Hamara D. Kquinn., R.C., Smith P.H., Sutter B., Catling D.C. and Morris R.V. 2009. Evidence  
      for calcium carbonate at the Mars Phoenix landing site. Science, 325(5936): 61–64. 
Bozovic, A., Budanov, H., Nonveiller E. and Pavlin B. 1981. The Keban Dam on karstiﬁ ed limestone. Bull.  
      Int. Assoc. Eng. Geol., 24: 45–52. 
Breznik,  M.  1998.  Storage  Reservoirs  and  Deep Wells  in  Karst  Regions. A.A.  Balkema,  Rotterdam,  
      Brookﬁ eld, 251 p. 
Buffard, R. 1993. Les gisements de fer de la région de Kisanga (Shaba méridional, Zaïre), colmatages d’un  
      paléokarst du Protérozoïque supérieur. Karstologia, 21: 51–55. 
Burger,  D.  1992.  Quantifizierung  quartärer  subtropischer  Verwitterung  auf  Kalk;  Das  Beispiel  
      Travertinkomplex von Antalya, Südwesttïrkei Relief, Boden, Palaöklima, Gebr., Borntraeger, Berlin,  
      Stuttgart, 131 p. 
Cadorin, J.F., Jongmans D., Plumier A., Camelbeeck T. and Quinif Y. 2000. Modelling of speleothem rupture.  
      Proceed. Han 2000 workshop, 13–17 mars 2000, Han-sur-Lesse, Belgium, 27–30. 
Camus, H. 2003. Vallée et réseaux karstiques de la bordure carbonatée sud-cévenole. Relation avec la  
      surrection, le volcanisme et les paléoclimats. Thèse Doctorat, Université de Bordeaux, 3, 692 p.  
Camus, H., Seranne M. and Quinif Y. 2001. Activité tec tonique récente enregistrée par les spéléothèmes:  
      un contre-exemple sur la faille des Cévennes (sud du Massif Central, Hérault, France). Actes coll.  
      RIVIERA  2000, Tectonique  active  et  géomorphologie, Villefranche-sur-Mer,  Revue  d’Analyse  
      Spatiale, Nice, n° spécial, 2001, 53–54.  
Cappa,  F.,  Guglielmi Y.,  Fénart  P.,  Merrien-Soukatchoff V.  and Thoraval A.  2005.  Hydromechanical  
      interactions in a fractured carbonate reservoir inferred from hydraulic and mechanical measurements.  
      Int. J. Rock. Mech. Min. Sci. Geomech. Abstr., 42: 287–306. 
Cavalera, Th. 2007. Etude du fonctionnement et du bassin d’alimentation de la source sous-marine de  
      Port Miou (Cassis, Bouches-du-Rhône). Approche multicritères. These doct. Sci. de la Terre, Univ.  
      Marseille I, 403 p. 
Cavalera, Th., Gilli E., Mamindy-Pajany Y. and Marmier N. 2010. Mechanism of salt contamination of  
      karstic springs related to the Messinian deep stage. The speleological model of Port Miou (France).  
      EGU General Assembly 2009, Vienna, spec. issue. Geodinamica Acta, 23(1-3): 15–28. 
Chabot, G. 1927. Les Plateaux du Jura central. Etude morphogénique. Les Belles Lettres édit., Paris, 350 p. 

----------------------- Page 238-----------------------

                                                                                             Bibliography        225 

Chang, S.F. and Hong L.P. 1986. Pile foundation in limestone areas of Malaysia. pp. 25–36. In : Fatt, C.S.  
      (ed.). Foundation Problems in Limestone Areas of Peninsular Malaysia. IEM, Geo. Eng. Tech. Div.,  
      Malaysia. 
Chapuis, R. and Nardy J.P. 1986. Réﬂ exions géographiques. Cahiers de Géographie 29, Annales littéraires  
      de l’université de Franche-Comté, 97 p. 
Choppy, J. 1992a. Des indicateurs climatiques: les cannelures et rigoles de l’endo- et de l’exokarst. pp.  
      349–354. In : Salomon J.N. and Maire R. (eds.). Karst et évolutions climatiques. Hommage à Jean  
      Nicod. Presses Univ., Bordeaux.  
Choppy, J. 1992b. Les karsts étagés, Synthèses spéléologiques et karstiques, 68 p. 
Choppy, J. 1992c. Actions conjointes de facteurs tectoniques, Synthèses karstiques, 68 p.  
Choppy, J. 2003. Les formes spéléologiques et karstiques, catalogue illustré, 112 p.  
Cita, M.B. and Ryan W.B.F. 1978. Messinian erosional surfaces in the Mediterranean. Marine Geology,  
      27: 193–365.  
Clauzon, G., Rubino J.L. and Savoye B. 1995. Marine Pliocene Gilbert-type fan deltas along the French  
      Mediterranean coast. In : IAS-16th Regional Meeting of Sedimentology—5e Congrès Français de  
      Sédimentologie—ASF. Fieldtrip Guide Book, Publications ASF, Paris, 23: 143–222. 
Collignon, B. 1986. Hydrogéologie appliquée des aquifères karstiques des Monts Tlemcen (Algérie). Thèse  
      de Doct. Hydrogéol., Univ d’Avignon., 159 p. 
Collignon, B. 1988. Evaluation des réserves permanentes et renouvelables des aquifères karstiques de  
      l’Ouest  de  l’Algérie  à  partir  du  suivi  piézométrique  de  forages  d’exploitation”. Actes  du  4ème  
      Colloque d’Hydrologie en Pays Calcaire, Besançon. Annales Scientiﬁ ques de l’Université de Besançon,  
      Géologie, 6: 99–105.  
Collina-Girard,  J.  1996.  Préhistoire  et  Karst  littoral,  la  grotte  Cosquer  et  les  Calanques  marseillaises  
      (Bouches-du-Rhône, France), Karstologia, 27: 27–40. 
Collina-Girard, J. 1994. Relevés direct de proﬁ ls sous-marins en plongée: mise en évidence de niveaux de  
      stationnement marin holocènes (entre 0 et 60 m de fond) au voisinage de la grotte Cosquer et en rade  
      de Marseille; Préhist. Anthropo. Med., 1994(3): 65–71. 
Collina-Girard, J. 1999. Les replats littoraux holocènes immergés en Provence et en Corse: implications  
      eustatiques et néotectoniques, Quaternaire, 10(2-3): 121–131. 
Cornet, G., Durozoy G., Gouvernet C. and Munk F. 1963. La source sous-marine de Port Miou (calanques  
      de Cassis), Etude par prospection géophysique. BRGM, Paris, Chronique d’hydrogéologie, 2: 47–51. 
Courbon, P. 2002. Modes de positionnement topographique et électromagnétique d’un siphon, Exemple  
      du Qattine Azar (Liban), Karstologia, 40: 19–26. 
Courbon, P. and Chabert C. 1986. Atlas des grandes cavités mondiales, UIS et FFS, 256 p. 
Cvijic,  J.  1893.  Die  Karstphänomenen Versuch  einer  morphologischen  Monographie.  Geographisches  
      Abhandlungen, 5(3): 266–273. 
Daoxian, Y. 1991. The Construction of underground dams on subterranean streams in South China karst.  
      IGCP299 Newsletter. Institute of Karst Geology, Guilin. 
Davis, W.M. 1899. The geographical cycle. Geogr. J., 14: 481–504.  
Davis, W.M. 1930. Origin of limestone caverns. Geol. soc. Amer. bull., 41(3): 475–628.  
Del Prete, S., Iovine G., Parise M. and Antonio Santo A. 2010. Type and distribution of sinkholes in the  
      plain areas of Southern Italy, EGU General Assembly 2009, Vienna, spec. issue. Geodinamica Acta,  
      23(1-3): 113–127.  
Delaby, S. 2000. Palaeoseismic investigations in Belgium caves. Proceed. of Han 2000 Europ. Symp., 45–48.  
Detay, M. 1993. Le forage d’eau. Réalisation, entretien, réhabilitation. Masson, Paris, 400 p. 
Detay, M. 1997. La gestion active des aquifères, Masson, Paris, 416 p. 
De Waele, J., Picotti V., Forti P., Brook G., Cucchi F. and Zini L. 2009. Age of caves in the Cordillera de  
      la Sal (Atacama, Chile). Proceedings of the 15th International Congress of Speleology, Kerrville  
      (Texas), July 19–26, 2: 825–830.  
Doerﬂ iger, N., Jeannin P.-Y. and Zwahlen F. 1999. Water vulnerability assessment in karst environments: a  
      new method of deﬁ ning protection areas using a multi-attribute approach & GIS tools (EPIK method).  
      Environ. Geol., 39(2): 165–176.  
Dreybrodt, W. 1988. Processes in Karst Systems—Physics, Chemistry and Geology. Springer Series in  
      Physical Environments 4, Springer, Berlin-New York, 188p. 
Drogue, C. 1974. Structure de certains aquifères karstiques d’aprés les résultats de travaux de forage. C.  
      R. Acad Sc. Paris, III-278: 2621–2624. 

----------------------- Page 239-----------------------

226     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Drucker, D. and Celerier G. 2001. Teneurs en carbone-13 du collagène de grands mammifères du site  
      de Pont d’Ambon (Dordogne, France): implications pour l’environnement et son exploitation au  
      Tardiglaciaire dans le Sud-ouest de la France, Paléo, 13: 145–153. 
Drysdale, R.N., Hellstrom J.C., Zanchetta G., Fallick A.E., Sánchez Gõni M.F., Couchoud I., McDonald  
      J., Maas R., Lohmann G. and Isola I. 2009. Evidence for Obliquity Forcing of Glacial Termination  
      II, Science, 325: 1527–1531. 
Dubois, P., Sorriaux P. and Soudet H.-J. 1993. Rospo Mare (Adriatique), un paléokarst pétrolier du domaine  
      méditerranéen, Karstologia, 21: 31–42. 
Dunham, R.J. 1962. Classiﬁ cation of carbonate rocks according to depositional texture. pp. 108–121. In :  
      Ham, W.E. (ed.). Classiﬁ cation of Carbonate Rocks: American Association of Petroleum Geologists  
      Memoires. 
Durand, B. 1987. Du kérogène au pétrole et au charbon: les voies et les mécanismes des transformations des  
      matières organiques sédimentaires au cours de l’enfouissement, Mém. Soc. Geol. France, N.S., 77–95. 
El  Hakim,  M.  2005.  Les  aquifères  karstiques  de  l’Anti-Liban  et  du  nord  de  la  plaine  de  la  Bekaa:  
      caractéristiques, fonctionnement, évolution et modélisation, d’après l’exemple du système karstique  
      Anjar-Chamsine (Liban). Thèse doct. Sci de la Terre, Univ. Montpellier II et Univ. St. Joseph, 216 p. 
El Khammari, K., Najine A., Jaffal M., Aifa T., Himi M., Vasquez D., Casas A. and Andrieux P. 2007.  
      Imagerie combinée géoélectrique radar géologique des cavités souterraines de la ville de Zaouit Ech  
      Cheikh (Maroc) Comptes Rendus Geoscience, 339(7): 460–467.  
Ertunç, A. 1999. The geological problems of the large dams constructed on the Euphrates River (Turkey).  
      Engineer. Geol., 51: 167–182.  
Faulkner, T. 2005. Modiﬁ cation of cave entrances in Norway by marine action. Proceedings of the fourteenth  
      International Speleological Congress, Athens (CD). Paper 069.  
Fernandez-Gibert, E., Calaforra J.M. and Rossi C. 2000. Speleogenesis in the Picos de Europa Massif,  
      Northern Spain. pp. 352–357. In : Klimchouk, A.B., Ford D.C., Palmer A.N. and Dreybrodt W. (eds.).  
      Speleogenesis. Evolution of Karst Aquifers. NSS Huntsville. 
Folk, R.L. 1959. Practical petrographic classiﬁ cation of limestones: American Association of Petroleum  
      Geologists Bulletin, 43: 1–38. 
Ford, D.C. 1992. Karst et glaciation au Canada. pp. 250–266. In : Salomon, J.N. and Maire R. (eds.). Karsts  
      et évolutions climatiques. Hommage à Jean Nicod. Presses Univ., Bordeaux. 
Ford, D.C. and William P. 2007. Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology, Wiley, Chichester UK, 576 p. 
Forti, P. and Postpichl D. 1986. May the growth axis of stalagmites be considered as recorders of historic  
      and prehistoric earthquakes? Preliminary results from the Bologna karst area (Italy). Int. Symp. Eng.  
      Geol. Problems in Seismic area, Bari, 1: 183–193.  
Gauchon, Ch. 1997. Des cavernes et des hommes, Karstologia mémoire, 7, 248 p.  
Genty, D., Baker A., Massault M., Proctor C., Gilmour M., Pons-Branchu E. and Hamelin B. 2001. Dead  
      carbon in stalagmites: carbonate bedrock paleodissolution vs. ageing of soil organic matter. Implications  
      for 13C variations in speleothems. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 65(20): 3443–3457. 
Geoderis. 2005. Méthodes de reconnaissance et de suivi des zones à risque de fontis. CR réunion « Traiter  
      les risques au quotidien » du 13/10/2005. CETE Laboratoire de Nancy. 
Gibert, J. 1986. Ecologie d’un système karstique jurassien. Hydrogéologie, dérive animale, transits de  
      matières, dynamique de la population de Niphargus (Crustacé Amphipode). Mém. Biospéol., Moulis,  
      1987, XIII (40), 379 p. 
Gilli, É. 1984. Recherches sur le creusement et la stabilité des grands volumes karstiques souterrains.  
      Applications au creusement des cavités artiﬁ cielles de grande taille. Thèse, Marseille, 287 p. 
Gilli, É. 1986a. Les grandes cavités souterraines: études et applications. Karstologia, 7: 3–10. 
Gilli, E. 1986b. Néotectonique dans les massifs karstiques. Un exemple dans les Préalpes de Nice: la Grotte  
      des Deux Gourdes, Karstologia, 8: 50–52. 
Gilli, E. 1991. Etude d’un chevauchement dans les gouffres du Calernaum et des Baoudillouns, Karstologia,  
      18: 39–48. 
Gilli, E. 1995a. Recording of earth movements in karst. 5th Int. Conf. Seism. Zonation. Oct. 17, 18, 19  
      1995, Nice, AFPS. EERI. Ouest Edit., Nantes, 1305–1314. 
Gilli, E. 1995b. La spéléologie. coll. Que sais-je? PUF Paris, 128 p. 
Gilli, E. 1999. Rupture de spéléothèmes par ﬂ uage d’un remplissage endokarstique. L’exemple de la grotte  
      de Ribière (Bouches du Rhône) C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, IIa(329): 807–813. 
Gilli, E. 2001. Compilation d’anciennes mesures de débit à Port Miou. Apport à l’hydrogéologie de la  
      Provence. 7e coll. hydrogéol. en pays calcaire et milieu ﬁ ssuré. Besançon, 20–22 Sept. 2000, 157–160. 

----------------------- Page 240-----------------------

                                                                                        Bibliography       227 

Gilli, E. 2004. Glacial causes of damage in cave and difﬁ culties to use speleothems as seismic or neotectonics  
      indicators. Lavoisier, Paris, Geodinamica Acta, 17/3: 229–240. 
Gilli, E. 2005. Review on the use of natural cave speleothems as palaeoseismic or neotectonics indicators.  
      Elsevier, C.R. Geosciences, 337(13): 1208–1215. 
Gilli, E. 2010. Effect of the 2004 Asian tsunami in the sea cave of Tham Phaya Nak (Koh Phi Phi archipelago,  
      Thailand) and possible evidence of a prehistoric event. EGU General Assembly 2009, Vienna spec.  
      issue. Geodinamica Acta, 23(1-3): 79–88. 
Gilli, E. 2015. Deep speleological salt contamination in Mediterranean karst aquifers: perspectives for  
      water supply. Env. Earth Sc., DOI 10.1007/s12665-015-4042-2. 
Gilli, E. and Audra Ph. 2004. Les lithophages pliocènes de la fontaine de Vaucluse (Vaucluse, France). Un  
      argument pour une phase messinienne dans la genèse du plus grand karst noyé de France. Elsevier  
      C.R. Geosciences, 336(16): 1481–1489.  
Gilli, E., Levret A., Sollogoub P. and Delange P. 1999. Research on the february 18, 1996 earthquake in  
      the caves of St-Paul-de-Fenouillet area (Pyrenées Orientales, France)—Geodinamica Acta, 12(3-4):  
      143–158. 
Gilli, E. and Mangan Ch. 1994. Le prototype de Coaraze: un exemple de création de réserve d’eau par  
      obturation d’exutoire karstique, Karstologia, 25: 37–40. 
Gilli, E., Mangan Ch. and Mudry J. 2008. Hydrogéologie, objets, méthodes et applications. 2ème édit. Coll  

      Presup, Dunod édit. Paris, 340 p.  
Gilli, E., Boudin F., Longuevergne L., Florsch N., Walch J.J., Gomez A., Depeyre J. and Marie J.C. 2010.  
      Neotectonics and current hydrologically-induced karst deformation. Case study of the Plateau de  
      Calern (Alpes-Maritimes, France). EGU General Assembly 2009, Vienna spec. issue. Geodinamica  
      Acta, 23(1-3): 49–64. 
Gombert, P. 1995. Approche théorique simpliﬁ ée de la dissolution karstique. Karstologia, 24: 41–51. 
Gouvernet, C., Guieu G. and Rousset C. 1979. Provence. Guides géologiques régionaux. Masson., 238 p.  
Gospodaric, P. 1977. Collapsing of speleothems in Postojna cave system, Proceed. 7th Int. Speleo. Congress  
      Shefﬁ eld, 223–240.  
Granger, D.E., Fabel D. and Palmer A.N. 2001. Pliocene-Pleistocene incision of the Green River, Kentucky,  
      determined from radioactive decay of cosmogenic 26Al and 10Be in Mammoth Cave sediments. Bull.  
      Geol. Soc. Am., 113(7): 825–836. 
Guendon, J.L., Ali A.A., Roiron P., Terral J.-F., D’Anna A., Diaz Del Olmo F. and Baena Escudero R. 2003.  
      Les travertins de Saint-Antonin: séquence géobotanique et climato-anthropique holocène (Bouches- 
      du-Rhône, France), Karstologia, 41: 1–14. 
Guerin, R. 2004. Contribution à l’hydrogéophysique. HDR, Univ. Paris, 6, 133 p.  
Guglielmi, Y. and Mudry J. 2001. Quantitative measurements of channel-block hydraulic interactions by  
      experimental saturation of a large, natural, ﬁ ssured rock mass. Ground Water, 39: 696–701. 
Guieu, G. and Rousset C. 1978. Structures, paléostructures, paléogéographie et genèse des bauxites en  
      Provence. Bull. du BRGM. 2-II-3: 311–322. 
Hajri, S., Sadier B., Jaillet S., Ployon E., Boche E., Chakroun A., Saulnier G.M. and Delannoy J.J. 2009.  
      Analyse spatiale et morphologique d’une forêt de stalagmites par modélisation 3D dans le réseau  
      d’Orgnac (Ardèche, France), Karstologia, 53: 1–14. 
Hauselmann, Ph. 2010. Spéléogenèse dans la zone épinoyée. Un nouveau modèle. In : Audra, Ph. (Dir).  
      Grottes et karsts de France, Karstologia Mémoires, 19: 46–47.  
Hauselmann, PH. and Granger D.E. 2005. Dating of caves by cosmogenic nuclides: method, possibilities,  
      and the Siebenhengste example (Switzerland).—Acta, 34(1): 43–50.  
Henry, H.R. and Kohout F.A. 1972. Circulation patterns of saline groundwater affected by geothermal  
      heating as related to waste disposal. American Assoc. of Petroleum Geologists Memoires, 18: 202–221. 
Hill, C. 1987. Geology of Carlsbad cavern and other caves in the Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico and  
      Texas. New Mexico Bur. of Mines & Min. Ress. Bull, 117, 150 p. 
Hill, C. and Forti P. 1997. Cave minerals of the world. National Spel. Soc., 463 p. 
Hoblea, F. 1999. Contribution à la connaissance et à la gestion environnementale, des géosystèmes karstiques  
      montagnards: études savoyardes. Université de Savoie, thèse, 2 tomes, 995 p. 
Hoblea, F., Gallino-Josnin S. and Audra Ph. 2010. Genèse et fonctionnement du karst hydrothermal d’Aix- 
      les-Bains (Savoie, France): historique des recherches et avancées récentes Bulletin de la Societe  
      Geologique de France, 184(4): 315–326. 

----------------------- Page 241-----------------------

228     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Hoblea,  F.  and  Picollier  J.  2007.  Etude  d’impact  de  la  pratique  spéléologique  sur  la  qualité  des  eaux  
      souterraines karstiques captées. Mise au point d’un protocole d’étude, applications en Savoie (système  
      de la Doria) et dans le sud-Vercors (système du Brudour). rapp. EDYTEM. Uté de Savoie, 57 p. 
Hsü, K.J., Montadert L., Bernoulli D., Cita M.B., Erikson A., Garrison R.E., Kidd R.B., Melieres F., Muller  
      C. and Wright R.H. 1977. History of the Mediterranean salinity crisis. Nature, 267(5610): 399–403. 
Hu, B.B. 1991. Xu Xiake, a Chinese traveler of the seventeenth century, and his contribution to Karst  
      studies—Cave Science. Trans. Brit. Cave Res. Assoc., 18: 153–157.  
Jacob, Th., Chéry J., Boudin F. and Bayer R. 2008. Monitoring deformation from hydrologic processes in  
      a karst aquifer using long-baseline tiltmeters. Water resources research, 46: 1–18. 
Jaconelli, D. 2005. Création de sentiers en milieu karstique. Déﬁ s – Enjeux – Réalisation, Fédération  
      Française de Spéléologie., Lyon, 65 p. 
Jaillet, S., Maire R., Brehier F., Despain J., Lans B., Morel L., Pernette J.-F., Ployon E., Tourte B. and  
      Ultima Patagonia. 2008. Englacement, eustatisme et réajustements karstiques de la bordure sud de  
      l’archipel de Madre de Dios (Patagonie, Province última Esperanza, Chili, Karstologia, 51: 1–24.  
James, J.M. 1992. Corrosion par mélange des eaux dans les grottes de la Plaine de Nullarbor, Australie.  
      pp. 333–354. In : Salomon, J.N. and Maire R. (eds.). Karsts et évolutions climatiques. Hommage à  
      Jean Nicod, Presses univ., Bordeaux.  
Jorand, C. 2007. Modélisation expérimentale de la fracturation d’un milieu sédimentaire. Thése doct. Sci.  
      de la Terre, Univ. Nice, 210 p. 
Kareh, R. 1967. Les sources sous-marines de Chekka. Hannon, Revue Libanaise de Géographie, II: 36–121.  
Kempe, S. 2004. Natural speleothem damage in Postojnska jama (Slovenia) caused by glacial cave ice ?  
      A ﬁ rst assessment. Acta carsologica, 33(1): 265–289. 
Klimchouk, A. 2000. Speleogenesis of the great gypsum mazes in the Western Ukraine. pp. 261–273. In:  
      Klimchouk A.B., Ford D.C., Palmer A.N. and Dreybrodt W. (eds.). Speleogenesis. Evolution of Karst  
      Aquifers . NSS Huntsville. 
Lacassin, R., Meyer B., Benedetti L., Armijo R. and Tapponnier P. 1998. Comptes Rendus de l’Académie  
      des Sciences—Séries IIA—Earth and Planetary Science, 326(11): 807–815. 
Lacave, C., Koller M. and Levret A. 1999. Measurement of natural frequencies and damping of speleothems,  
      Proceed. 12th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Auckland, New Zealand, 2118: 1–7. 
Lacave, C., Egozcue J.J. and Koller M.G. 2002. What can be concluded about seismic history from broken  
      and unbroken speleothems? J. Earthquake Eng., 8(3): 431–455. 
Lamoreaux, Ph.E. 1995. Historical references to karst studies. pp. 11–18. In : Beck (ed.). Karst Geohazards.  
      Balkema, Rotterdam. 
Land, L.A. and Paul C.K. 2000. Submarine karst belt rimming the continental slope in the straits of Florida,  
      Geo Marine letters, 20: 123–132. 
Maire, R. 1990. La haute montagne calcaire, Karstologia Mémoires 3, Gap édit., 732 p. 
Malzieu, E. 1987. Ressource en eau entre Rhône et Ventoux. Hydrogéologie et hydrochimie du bassin de  
      Bedoin-Mormoiron, de la plaine des Sorgues et du massif de Pernes-les-Fontaines (Vaucluse). Thèse  
      3ème cycle Université d’Avignon, 246 p. 

Mangan, Ch. 1985. Indices karstiques et fondations en terrain carbonaté, Ann. Soc. Geol, Belgique, 108:  
      99–104. 
Mangan, Ch. and Gilli E. 1997. Liaison autoroutière A50–A57. Traversée souterraine de Toulon. Recherches  
      hydrogéologiques en rapport avec l’effondrement de mars 1996. Rapp. Int. DDE Toulon. 
Mangan, Ch. and Gilli E. 2002. Effondrements de terrain de la pénétrante Cannes-Grasse (06). Etude  
      hydrogéologique entre Tournamy et Mouans-Sartoux. Dossier de synthèse – sept. 2002. DDE Alpes- 
      Maritimes. 
Mangin, A. 1969. Etude hydraulique du mécanisme d’intermittence de Fontestorbes (Ariège). Annales de  
      Spéléologie, 24(2): 255–98. 
Mangin, A. 1975. Contribution à l’étude hydrodynamique des aquifères karstiques. Thèse doct. état Sc.  
      Université de Dijon, 124 p. 
Mangin, A. 1994. Karst hydrogeology, in Groundwater ecology. pp. 43–67. In : Stanford, J., Gibert J. and  
      Danielopol D. (eds.). Academic Press, San Diego CA.  
Mangin, A. 2008. Caractérisation des propriétés des systèmes karstiques d’après l’étude des écoulements.  
      Actes coll. Hydrogéologie et karst au travers des travaux de Michel Lepiller, 17 mai 2008. CFH-AIH. 
Margat, J. 1981. Gestion des ressources en eau souterraine par aménagement de source. Sélection d’exemples  
      dans les pays arabes 2ème Symposium sur les ressources en eau dans les pays arabes/ACSAD, Rabat,  

      Sept. Publ. ACSAD 1982, Damas.  

----------------------- Page 242-----------------------

                                                                                                 Bibliography         229 

Marsaud,  B.  1997.  Structure  et  fonctionnement  de  la  zone  noyée  des  karsts  à  partir  des  résultats  
       expérimentaux, Thèse de Doctorat, Orsay-Paris XI, BRGM, Orléans, 301 p. 
Martonne, E. de. 1909. Traité de géographie physique, A. Colin édit., Paris, 3 tomes. 
Martini, J.E.J. and Marshall C.G.A. 2002. Noodsberg cave, une grotte dans les quartzites de la province  
       du Kwazulu-Natal (Afrique du Sud), Karstologia, 39: 47–50. 
Mattauer, M. 1998. Commentaires à la note de R. LACASSIN et al. C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 327: 855–859. 
Maurin, V. and Zoetl J. 1965. Salt water encroachment in the low altitude karst water horizons of the Island  
       of Kephallini. Actes Coll. Dubrovnik, AISH-UNESCO, 2: 423–438. 
Mengxiong,  S.  1988.  Karstologie  appliquée.  In :  Barbary,  J.P.  (ed.).  GUIZHOU  EXPE  86,  Spelunca  
       Mémoires, 16. 
Michaud,  F.  2008.  Les  champs  de  dépressions  circulaires  de  la  ride  de  Carnegie  (Paciﬁ que  oriental).  
       Karstologia, 52: 31–30.  
Mijatovic,  B.F.  1993. Alimentation  artiﬁ cielle  des  systèmes  aquifères  dans  les  régions  karstiques,  
       Hydrogeological Processes in Karst Terranes (Proceedings of the Antalya Symposium and Field  
       Seminar, October 1990). IAHS, 207: 153–162. 
Milanovic, P.T. 2004. Water Resources Engineering in Karst. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 312 p.  
Molnar, P. and England P. 1990. Late Cenozoic uplift of mountain ranges and global climate change:  
       Chicken or egg? Nature, 346: 29–34. 
Mocochain, L., Clauzon G, Bigot J.Y. and Brunet Ph. 2006. Geodynamic evolution of the peri-Mediterranean  
       karst during the Messinian and the Pliocene: evidence from the Ardèche and Rhône Valley systems  
       canyons, Southern France. Sedimentary Geology, 188-189: 219–233. 
Morhange, C. 1994. La mobilité récente des littoraux provençaux, Thèse doc. géog. phys. Uté de Provence,  
       Aix, 202 p. 
Morse, J.W. and He S.L. 1993. Inﬂ uences of T, S and pCO2 on the pseudo-homogeneous precipitation of  
       CaCO  from seawater – Implications for whiting formation. Marine Chemistry, 41: 291–297. 
              3 
Najine, A.,  Jaffal  M., Aifa T.,  Filahi  M., Arioua A.,  Boukdir A., Andrieux  P.  and  Rejiba  F.  2006.  
       Reconnaissance de cavités souterraines par tomographie électrique et radar géologique dans le centre  
       ville de Béni-Mellal (Maroc). Bulletin des Laboratoires des Ponts et Chaussées, 260: 83–90.  
Nicod, J. 1972. Pays et paysages du calcaire. Paris, coll. Sup, Le géographe, PUF, 224 p. 
Nicod, J. 1991. Phénomènes karstiques et mouvements de terrain récents dans le Trias du département du  
       Var. Travaux U.A. 903 du CNRS, 20: 5–14. 
Nicod, J. 1993. Recherches nouvelles sur les karsts des gypses et des évaporites associées. Karstologia,  
       21: 15–30. 
Nicod,  J.  1999.  Un  cas  d’école,  l’affaissement  du  barrage  de  Zeuziers  (Valais,  Suisse):  problèmes  
       géotechniques et karstiﬁ cation, Karstologia, 34: 52–53. 
Nicod, J. 2002. Pamukkale (Hiérapolis): un site de travertins hydrothermaux exceptionnel de Turquie,  
       Karstologia, 39: 51–54. 
Ogilvy, R.D., Cuadra A., Jackson P.D. and Monte J.L. 1991. Detection of an air-ﬁ lled drainage gallery by  
       VLF resistivity method. Geophysical Prospecting, 39: 845–859. 
Özbek, E. 1975. Cavity at Keban Dam, Turkey, Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the Environment ,  
       Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, 12(1): 45–48.  
Özdemir, M.A. and Özgen M. 2004. Keban Barajında Su Kaçakları ve Dogal Turizm, Afyon Kocatepe  
       Üniv., Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, VI/1, 65–85. 
Palmer, A. 1991. Origin and morphology of limestone caves. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 103: 1–21. 
Paterson, M.S. 1978. Experimental Rock Deformation—The Brittle Field. Springer, New York, 254 p. 
Pelissie, Th. 2010. Le paléokarst des phosphorites du Quercy. In : Audra, Ph. (Dir). Grottes et karsts de  
       France, Karstologia Mémoires, 19: 46–47. 
Pissard, I. and Mantovani G. 1997. Le Tourisme souterrain en France, Coll. Dossiers et documents, éd.  
       Aﬁ t, 95 p. 
Pons-Branchu,  E.  2001.  Datation  haute  résolution  de  spéléothèmes  (230Th/234U  et  226Ra/238U).  
       Application aux reconstitutions environnementales autour des sites du Gard et de Meuse / Haute- 
       Marne. Thèse doct. géol. Marseille III. ANDRA (coll. « les Rapports »), Châtenay-Malabry, 224 p. 
Postpichl, D., Agostini S., Forti P. and Quinif Y. 1991. Paleosismicity from karst sediments: the Grotta del  
       Cervo cave case study (Central Italy), Tectonophysic, 193: 33–34. 
Potie, L. 1974. Captage des résurgences sous-marines d’eau douce. Observations sur les effets du barrage  
       expérimental de Port Miou. Rapport interne SRPM, Sté Eaux de Marseille, 74 RT 1001 PM, Marseille.  

----------------------- Page 243-----------------------

230     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Poullyaud, M. and Seurin M. 1985. Pseudo-karsts dans des roches gréso-quartzitiques de la formation de  
      Roraima, Karstologia, 5: 45–52. 
Prie, V. 2009. Les escargots souterrains, nouveaux marqueurs des hydrosystèmes karstiques. Karstologia,  
      52: 7–16. 
Quinif, Y. and Maire R. 1998. Pleistocene Deposits in Pierre Saint-Martin Cave, French Pyrenees Quaternary  
      Research, 49-1: 37–50.  
Railsback, L.B., Brook G.A., Chen J., Kalin R. and Fleisher C.J. 1994. Environmental controls on the  
      petrology of a late Holocene speleothem from Botswana with annual layers of aragonite and calcite.  
      J. Sed. Res., 64/1a: 147–155. 
Renault, Ph. 1970. La formation des cavernes. Paris, coll. Que Sais-je? PUF, 128 p.  
Renault, Ph. 1992. La karstologie française de 1900 à 1992. pp. 217-30. In : Salomon, J.N. and Maire R.  
      (eds.). Karsts et évolutions climatiques. Hommage à Jean Nicod. Presses univ., Bordeaux.  
Reynaud, A. 2000. Fonctionnement d’un aquifère karstique décollé sur une semelle de Trias évaporitique:  
      exemple du Massif du Mont Vial (Arc de Castellane, Alpes-Maritimes). Thèse doct. Sci. de la Terre,  
      Univ. Franche-Comté, 246 p. 
Ridgwell, A. and Zeebe R.E. 2005. The role of the global carbonate cycle in the regulation and evolution  
      of the Earth system. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 234(3-4): 299–315. 
Roglic’, J. 1964. Karst valleys in the dinaric karst. Erdkunde, 18-2: 113–116. 
Roques, H. 1964. Étude statique et cinétique des systèmes gaz carbonique-eau-carbonate, CNRS, Ann.  
      Spéléol., XIX/2: 255–486. 
Rossi, G. 1978. Quelques aspects des rapports karst-structure en milieu tropical. In : Revue de géographie  
      alpine, 66(3): 337–348. 
Rouchy, J.M. 1999. Un évènement exceptionnel: la crise de salinité messinienne de Méditerranée. pp.  
      104–108. In : Fröhlich, F. and Schubnel H.-J. (eds.). Les âges de la terre. MNHN, Paris.  
Rouvier, H. 1971. Minéralisations plombo-zincifères et phénomène karstique. Exemple tunisien: le gisement  
      du Djebel Hallouf. Mineralium Deposita, 6(3): 196–208. 
Saint-Martin, J.P. 2010. The Girvanella-like remains from Messinian marine deposits (Sardinia, Italy):  
      Lagerstätten paradigm for microbial biota? Annales de Paléontologie, 96(2): 33–50.  
Salomon, J.N. 2000. Précis de karstologie. Bordeaux, Presses universitaires de Bordeaux, 251 p.  
Sanford, W.E., Whitaker F.F. Smart P. and Jones G. 1998. Numerical analysis of seawater circulation in  
      carbonate platforms: I. Geothermal convection, American Journal of Science, 298: 801–821. 
Savoye, B., Rehault J.P., LE Suave R., Monti S. and Le Drezen E. 1997. Synthèse bathymétrique et imagerie  
      acoustique (Corse et mer Ligure). Notice des cartes bathymétriques et imagerie acoustique à 1/500  
      000° de la mer ligure. IFREMER. 
Schillat, B. 1977. Conservation of tectonic waves in the axes of stalagmites over long periods, Proc. 7th  
      Int. Cong. Speleol. Shefﬁ eld, 377–379.  
Shopov, Y.Y., Ford D.C. and Schwarcz H.P. 1994. Luminescent microbanding in speleothems: high-resolution  
      chronology and paleoclimate. Geology 22: 407–410. 
Song, L. 1999. Sustainable development of agriculture in karst areas, South China. Int. J. Spel., 28 B,  
      1/4: 139–148. 
Stefanon, A.  1972.  Capture  and  exploitation  of  submarine  springs.  Proc.  Oceanology  International  
      Conference. Brighton (UK), 427–734.  
Stefanon, A. 1984. A review of capture and exploitation of submarine springs by divers. Joint Ocean  
      Assembly. Halifax, 100–110.  
Sternau, R. 1967. Artiﬁ cial recharge of water through wells. Experiences and techniques. In : Symposium  
      of Haifa: Artiﬁ cial Recharge of Aquifers and Management of Aquifers. IAHS Publ., 72: 91–100. 
Therond, R. 1973. Recherches sur l’étanchéité des barrages en pays karstiques. Eyrolles, Paris, 444 p. 
Thiebaud, E. 2008. Fonctionnement d’un système hydrothermal associé à un contact tectonique alpin (La  
      Léchère, Savoie). Apports de l’hydrogéologie, de la géochimie et de la modélisation hydrodynamique  
      et thermique en vue de la gestion de la ressource. Thèse doct. géol., Univ. de Savoie., 306 p. 
Thompson, R. and Oldﬁ eld F. 1986. Environmental Magnetism. Allen and Unwin, London, 227 p. 
Tissot, B. and Welte D.H. 1984. Petroleum Formation and Occurrence. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  
      New York, 538 p. 
Toulemont, M. 1987. Les gypses lutétiens du bassin de Paris. Sédimentation, karstiﬁ cation et conséquences  
      géotechniques. Rapp. Labo., série GT-24, Paris, LCPC. 
Tournis, V.  and  Rabinovitch  M.  2010.  Les  ressources  naturelles  pour  la  fabrication  des  engrais:  une  
      introduction. BRGM info. 

----------------------- Page 244-----------------------

                                                                                       Bibliography      231 

Tricart, J. and Cailleux A. 1955. Introduction à la géomorphologie climatique. C.D.U., 222 p.  
Troester, J.W., White E.L. and White W.B. 1984. A comparison of sinkhole depth frequency distributions  
      in temperate and tropical karst regions. pp. 65–67. In : Beck, B.F. (ed.). Sinkholes: Their Geology,  
      Engineering and Environmental Impact. Balkema, Rotterdam. 
Vatan, A. 1967. Manuel de sédimentologie. Technip, Paris, 397 p. 
Vergari, A.  1998.  Nouveau  regard  sur  la  spéléogenèse:  le  pseudo-endokarst  du Tournaisis  (Hainaut,  
      Belgique). Karstologia, 31: 12–18. 
Vouillamoz,  J.M.,  Legchenko A., Albouy Y.  Bakalowicz  M.,  Baltassat  J.M.  and Al-Fares W.  2003.  
      Localization of Saturated Karst Aquifer with Magnetic Resonance Sounding and Resistivity Imagery,  
      Groundwater, 41(5): 1–9. 
Waltham, A.C and Webb B. 1982. Geology. pp. 68–74. In : Jermy, C. and Kavanagh K.P. Gunong Mulu  
      National Park, Sarawak. Spec. issue 2,  The Sarawak Museum J., 30(51). 
Ward,  R.F.,  Kendall  C.G.St.C.  and  Harris  P.M.  1986.  Upper  Permian  (Guadalupian)  facies  and  their  
      association with hydrocarbons; Permian Basin, west Texas and New Mexico. Am. Assoc. Petrol.  
      Geol. Bull., 70: 239–262. 
Webster, J.W., Brook G. A., Railsback L.B., Cheng H., Edwards R.L., Alexander C. and Reeders Ph. 2007.  
      Stalagmite evidence from Belize indicating signiﬁ cant droughts at the time of Preclassic Abandonment,  
      the Maya Hiatus, and the Classic Maya collapse. Palaeog. Palaeoc. Palaeoe., 250(1-4): 1–17. 
Willems, L., Rodet J., Auler A., Pilo L.B., Pouclet A. 2004. Karsts en roches non carbonatées – l’exemple  
      des quartzites et des itabirites de Minas Gerais, Brésil. Rouen, J. Rodet (ed.). Actes des Journées  
      Européennes de l’AFK 2003, pp. 74–75. 
Withe, W.B. 1988. Geomorphology and Hydrology of Karst Terrains. Oxford University Press, New York,  
      464 p.  
Xiaoyan, Z., Meiliang Z., Yushi L., Jiaming Q. and Yan Y. 2006. Carbon isotopic records from stalagmites  
      and  the  signiﬁ cation  of  paleo-ecological  environment  in  the  area  of  Guangxi-Guizhou,  China,  
      Environmental geology, 51(2): 267–273. 
Zhang, P., Cheng H., Edwards R.L., Chen F., Wang Y., Yang X., Liu J., Tan M., Wang X., Liu J., An C.,  
      Dai Z., Zhou J., Zhang D., Jia J., Jin L. and Johnson K.R. 2008. A test of climate, sun, and culture  
      relationships from an 1810-Year Chinese cave record. Science, 322(5903): 940–942. 

----------------------- Page 245-----------------------

This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank 

----------------------- Page 246-----------------------

                             Color Plate Section 

Chapter 15 

 Depth     Iteration 4 Abs. error = 12.9% 
     0.0                              64.0                              128                             192                             m 
   0.7 
   6.5 

  13.3 

  23.9 

  31.2 

  40.4 
       Inverse Model Resistivity Section 

     115       248       538       1165      2522       5464     11834      25632 
                                    Resistivity in ohm.m 
                                                                                                             Unit electrode spacing 4.0 m 

    Figure 124. Underground cavities revealed by electric panels in Lamalou (after Guérin, 2004). 

Figure 164. High-mountain karst in the Marguareis (Alpes Maritimes, France). This landscape is  
shaped by superimposed karstic and glacial features. Glacial polish and moraines were left behind when  
the ice melted in the Holocene. The melt water carved out deep karstic conduits, and exposed limestone  
                                surfaces, which were then incised by more recent lapies. 

----------------------- Page 247-----------------------

 238   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 165. Saint Barnabé karst (Alpes Maritimes, France). Lapies forming under a layer of soil cover  
           created rounded shapes (rundkarren) sculpted by water running down their surfaces. 

Figure  166.  Caussols  ponor  (Alpes-Maritimes,  France).  Water  collects  in  Cenomanian  marls,  and  
disappears into the ground when it reaches the contact with Neocomian limestone. It re-emerges at the  
                                   Bramafan Springs, 6 km to the east. 

----------------------- Page 248-----------------------

                                                                                            Color Plate Section              239 

                                                                                                                   3 
Figure 167. Dumanli Vauclusian spring (Turkey). The discharge ranges from 50 to 1000 m /s. Today,  
this spring is hidden beneath the waters of the Oymapinar Dam reservoir, which it feeds into. The water is  
                                  used for irrigation and for electricity production. 

Figure 168. Submarine lapies (Lérins Islands, Alpes-Maritimes, France). These features formed when  
                                                    sea level was lower. 

----------------------- Page 249-----------------------

 240    KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 169. Fluorescein tracer injection in the Cambario Valley (Alpes-Maritimes, France) (photo  
G. Tennevin). The tracer is poured into a body of water in the limestone, and ﬂ ows into the deeper parts  
of the karstic reservoir before emerging at the submarine Cabbé Spring (Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, France). 

                 Figure 170. Residual karstic butte. Ankarana Massif (Madagascar). 

----------------------- Page 250-----------------------

                                                                                  Color Plate Section          241 

Figure 171. Manenjeba resurgence (Ankarana Massif, Madagascar) (photo F. Tessier). The presence  
                      of stalactites on the exterior walls, characteristic in tropical karst. 

Figure 172. Clear Water subterranean river. Mulu Massif. A paragenetic platform is clearly visible  
on the right side of the photo, indicating a period of slower water circulation during which sediment was  
                             deposited, protecting the cavern ﬂ oor from erosion.  

----------------------- Page 251-----------------------

242     KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 173. Deer Cave tunnel, Mulu Massif. The vertical white streaks are waterfalls fed by water stored  
                          in the epikarst, ﬂ owing down into the unsaturated zone.  

Figure 174. Méailles Cave (Alpes de Haute Provence). This cave was formed at the base of a sandstone  
and calcareous conglomerate unit, resting on marl that is visible on either side of the person in the image.  
A channel along the cave roof is clearly visible, left from the initial phases of cave formation when water  
ﬂ owed slowly across the marl at the base of the conglomerate. Increased discharge led to further erosion  
                                                  of the marl.  

----------------------- Page 252-----------------------

                                                                                Color Plate Section       243 

 Figure 175. La Verna chamber in Pierre Saint Martin Cave (Atlantic Pyrénées). This chamber, the  
largest one in France (250 m diameter), formed at the contact between limestone and folded Paleozoic  
                       basement rock. The river eroded the impermeable substratum. 

Figure 176. Overlook of the Sarawak Chamber (Mulu Massif, Sarawak, Malaysia) (photo P. Delange,  
Th. Gaschat, E. Gilli, R. Schejbal). This 600 m x 415 m chamber is the largest known underground space  
in the world. It formed along the side of an anticline, by eroding into clayey sandstone beneath a massive  
limestone roof, at the base of which thinly bedded limestone units collapsed, creating the boulder ﬁ eld on  
                                                the cave ﬂ oor. 

----------------------- Page 253-----------------------

  244   KARSTOLOGY: Karsts, Caves and Springs 

Figure 177. Suès subterranean river (Sospel, Alpes-Maritimes, France) in gypsum. The pebbles and  
                        boulders are limestone chunks carried into the cave by water. 

Figure 178. Ice cave in the Gaumukh glacier (India). This thermo-karst formed as water from one of  
the springs that feeds the Ganges ﬂ owed along the base of the glacier. The boulders in the streambed are  
reworked moraine deposits. When the glacier eventually melts, these deposits will form long, snaking  
                                                hills called eskers.  

----------------------- Page 254-----------------------

