----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012, 77–86                                                                        Articles 

 ARTICLES 

KARSTOLOGY IN MOTORWAY CONSTRUCTION 
ON CLASSICAL KARST 

AUTHORS 
Martin Knez,  Tadej  Slabe 
Scientif ic Research Centre of  the Slovenian Academy of  Sciences and Arts, Karst Research Institute, Titov trg 2, 
SI – 6230 Postoj na, Slovenia 
knez@zrc-sazu.si, slabe@zrc-sazu.si 

 UDC: 551.44:625.7/.8(497.472) 
COBISS:  1.02 

ABSTRACT 
Karstology in motorway construction on Classical Karst 
One of  the maj or ong oing p roj ects in Slovenia was to link the country with modern motorways. Almost 
half  of  Slovenia is karst and more  than half  of  its supp ly of  water comes f rom karst aquif ers. Slovenia is 
the home of  the Classical Karst reg ion – Kras. Karstolog ists have been involved in p lanning and construction 
of  motorways. We have acquired a g reat deal of  inf ormation about surf ace karst phenomena and the ep ikarst, 
and where excavation work has cut deep er in the surf ace and in tunnels, about the vadose zone and the 
p aleokarst. Develop ment of   the karst  usually lef t  imp ortant  traces, above all  in  the  numerous old caves. 
More than 350 new caves have been op ened. During the p lanning we tried to avoid imp ortant karst p he- 
nomena as are collapse dolines, larg e dolines, caves and karst walls and by imp ermeable construction of 
a roadway we tried to p revent the p ollution f lowing f rom it into underg round waters. During the construction 
works we researched newly discovered karst f eatures and tried to p reserve as many as p ossible. 

KEY  WORDS 
motorway construction, karstolog ical monitoring, karst, karst cave, Classical Karst  (Kras), Slovenia 

IZ VLEČEK 
Krasoslovj e in g radnj a avtocest na matičnem Krasu 
Eden večj ih p roj ektov, ki p otekaj o v Slovenij i, j e p ovezati državo s sodobnimi avtocestami. Skoraj  p olovica 
Slovenij e j e kraške in več kot p olovica voda, s katerimi se oskrbuj emo, j e iz kraških vodonosnikov. Krasoslovci 
smo vklj učeni v načrtovanj e in izg radnj o avtocest. Kj er so zemelj ska dela p osegla globlj e v p ovršj e, smo p rido - 
bili vrsto sp oznanj  o p ovršinskih kraških p oj avih, ep ikrasu, v p redorih p a o vadozni coni ter p aleokrasu. 
Razvoj  krasa p og osto p usti p omembne sledove nad in v številnih j amah. Med g radnj o avtoceste p rek Krasa 
se j e  odp rlo 350  novih j am. Med  načrtovanj em se skuša  izog niti p omembnim kraškim p oj avom, kot so 
udornice, večj e vrtače, j ame  in kraške stene. Z  nep rop ustnimi cestišči p a skušaj o p rep rečiti onesnaženj e 
p odzemne vode. Med g radnj o raziskuj emo novo odkrite kraške p oj ave ter j ih skušamo čim več ohraniti. 

KLJ UČNE BESEDE 
g radnj a avtocest, krasoslovna sp remlj ava, kras, kraška j ama, Kras, Slovenij a 

The article was submitted f or p ublication on June 30, 2011. 

                                                                                                                   77 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Martin Knez, Tadej Slabe                          Karstology in motorway construction on Classical Karst 

1  Introduction 

    Over the last fifteen years the construction of modern motorways in Slovenia has been one of the 
major construction projects aimed at connecting important parts of the country and opening them to 
Europe. Almost half of Slovenia is karst and more than half of the water for the supply of the popula- 
tion comes from karst aquifers. Slovenia is home to the classical karst region of Kras that gave its name 
for this unique carbonate rock landscape to numerous world languages and is also the cradle of karstol- 
ogy. We need to better understand this fragile karst landscape and do everything to preserve it since 
it is an important part of our natural and cultural heritage. 
    Special attention is devoted to Kras, a karst plateau rising above the northeastern-most part of the 
Adriatic Sea that is bordered on the southwest by a vast flysch area with elevations exceeding 600 meters. 
Lying between 200 and 500 meters above sea level, the plateau covers 440 square kilometers and in a broad 
sense belongs to the External Dinarides. Only Cretaceous and Paleogenic carbonate rocks are found 
here. They are characterized by exceptionally varied limestone that mostly formed in relatively shal- 
low sedimentation basins with lush fauna and flora. Originally, the plateau was surrounded and covered 
with flysch and therefore flooded. The role of vertical percolation was minimal. On the Kras plateau 
there are no sediment remains of the surface waters to explain the development of the plateau. The water 
table later dropped several hundred meters into the karst  (Placer et al. 2010). At the contact between 
the carbonate rock and flysch, surface waters created characteristic contact karst. Today, all Kras rivers 
sink where they flow from flysch onto limestone bedrock and flow underground toward the springs 
of the Timava  River in  Italy. The largest  stream is the  Reka  River, which  sinks in the  Škocjan  Caves, 
while 65% percent is precipitation water. From the ecological standpoint, Kras has one of the most vul- 
nerable natural systems in Slovenia. 
    For a number of years, karstologists have cooperated in construction of motorways in the Kras region 
(Kogovšek 1993, 1995b; Knez et al. 1994; Šebela and Mihevc 1995; Slabe 1996; 1997a; 1997b; 1998; Mihevc 
nad Zupan Hajna  1996; Mihevc  1996;  1999; Kogovšek et al.  1997; Mihevc et al.  1998; Šebela et al.  1999; 
Knez et al. 2003, 2004a; 2004b; Bosák et al. 2000; Knez and Slabe 1999; 2000; 2001; 2002; 2004a; 2004b; 
2005; 2006; 2007). In the selection of motorway and railway routes, the main consideration is the integri- 
ty of the karst landscape; and therefore the chosen routes avoid the more important surface karst features 
(dolines, poljes, collapse dolines, karst walls) and already known caves. The removal of soil and vege- 
tation from the karst surface and of course major earthworks such as the excavation of cuts and tunnels 
reveal karst features. Our task is to study these features as part of the natural heritage, advise on how 
to preserve them, and of course share our new findings with the builders. These findings are used to 
overcome construction obstacles. 
    Special attention is devoted to the impact of the construction and use of motorways on karst waters. 
Motorways should therefore be impermeable so that runoff water from the road is first gathered in oil 
collectors and then released clean onto the karst surface. 
    During the construction of motorways we also perform karstological monitoring. We study newly 
revealed karst phenomena as an important part of our natural heritage and advise on how to preserve 
them if the construction work allows it. At the same time our new findings are of great help to the con- 
struction companies. We have acquired a number of new findings on the formation and development 
of the karst surface, epikarst, and the perforation of the aquifer. 

2  Exploring the karst surface and new caves during motorway construction 

    The karst surface is dissected by dolines, cave entrances and unroofed caves (Figure 1). Dolines are 
a sign of the current shaping of the surface by precipitation water that percolates vertically through it 
and passes through the vadose part of the aquifer to the underground water. Unroofed caves have a sim- 

78 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

  Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012                                                                            Articles 

Z 
E 
N 
K 
  
N 
I 
T 
R 
A 
M 

  Fig ure  1:  Unroof ed cave near Povir. 

  ilar form or are more oblong. These are old caves that appear on the surface due to the lowering of the 
  karst surface and no longer have the upper part of their circumference. 
      The epikarst is crisscrossed with fissures that are more distinctive in Cretaceous limestone and less 
  so in Paleogene limestone, and many of them open at the bottoms and slopes of dolines. In most cases 
  they are filled with soil and their walls are dissected with subsoil rock relief forms. 
      More than 350 caves were opened on the 70-kilometer section of motorway built in Kras (Figure 2). 
  Relative to the development of the aquifer, we distinguish between old caves through which watercourses 
  flowed when the karst aquifer was surrounded and covered by flysch and shafts through which water 
  vertically percolates from the permeable karst surface to the underground water. Some old caves are 
  empty, almost two thirds of them are filled with sediments, and one third are unroofed caves. The deep- 
  est shaft found measured  109 meters (Figure 3). Due to the lowering of the karst surface, many shafts 
  are now located just below the surface. 
      We studied all the caves, drew their plans, determined their shape, examined the rock relief, collected 
  samples of sediments for paleomagnetic and pollen analyses, and sampled flowstone for mineralogical 
  analyses and age determination. 
      Great attention has been devoted to unroofed caves since the occurrence of this phenomena turned 
  out to be considerably higher than previously expected, and numerous articles on unroofed caves and 
  the  construction  of  new  motorways  are  now  available  (Šebela  1995;  Šebela  and  Mihevc  1995; 
  Mihevc  1996; Mihevc  and  Zupan  Hajna  1996;  Slabe  1996;  1997a;  1997b;  1998;  Kogovšek et al.  1997; 
  Mihevc et al. 1998; Šebela et al. 1999; Knez and Slabe 2000; 2001; 2002; 2004a; 2004b; 2005; 2006; 2007). 
  The shape of unroofed caves is the consequence of the type and shape of the cave and the development 
  of the karst aquifer and its surface in various geological, geomorphological, climate, and hydrological 
  conditions. The distinctiveness of the surface shape of an unroofed cave is dictated by the speed at which 
  the sediment was washed out of the cave relative to the lowering of the surrounding surface (Knez and 
  Slabe 2002). If the speed was low, we can often see just soil and vegetation or areas of sediments and 

                                                                                                                  79 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

Martin Knez, Tadej Slabe                                             Karstology in motorway construction on Classical Karst 

                                                                                                                   Senadole 
  m 
  e                                                                                            Brestovica 
  j 
  n 
  i                                                                                            pri Povirju 
    
  p 
  r 
  e 
  h 
  o 
  d 
                                   SEŽANA 
                                                               Žirje 
                                                                                                                              Čebulovica 
                                      Zidovnik 
                                                                                                                                 643 
                                         575 
  F                                                    Merče                        Povir 
  e 
  r 
  n 
  e 
  t 
  i 
  č 
  i                                                               Plešivica 

                                                                                   Gorenje 
                                                                                  pri Divači 

                                                                                                   DIVAČA 

                                                                                                                          Dol. Ležeče 

                                                                                                                     Gradišče 
                                                                                                                     pri Divači 
  Gropada                                                                     Klemenka                                                    Brežec 
  Gropada                                                                       670                                                       pri Divači 
                                          Lipica                                                                          Betanija 

                                                                                                                      Škocjanske j. 
                                                                             Lokev                                                        R 
                                                                                                                                            e 
                                                                                                                                             k 
                                                                                                                                              a 
                                                                                                                           Matavun 
                                                                                                                                         Naklo 

                                                                                    Prelože 

                                                               Obrovnik 

                        Bazovica                                  700 

                        Basovzza 

                                                 Gročana 
                                                 Grozzana 

                                                   Pesek                     Vrhpolje 
        Boršt              Jezero                  Pese                                                                 Rodik 
   S. Antonio              S. Lorenzo                                                                                        Ajdovščina 
   in Bosco                 G            Draga                                                                                 804 
                             l 
                              i 
                              n 
                               š                              Krvavi 
                                č                                       Videž 
                                 i 
                                  c                           Potok 
                                   a                                     664 

   Kroglje                                                                                                                      Slope 
   Crogole 

                                                                                           KOZINA 

                                                                                             Hrpelje                      A                      H 
                  Dolina                                                                                                                Brezovica 
                  San Dorligo 
                  d. Valle 

                                              Beka                                                                  TubljeSLO 
                                                                                                            I       pri Hrpeljah         Britof 

                 Socerb 
                                                 Ocizla                                                                  Rožice 
                                                                                                                                     CRO 
                                                               Klanec 
                                                               pri Kozini 

                                                                                                             cave 
                 Kastelec 
     Mlinarji                                                                                                caves, filled with sediment 
                                                   Petrinje                                                                    Materija       Bač pri 
                                                                                                                                              N 
             Osp                                                                                             shafts                            Materiji 
                                                                                                                                          W      E 
                                                                         Prešnica                         0          1          2 km 
                                                                                                                                              S 
                                                                                               Gabrov vrh 

                                                                                                   837    Authors: Tadej Slabe, Martin Knez 
                                                                                                          Cartography: Jure Hajna, Franjo Drole 
       Gabrovica 
                                                                                                          © Karst Research Institute ZRC SAZU 

Fig ure 2: Caves discovered during motorway construction in southwest Slovenia. 

80 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

 Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012                                                                         Articles 

Fig ure 3: Cross-sections of  diff erent caves op ened during the construction; their shap e and size dictate 
f urther app rop riate building works. 

                                                                                                              81 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

Martin Knez, Tadej Slabe                            Karstology in motorway construction on Classical Karst 

flowstone on the surface; where it was faster, unroofed caves on the karst surface resemble dolines, a string 
of dolines, or oblong depressions. 
    A large proportion of the caves were filled with sediments, in most cases fine-grained flysch sed- 
iments with intervening layers of gravel. Bosák et al. (2000) took sediment samples for paleomagnetic 
research from  caves  at  Kozina  and  Divača  and  determined they  originated in the  Olduvai period.  It 
was therefore concluded that the caves were filled after the Messinian crisis approximately 5.2 million 
years ago (Bosák et al. 2000). 
    Determining the age of the sediments (Bosák et al. 2000; Zupan Hajna et al. 2010) helps us under- 
stand the oldest periods of karstification and has proven that the oldest caves in Kras are much older 
than earlier karstologists thought. 

3  Planning road construction 

    Perforation puts a special stamp on the construction of motorways in the Kras region. In addition 
to its varied development, Slovenia’s karst is marked by tectonic and lithostratigraphic diversity and it 
is therefore difficult to determine in advance where caves will occur. As a rule, caves occur more fre- 
quently  along the  contacts  of flysch with limestone. The perforation  of the karst  aquifer is therefore 
determined primarily on the basis of good and comprehensive knowledge of the karst and continuous 
intensive work in planning and constructing the motorways. 
    When planning motorways, the link between surface and underground karst features requires the 
karstological evaluation of the karst surface as well as the karst underground, the hydrological situa- 
tion,  and  the  presented  variables.  On  all  the  motorway  construction  sites  in  Kras  we  encountered 
numerous karst phenomena including dolines, filled and empty caves, sections of old and current drainage 
systems through the karst. We are certain that a quality karstological study of the area where a road is 
planned enables the better selection of a route and is one of the basic starting points for planning motor- 
way construction in this unique and vulnerable landscape. 
    We begin by assembling published literature, archives, and various unpublished studies to learn about 
the surface karst features, and thus identify dolines, collapse dolines, and other morphological features 
in particular. Through a field survey we establish the starting points for mapping the areas of the select- 
ed route. In the field, we evaluate different types of rock from the karstological aspect. On theme maps 
we present the known entrances to underground caves and supplement them with potential new entrances. 
We anticipate the branching of underground cave systems on the basis of surface mapping and expla- 
nations of the development of morphologically identified unroofed caves visible in the relief. On the 
basis of surface mapping we also consider possibilities for dumping waste material if necessary. 
    We know from experience that during construction every route crossing Kras will sooner or later 
encounter underground caves or parts of cave systems. To a certain degree we can predict the shape 
and type of caves using our knowledge of surface and underground phenomena. We trace the caves in 
the wider area of the traffic route, determine their type, position, and role in the aquifer, their shape, 
rock relief, the sediment and flowstone found in them, and present them on suitable maps. To make 
the maps easier to read, we present the previous data on the perforation of the aquifer and elaborate 
predictions with special emphasis on anticipated lithological and tectonic changes in the rock. 
    When  necessary  we  perform  tracing  experiments  during  low  and  high  waters  (Kogovšek  and 
Petrič 2007), primarily to determine the direction and velocity of underground flows in the wider area 
of the traffic route. With the results of field mapping and tracking experiments, we elaborate and upgrade 
the existing hydrogeological maps, build a database on the state of the environment, and assess the impact 
of the construction on karst waters. 
    Experience acquired tracing waters and accidental spillages of various substances on the karst sur- 
face  drew  attention  to  the  great  perforation  of  the  karst  aquifer,  which  the  number  of  caves  newly 

82 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012                                                                                Articles 

discovered during construction confirmed. Maximum precautions must be employed during both the 
construction and use of roads. Daily traffic leaves numerous environmentally harmful substances on 
road surfaces  (Kogovšek  1993), and mineral oils were found in stagnant waters in caves located near 
traffic routes (Knez et al. 1994; Kogovšek 1995a; 1995b; Gabrovšek and Peric 2007). Due to these find- 
ings and the persistence of karstologists, motorways are made to be impermeable. Pipes and gutters 
along the roads lead to wastewater collectors. Untreated water should never reach the permeable karst 
surface and the specifications for drainage systems must meet this requirement. 
    The basic guidelines for planning traffic routes include: 
•  the selection of a route shall be based on a comprehensive assessment of the karst with emphasis on 
   local features; 
•  the selected traffic route shall avoid specific exceptional karst features; 
•  the conservation of karst aquifers shall be one of the priority goals of planning. 

4  Preserving as many karst caves as possible 

     Caves are opened when vegetation and soil is removed from the surface, and a large number of caves 
were opened during the excavation of cuts. Blasting caused their roofs to collapse, and cross sections 
of passages were preserved in embankments. The most shafts were opened at the bottoms of dolines 
when the soil and alluvia were removed. 

Fig ure 4: Preservation of  caves: a) in road cuts the caves are hidden behind rocky scarps, b) the caves 
ly ing below the road with narrow mouth and if  their rim is not too much damag ed by blasting are covered 
by concrete lids, c) in the side of  the tunnel p ip e there is a sp ecial door leading to the caves; below traff ic 
belt caves are connected with larg e concrete p ip es, d) karst op enings  (bottom of  dolines, tops of  shaf ts) 
are of ten reinf orced by arches of  big rocks p oured over by concrete. 

                                                                                                                    83 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

Martin Knez, Tadej Slabe                         Karstology in motorway construction on Classical Karst 

                                                                                                             N 
                                                                                                             I 
                                                                                                             T 
                                                                                                             A 
                                                                                                             V 
                                                                                                             R 
                                                                                                             H 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                             O 
                                                                                                             I 
                                                                                                             C 
                                                                                                             C 
                                                                                                             U 
                                                                                                             R 
                                                                                                             E 
                                                                                                             F 

Fig ure 5: Preserved cave in Kastelec tunnel. 

    The  shafts were  easiest to preserve  and  concrete plates were  used to  close the  smaller  entrances 
(Figure 4). It was similarly possible to preserve old caves with solid circumferences but caves located 
in fractured rock or opened during blasting had to be filled. Rock walls were used to close caves crossed 
by road cuts with entrances on embankments. Their circumferences were fractured to such an extent 
that they were unsuitable for visiting, and water could wash clay from caves filled with sediments and 
deposit it on the roads (Figure 4). We extrapolated the further extent of the caves on the basis of their 
shapes and the geological conditions, which is especially useful for road builders. One well preserved 
cave was left open for travellers crossing the border with Italy to visit. The most interesting and best 
preserved caves were completely secured and made accessible for visiting even though they were locat- 
ed under the motorway or even wound around a tunnel as with the Kastelec tunnel (Figures 4, 5). They 
are accessible via concrete culverts closed at the roadside and in the tunnel with a door. 

5  Conclusion 

    It is clear that the cooperation of karstologists in the construction of motorways in the Kras region 
has brought positive results. It is important that karstologists participate in the planning and construction 
of motorways  and later that they monitor the impact of the motorways on the environment, that is, 
throughout the entire process of encroachment on the vulnerable karst landscape. This logical coop- 
eration  helps  preserve  natural  heritage  and  increase  our  basic  knowledge  about  the  formation  and 
development of karst and about the construction of motorways in this unique environment. There are 
many types of karst and each requires a unique approach, which calls for permanent and continuous 
cooperation between road builders and karstologists. Over the last fifteen years, the cooperation between 

84 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012                                                                           Articles 

the planners and builders of motorways and karstologists has resulted in rich knowledge used in the 
planning and implementation of other encroachments in karst areas. 

6  References 

Gabrovšek, F., Peric, B. 2007: Propagation of the flood pulses in the epiphreatic zone of karst aquifers: 
    the case of Reka river system, karst plateau, SW Slovenia. Geophysical Research Abstracts 9. Vienna. 
Bosák, P., Pruner, P., Mihevc, A., Zupan Hajna, N. 2000: Magnetostratigraphy and unconformities in 
    cave sediments: case study from the Classical Karst, SW Slovenia. Geologos 5. Poznań. 
Knez, M., Kranjc, A., Otoničar, B., Slabe, T., Svetličič, S.  1994: Posledice izlitja nafte pri Kozini. Ujma 
    9. Ljubljana. 
Knez,  M.,  Otoničar,  B.,  Slabe,  T.  2003:  Subcutaneous  stone  forest  (Trebnje,  Central  Slovenia).  Acta 
    Carsologica 32-1. Ljubljana. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T. 1999: Unroofed caves and recognising them in karst relief (discovered during motor- 
    way construction at Kozina, South Slovenia). Acta Carsologica 28-2. Ljubljana. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T. 2000: Jame brez stropa so pomembna oblika na kraškem površju: s krasoslovnega 
    nadzora gradnje avtocest na krasu. 5. slovenski kongres o cestah in prometu. Ljubljana. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T. 2001: Karstology and expressway construction. Proceedings of 14th IRF Road World 
    Congress. Paris. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T. 2002: Unroofed caves are an important feature of karst surfaces: examples from the 
    Classical karst. Zeitschrift für Geomorphologie 46-2. Stuttgart. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T. 2004a: Karstology and the opening of caves during motorway construction in the 
    karst region of Slovenia. International Journal of Speleology 31. Bologna. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T. 2004b: Highways on karst. Encyclopedia of Caves and Karst Science. New York, London. 
Knez,  M.,  Slabe,  T.  2005:  Caves  and  sinkholes  in  motorway  construction,  Slovenia.  Sinkholes  and 
    Subsidence. Karst and Cavernous Rocks in Engineering and Construction. Chichester. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T. 2006: Krasoslovne raziskave pri gradnji avtocest preko slovenskega krasa. Annales: 
    Series historia naturalis  16-2. Koper. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T. (eds.) 2007: Kraški pojavi razkriti med gradnjo slovenskih avtocest. Ljubljana. 
Knez, M., Slabe, T., Šebela, S. 2004a: Karstification of the aquifer discovered during the construction 
    of the expressway between Klanec and Črni Kal, Classical Karst. Acta Carsologica 33-1. Ljubljana. 
Knez, M.,  Slabe, T.  Šebela,  S. 2004b:  Karst uncovered  during  Bič–Korenitka motorway  construction 
    (Dolenjska, Slovenija). Acta carsologica 33-2. Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek, J.  1993: Kakšna je sestava voda, ki odtekajo z naših cest? Ujma 7. Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek, J. 1995a: The surface above Postojnska jama and its relation with the cave. The case of Kristalni 
    rov. International Show Caves and Environmental Monitoring. Postojna. 
Kogovšek, J. 1995b: Podrobno spremljanje kvalitete vode, odtekajoče z avtoceste in njen vpliv na kraško 
    vodo. Annalles 5-7. Koper. 
Kogovšek, J.,  Petrič, M.  2007:  Directions  and  dynamics  of flow  and transport  of  contaminants from 
    the landfill near Sežana (SW Slovenia). Acta Carsologica 36-3. Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek, J., Slabe, T., Šebela, S. 1997: Motorways in Karst (Slovenia). 48th Highway Geology Symposium. 
    Knoxville. 
Mihevc, A.  1996. Brezstropa jama pri Povirju. Naše jame 38. Ljubljana. 
Mihevc, A.  1999: The caves and the karst surface – case study from Kras, Slovenia. Etudes de géogra- 
    phie physique. Marseille. 
Mihevc, A., Slabe, T., Šebela, S.  1998: Denuded caves. Acta Carsologica 27-1. Ljubljana. 
Mihevc, A., Zupan Hajna, N.  1996: Clastic sediments from dolines and caves found during the con- 
    struction of the motorway near Divača, on the Classical Karst. Acta Carsologica 25. Ljubljana. 

                                                                                                               85 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

Martin Knez, Tadej Slabe                            Karstology in motorway construction on Classical Karst 

Placer,  L., Vrabec, M.,  Celarc,  B. 2010: The bases for understanding  of the NW Dinarides  and  Istria 
    peninsula tectonics. Geologija 53-1. Ljubljana. DOI:  10.5474/geologija.2010.005 
Slabe, T. 1996: Karst features in the motorway section between Čebulovica and Dane. Acta Carsologica 25. 
    Ljubljana. 
Slabe, T.  1997a: Karst features discovered during motorway construction in Slovenia. Environmental 
    Geology 32-3. Berlin. DOI:  10.1007/s002440050206 
Slabe, T.  1997b: The caves in the motorway Dane–Fernetiči. Acta Carsologica 26-2. Ljubljana. 
Slabe, T.  1998: Karst features discovered during motorway construction between Divača and Kozina. 
    Acta Carsologica 27. Ljubljana. 
Šebela, S.  1995: Jama brez stropa. Življenje in tehnika 46-5, Ljubljana. 
Šebela, S., Mihevc, A. 1995: The problems of construction on karst – the examples from Slovenia. Karst 
    Geohazards, Engineering and Environmental Problems in Karst Terrain. Rotterdam. 
Šebela,  S.,  Mihevc,  A.,  Slabe,  T.  1999:  The  vulnerability  map  of  karst  along  highways  in  Slovenia. 
    Hydrogeology and Engineering Geology of Dolines and Karst. Rotterdam. 
Zupan Hajna, N., Mihevc, A., Pruner, P., Bosák, P. 2010: Palaeomagnetic research on karst sediments 
    in Slovenia. International Journal of Speleology. 39-2 Bologna. 

86 
