----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

  

           KARST RESEARCH INSTITUTE  ZRC SAZU  
                                                               
                        Slovenian National Commission for UNESCO  
                                Speleological Association of Slovenia  
                              International Speleological Union UIS  
                                                               
                                                               
                                                               
  
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
     th 
20       INTERNATIONAL KARSTOLOGICAL SCHOOL  
                                          “Classical Karst”  
                                                               
                     KARST FORMS AND PROCESSES  
  
                                                               

                                                                                                                                      
                                                               
                                GUIDE BOOK & ABSTRACTS  
                                                               
                                                  Postojna, 20 12  

  

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                             2  

Editors   
Andrej Mihevc & Franci Gabrovšek  
  
Organizing & Scientific committee  
Andrej Mihevc, Franci Gabrovšek, Mitja Prelovšek, Nadja Zupan Hajna,  Tadej Slabe, Metka Petrič,  
Matija Perne, Janja Kogovšek, Bojan Otoničar, Martin Knez, Stanka Šebela, Andrej Kranjc, Marjutka  
Hafner, Neven Bocić, Pavel Bosak, Philipp Hauselmann, Ugo Sauro, Trevor Shaw, Andrzej Tyc.  
  
Supported by  
Slovenian Research Agency  
Slovenian National Commission for UNESCO  
Scientific Research Centre of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts  
Postojnska jama d.d.  
Park Škocjanske jame, Slovenija  
Commune of Postojna  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Published by   
Karst Research Institute, Scientific Research Centre of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts,  
Titov trg 2, 6230 Postojna, Slovenia  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                  3  

  
General information…………………………………………………….4  
              
Programme...…………………………………………………………….6                                                                                                           
  
Field trips………………………………………………………………...8  
  
Abstracts....................................................................................................46  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                     4  

                                                                               
GENERAL INFORMATIONS:  
  
Lunch:                    
      -     Lunches are not organized during the session days, but 90 minutes lunch breaks are in the  
            schedule (see the places to eat given below).  
      -     A field lunch will be organised for the excursion on Thursday and Friday. One non-alcoholic  
            beverage is included in the price.  
  
Excursions:   
      -     register for each excursion at the registration desk,   
      -     buss departure for field trips is from the parking place at the Bus station, see the map below,   
      -     head lights are recommended, walking shoes and field clothes are necessary,   
      -     take care for additional information and changes regarding the bus departures,   
      -     water will be available on all busses,   
      -     insect repellents are recommended (we will be walking in the areas populated with ticks  
            (Ixodes ricinus) that transfer lyme desease and tick-borne meningitis,   
      -     participation on the excursions is at your own risk.   
  
Posters:                  
      -     Leave posters at registration desk on Monday before the lunch break,   
      -     posters will be divided according to their contents in different groups,   
      -     stand by your poster during the poster sessions.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                       5  

                                                                                                                                                              
Map of the town centre with important places:  
1 – Karst Research Institute at ZRC SAZU, Titov trg 2  
2 – Kulturni dom (Cultural Centre of Postojna), Prešernova ulica 1  
3 – Start of field trips. At bus station.  
4 – Notranjski muzej Postojna, Kolodvorska cesta 3  
  
Places to eat:  
5 – Minutka: restaurant with pizza, pasta, Balkan food and daily menu  
6 – Hotel Šport: local and “global” food and daily menu  
7 – Proteus: restaurant with local and “global” food and daily menu  
8 – Bar Bor: restaurant, simple but good local food, also serves daily meals  
9 – Čuk: restaurant at the sport park, pizzeria, good pasta, local and global food  
10 – Špajza: local and “global” food and daily menu  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                       6  

  
                                                  PROGRAMME  
  
                                                                     th 
                                             Monday, June 18           , 2012  
    
7:30 – 13:00          REGISTRATION  (Cultural Centre Postojna)  
  
8:30 – 9:30           OPENING SESSION (Cultural Centre Postojna)  
                     including a lecture: 20 years of IKS  
  
SESSION 1           (Cultural Centre Postojna)  
9.30-10.00         Andrej Mihevc, The geomorphology of the Slovene Classical Karst  
10.00-10.30        Ugo Sauro, The landforms of the karst mountains in the middle latitudes:  
                   reflections, trends and problems of the research.  
10.30-11.00        Coffee Break    
11.00-11.30        Lukas Plan, Karst and Cave Evolution in the Alps  
11.30-13.30        Neven Bocić, Large Dinaric karst plateaus in Croatia – differences and   
                   similarities as waymarks to understanding their geomorphology  
                   Dalibor Paar,  What we know about the longest Croatian cave  
                   Alena Petrvalská, Karst of the Yucatan peninsula (Mexico)  
                   Atef Abdel-Hamid Mohamid, Limestone Geomorphology in Abu Zneima  
                   area, Western, Sinai, Egypt  
                   Lipar Matej, Limestone pinnacles in Western Australia – the result of karstic  
                   proce sses and microbial cementation   
                   Davide Baioni, Evaporite Karst on Mars: Evidence of global climate   
                   change in the recent past  
13.30-15.00        Lunch break  
15.00-17.00        Poster Session (Karst Research Institute)  
18.00-21.00         Field Trip A : Evening trip to Postojnska jama  
                    Meeting at the main entrance to the cave, be there few minutes before as  
                    the cave-train departs at 18:00.  
  
                                                                     th 
                                             Tuesday, June 19          , 2012  
                                                                
SESSION 2          (Cultural Centre Postojna)  
8.10-8.40          Mehmet Ekmekci  
8.40-9.10          Andrew Farrant, Role of sediment in speleogenesis; paragenesis and  
                   alluviation  
9.10-9.40          Stein Erik Lauritzen, The architecture of big rooms  
9.40-10.40      Tim Horsfield, Speleothems as Archives in the Production of a Holocene  
                   Palaeoclimate Record for Slovenia  
                   Jo  De  Waele,  Palaeoclimatic  significance  of  a  fast  growing  submerged  
                   stalagmite of Grotta Verde cave, NW-Sardinia  
                   Aurel Persoiu, From speleothems to glaciers: disentangling between karstic  
                   and glaciologic processes in caves  
                   Bojan Otoničar, Mravljetovo brezno v Gošarjevih rupah cave: dissolution of  
                   dedolomite  
10.40-11.00        Coffee Break    
11.00-11.30        José María Calaforra, Gypsum speleothems in gypsum and limestone caves  

  

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                      7  

11.30-11.45        Mario Parise, Breakdown deposits: characteristics and their significance in  
                   the evolution of karst systems  
                   Ahmad Afrasibian, The importance of recognition of sink-hole process in  
                   water engineering projects in Iran  
12.00-13.30        Lunch Break  
13.30-20.00        Field Trip B: Planinsko polje and adjacent karst  
21.00-21.30        IGU Karst Commission meeting                    Karst Research Institute  
                                                               
                                                                       th 
                                           Wednesday, June 20            , 201  
                                                               
SESSION 3          (Cultural Centre Postojna)  
8.10-8.40          Mitja Prelovšek, Present-day dissolution rates in stream caves of Slovenia  
8.40-9.10          Matt  Covington,  Process  length  scales  in  karst:  from  simple  models  to  
                   applications  
9.10-10.40         Stefano Furlani, Limestone lowering rates in the Mediterranean area  
                      Sara Biolchi, Intertidal coastal karst morphologies in the Gulf of Trieste  
                   Blaž Miklavič, Denudation of eogenetic limestone during the last glacial cycle  
                   in a tropical environment  
                   Nenad Buzjak, The origin and morphology of submarine spring Vrulja Zečica  
                   (Croatia)   
                   Anja Maglica, Hydrological Inter-Relations between Cerkniško and Planinsko  
                   Karst Poljes –Dynamics of Surface and Groundwater Interaction  
                   Cyril Mayaud, New insights into the functioning of the Lurbach system   
                   (Central Styrian Karst, Austria)  
10.40-11.00        Coffee Break    
11.00-11.30        Franci Gabrovšek, Speleogenetic Processes in Karst Modelling: An Overview  
11.30-12.00        Nehme   Carol,  Late   Pleistocene   evolution   of   Antelias   valley   (Lebanon):  
                   speleogenic  approach  applied  on  Kassarat  cave  system  with  implication  of  
                   U/Th datations records  
                   Simone Milanolo, Modern calcite precipitation rates on artificial medium  
                  from Bijambare cave, Bosnia and Herzegovina   
12.00-13.30        Lunch Break  
13.30-20.00        Field Trip C: High Dinaric karst of Trnovski gozd plateau    
21.00-21.30        Unresolved Mysteries of karst Karst Research Institute (chaired by   
                   Philipp Häuselmann)  
  
                                           Thursday, June 21st, 2012  

8.00-19.30         Field trip D:Karst geomorphology and hydrogeology of Ljubljanica river  
 20.00             Reception at the Karst Research Institute  
  
                                             Friday, June 22nd, 2012  

8.00-17.00         Field trip E: Classical Karst Geomorphology and hydrogeology of Kras plateau 
           
                                                                    rd 
                                            Saturday, June 21          , 2012  
9.00-12.00         Field trip F: (Optional) Križna jama  
                   2 hours tour; transport from Postojna is not provided! The trip is conditional  
                   and depends on the interest.   

  

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                  8  

                                                           FIELD TRIPS  
  

                                                                                                                                                        
  
Map of field trips:  
Field trips and visits: Monday evening (A) ,  Tuesday (B)  and  Wednesday (C)  afternoon and whole day  
excursions on Thursday (D)  and Friday (E) . Additional trip to Križna jama is possible for participants  
on Saturday (F) .  
               Wear good walking shoes, field clothes  and bring with your headlamp to see more.   
                                                                              

  

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                 9  

                                                         FIELD TRIP A  
                                            POSTOJNSKA JAMA CAVE   
                                          Monday 18. 6. 2012, 18:00-21:00  
  
  
Classical Karst  
          Classical Karst is a part of Dinaric Karst in Slovenia and Italy. It spreads between the coast of  
Adriatic  Sea at Bay of Trieste and the springs of Ljubljanica river  in the edge of Ljubljana tectonic  
basin. It belongs to two large karst river basins: to Reka – Timavo river and to Ljubljanica river.  
          This  karst  area  has  abundance  of  karst  phenomena  like  large  sinking  rivers  and  springs,  
intermittent  lakes,  large  caves  and  relief  features  like  dolines,  collapsed  dolines,  uvalas,  poljes,  
levelled surfaces and high plateaus. And the karst surface is mostly rocky and dry.  
          It was the exploration of the people that were driven by curiosity or science and by land use or  
water  management  issues  and  tourism  that  make  this  karst  famous.  Since  17th   century  karst  

phenomena were studied by local and foreign naturalists and scientists. Well researched, mapped and  
described  caves  and  other  karst  phenomena  in  19th  century  made  this  karst  as  a  reference  karst.  

Together  with  that the name  Kras  was  used to  denominate  the  natural  pnenomena itself  and  a  new  
scientific discipline – karst studies.   
          Postojna played important role in karst research and is situated in the middle of this area.  
  
Pivka basin  
          The bottom of the Pivka basin, an area of about 80 km2, is built of Eocene flysch rock. A river  

network has formed on the floor of the basin; the water flows into the boundary limestone rock going  
to different river basins.  
          Karstificated  limestone  surrounds  the  valley  from  all  sides;  at  the  contact  on  higher  levels  
there  is  flysch.  Along  the  59  km  long  lithological  contact  of  flysch  and  limestone,  17  larger  and a  
number of small rivers sink, transforming only 2.3 km2 of karst.   
          The Pivka, with a mean flow of  4  m3/s,  is the largest sinking river in the basin. Most of its  

water flows from karst sources on the southern part of the basin, at the foot of the Javorniki, where a  
karst polje formed on limestone. For a large part of the year, the Pivka is dry; when waters are high, it  
floods the floor of the field. The main inflow into the Pivka from flysch rock is the Nanoščica, which  
flows from W; it collects water in the western part of the flysch basin.  
          The Pivka  sinks into the 20 km long Postojnska jama cave about 511 m a.s.l. The cave has  
several levels, the main level being between 520 and 530 m a.s.l., and the lowest between the sink of  
the  Pivka  and  the  outflow  sump  at  477  m  a.s.l.  There  are  still  more  than  2,  200  m  of  unexplored  
galleries before the river re-appears in Planinska jama at 460 m a.s.l.  
  
Postojnska jama  
           Postojnska jama (45°46´57.79˝N; 14°12´13.18˝E) is the longest cave in Slovenia and is one of  
the oldest and largest tourist caves of the world. Important tourist development of the cave started in  
1818, although cave was known for visitors already in 13. Century.  
           Cave developed on N edge of noncarbonate flysch Pivka basin where river Pivka sinks into  
the  Postojnski  kras  plateau  and  flows  through  it  towards  Planinsko  polje  where  it  springs  from  
Planinska jama cave. The gentle fluvial surface of the fluvial basin itself stands out in sharp contrast to  
the karst lands above the cave and to other higher karst plateaus.  
  

  

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                 10  

                                                                                                                                        
  
Fig.  A1:  Map  of  the  karst  between  Pivka  basin  and  Planinsko  polje  with  cave  system  
Postojnska jama – Planinska jama.  
             
           The  historical  entrance  at  527  m  a.s.l.  is  located  above  the  modern  ponor  (511  m).  Other  
entrances or caves connected to the system: Otoška jama, Magdalena jama, Črna jama and Pivka jama  
are  scattered  on  the  surface  in  elevations  at  about  600  to  650  m  a.s.l.  All  these  caves  are  
interconnected and form a cave system 20.5 km in length. The cave ends with terminal sump in Pivka  
jama  is  at  477  m  a.s.l.  There  is  still  more  than  1.2  km  of  unexplored  galleries  before  the  river  re- 
appears in Planinska jama at 460 m a.s.l.  
           The entrance to  Postojnska jama is situated near the contact between the Eocene flysch and  
the Upper Cretaceous  limestone. The entire cave system is developed in an 800 m thick sequence of  
the  Upper  Cenomanian  and  Turonian  to  Senonian  limestone.  The  cave  passages  are  formed  in  the  
Postojna  anticline,  which  is  oriented  NW–SE,  most  of  channels  being  in  its  steeper  south-western  
flank.   
           The known passages were formed at two main levels. The upper level is between 529 m a.s.l.,  
at the main entrance to the cave and 520 m a.s.l. in the Črna jama. This level is composed of large  
passages, generally up to 10 m high and wide. Profiles of these passages are rounded and show also  
traces of paragenesis (levelled ceilings, side notches and scallops on the walls and ceiling). There are  
also remnants of sediment fills indicating repeated fillings of the cave and successive erosion of the  
sediments. Speleothems were deposited in different phases above clastic sediments. The natural floor  
of the cave was modified by construction of a railway for tourists.   
           The second level is about 18 m below the upper one, where the modern underground Pivka  
river flows  from  its  entrance. The river  bed has a  low  gradient  and,  except  for  some  collapses  and  
narrow parts, there are no natural barriers. It leaves the system through a terminal sump. The active  
river passages are mostly smaller than the higher ones. The river bed is covered mostly with gravels  
derived from the Eocene flysch. The mean annual discharge of the river is 5.2 m3s-1. The water level  

can rise 10 m during floods.   

  

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                       11  

  

                                                                                                                                    
Fig. A2: Geology of Postojnska jama cave system (Šebela 1998).  
  
            The cave is filled by variety of alluvial deposits characteristic of the internal cave facies, such  
as  silts,  sands,  gravels,  covered  and/or  intercalated  by  rich  speleothems.  The  entrance  cave  facies  
consists of slope-derived debris mixed with the fluvial deposits.   
            Pleistocene large mammal fauna such as hippopotamus, cave lion and cave bear, were found  
here as well as Palaeolithic stone tools from the last glacial.  

  

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                     12  

           Intensive growth of flowstone is due to high annual precipitation, about 1700 mm, and high  
mineralization percolating water. Calcite is the main secondary chemical mineral in the cave, others  
noncarbonate minerals are less than 1 %.   
           The oldest flowstone in the cave is red one from Pisani rov, which shows the traces of erosion  
on it and also scallops were found on it. In some speleothems, between separate layers, flood loam was  
found; this shows on floods during speleothem growing.  
  
Collapse at Velika gora  
           Kalvarija  or  Velika  gora  is  the  largest  collapse  chamber  in  Postojna  cave.  Collapsing  is  
possible because of the favourable tectonisation of the limestone, but the sediments, rubble of different  
size and flowstone show, that there were probably several phases of collapses and that at present the  
collapsing is in low intensity.  
             

                                                                                                                     
                                                                       
Fig. A3: Schematic cross section trough Kalvarija  (Velika gora) collapse. Positions of samples and  
the age of the flowstone are marked on the sketch.  
  
           Samples  of  flowstone  were  taken  and  analysed  in  U  series  dating  lab  at  Department  of  
Geology, University of Bergen by alpha counting.  
           Three periods of flowstone growth were recorded. The oldest flowstone was dated at the foot  
of collapse at the railway station. Flowstone was deposited above collapse boulders and some layers of  
flowstone that was polluted with sand and clay. The age is 152 + -  40 Ka. Possible of the same period is  
flowstone dome at the top of Kalvarija with age of 70 + -26 Ka. From these two samples is difficult to  

reconstruct the environment in the cave.  
           Important growth of flowstone was recorded with five samples. Stalagmites were growing on  
the clay sediment in Pisani rov (41 + - 3 Ka, 43 + - 10 Ka), on the collapsed boulders (37 +_ 7 Ka) and on  

rubble  (47  +-7  Ka).  They  fall  over  due  washing  off  the  clays,  were  covered  with  big  boulders  or  
broken and covered with scree.  
           The  youngest  phase  of  flowstone  deposition  is  recorded  in  samples  of  grey  crystalline  
flowstone  (12  +-  5  Ka  and  6  +-  4  Ka),  which  forms  a  crust  and  stalagmites.  This  crust  covers  all  
collapse blocs, showing low intensity of collapsing in present conditions.   
           The sediments in Velika gora and dating of flowstone, even if the errors are large show some  
clear  phases  of  collapsing  in  alternation  with  flowstone  deposition.  Apparently  the  collapsing  is  
connected with colder climate, flowstone deposition with warmer.  
           Observations  of  cryoturbated  sediments  in  the  entrance  parts  of  the  cave  show,  that  the  
freezing in Pleistocene was influencing only entrance parts of the cave, where characteristic types of  
sediments and cryoturbation of them occurred. Collapsing in Kalvarija it therefore probably related to  
changed  chemistry  of  percolating  water.  In  cold  periods  water  was  not  saturated,  it  was  corroding  
only, making the fractured ceiling unstable. In warmer periods (Holocene and Wurm II, isotopic stage  
3) there was deposition of the flowstone not only on the floor but also in fissures in ceiling, cementing  
them, and lowering the intensity of the collapsing.  
  

  

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                     13  

Biospeleological station  
           It  is 220 metres long and lies at between 20 and 30 metres below the surface. To the north it  
opens into the Old Cave. To the south it was blocked by rubble. Since it was easily accessible from the  
Old Cave, eminent visitors in the 19th century were allowed to sign their names on the walls. In 1931 a  

biological  station  was  set  up  in  the  passage.  In  2002  the  sediments  which  had  closed  the  former  
entrance to the passage were removed and cave vivarium was installed.  
           Passage is one of the old entrance passages formed by sinking stream Pivka. The passage is  
today out of hydrological function about 15 m above the level of the present river level. Two profiles  
of gravel-filled passage were exposed with similar sequence of sediments. One is in the tunnel for the  
railway;  in  them  cave  bear  bones  and  stone  tools  dating  to  Mousterian  (~40  ka)  were  found.  The  
 similar profile is exposed to visitors at the entrance of the passage.  
           Bottom of the profile (6) forms sediment of flysch gravel and clay mixed with non-rounded  
limestone  fragments. This is the  remains  of  the  oldest  sediment  deposited in the  cave  by  the  Pivka  
underground stream. Upper part of the sediment was eroded away.   
           On  it  was  deposited  after  an  important  erosion  phase  about  2  m  thick  strata  of  rubble  and  
breccia (5). It was formed through freezing and disintegration of the ceiling and walls in the entrance  
 section of the cave. Pieces of flowstone outnumber pieces of limestone among the rubble. The white  
flowstone  indicates  that  it  grew  in  entrance  conditions  with  low  winter  temperatures  causing  
gelifraction and summer deposition of calcite. The climate was similar to present. This stratum was  
probably formed at the beginning of the last glaciation (Würm I).  
             

                                                                                                           
                                                                         
Fig. A4 : Schematic cross section of the sediment profile at the entrance part of the Rov novih podpisov  
passage. Legend: 1. limestone ,  2. flowstone,  3. cave loam and clay,  4. limestone rubble mixed with  
clay,  5. rubble and breccia,  mostly of broken flowstone,  6. flysch gravel and clay,  7. bones  of a cave  
bear.  
             
           In the Spelebiological station we can still see thick stalactites that are inclined into the cave,  
indicating strong winds during the growth. Most of them are broken which most likely attributed to the  
growth of this layer. Later on them new thinner stalactites were formed they are either Holocene in age  
or formed after the cave entrance was closed.  

  

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                14  

           Porous  flowstone  and  dark  coatings  (3)  that  follows  shows  either  warmer  humid  period  or  
closing of the cave entrance by rubble from the slope  above it. Towards the side of the passage the  
layers is much thinner and intercalated with clays.  
           Limestone  rubble  mixed  with  clay  (4).  Rocks  of  the  layer  show  subcutaneous  corrosion  
features. The origin of the rubble is the slope above the cave. Rocks piled up at the entrance and then  
slide into the cave by cryoturbation. The lower part of the stratum contains the bones of a cave bear. In  
similar strata in the other profile trough the passage, archaeologists have unearthed Moustérian stone  
tools, so the stratum formed between 40, 000 years and Holocene.  
           Clayey layer (3). A stratum of clay up to 50 centimetres thick was washed into this part of the  
cave from higher parts of passages or clay-filled voids.  
           The stalagmites and the flowstone (2), which covers the floor developed when the entrance to  
the  cave  was  blocked  for  the  air  circulation  and  the  passage  was  no  longer  exposed  to  freezing,  
however white flowstone crusts indicates minor impact of winter dry air.  
           The sequence of sediments in profile represents the climatic oscillations within the last glacial  
period and also changing of the cave climate because of filling the entrance by surface rubble which  
slowly minimised the air flow.  

  

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                               15  

                                                         FIELD TRIP B  
                             PLANINSKO POLJE AND ADJACENT KARST   
                                          Tuesday, 19. 6. 2012, 13:30-20:00  
  
Planinska jama  
           Planinska jama is the best known for the easy accessible confluence of relatively large rivers,  
the Pivka (arriving from Postojnska jama) and the Rak (arriving from Rakov Škocjan),  about half a  
kilometre  from  the  entrance.  The  former  enters the  cave  through  a  sump, which  has  been  explored  
about  half  a  kilometre  long  and  60m  deep,  without  penetrating  on  the  other  side.  When  Cerkniško  
polje the polje dries out, the eastern (Rak) branch of the cave receives no inflow and the water body  
begins to flow towards the Malni spring. The inflow/outflow sump has been explored some hundred  
meters long, to the very location of bifurcation, which turned out to be extremely dangerous for the  
divers.  Some 30 metres below the water table, the main passage is “crossed” by direct outflow from  
Javorniki Mountain, draining directly to Malni Springs.  The total of all the explored passages in the  
cave is about 10km.  
  
Planinsko polje  
           Planinsko polje developed in a levelled karst surface that follows the Idria fault zone. Its wider  
surrounding is built of Jurassic and Cretaceous limestone and Upper Triassic dolomite, dolomite also  
form a part of the polje bottom. Polje is  of rectangular shape, 6 km long, 2 km wide. There are two  
narrow pocket valleys on SW part formed above the springs of Unica river and one on its NW side  
above temporal springs. Polje is about 50 m deeper then lowest surrounding surface and consists of 16  
km2 flat surface at height about 450 m.   

           Planinsko polje presents the most important water confluence in the river basin of Ljubljanica.  
Tectonically  crushed  and  almost  impermeable  dolomite  barrier  along  the  Idrija  wrench  fault  zone,  
which  crosses  the  polje,  forces  the  karst  waters  to  overflow  from  higher  karstified  limestone  
background  to  the  surface  and  after  crossing  Planinsko  polje  toward  NE  they  can  sink  into  the  
underground again. The principal Unica springs, with mean annual discharge 24 m3                                                3 
                                                                                                             /s (min. 0, 3 m /s,  
max. 100 m3/s) are situated in the southern polje's part in Cretaceous limestone, where the confluence  

of waters from Cerknica, Javorniki Mt. and Pivka is located. Main spring is 6656 m long Planinska  
jama cave.  
           Planinsko polje is flooded several times in a year. The minimum inflow to the polje amounts  
to 1,  5 m3                      3                                                      3 
              /s; mean 23 m /s, maximal was estimated to 100-120 m /s, the total ponor capacity being  
about 60 m3                                                                                                                        3 
                /s. At floods, lasting 1-2 months, the water increases up to 10 m and up to 40 million of m   
of water inundate the polje.  
           The principal Unica swallow-holes are disposed at northern edge, where mostly medium and  
high waters are sinking. At low waters the whole Unica is disappearing in swallow-holes at eastern  
polje's border. The water is sinking directly from Unica bed through the polje's bottom across more  
than 150 swallow-holes  and impassable fissure. Only at Dolenje Loke and in Škofji lom, up to 160m  
long ponor caves are known, but there are several horizontal caves in vicinity of the polje, where water  
oscillations can be observed. Larger caves behind the ponors are over Najdena jama cave (5110 m),  
Logarček (4334 m) and Vetrovna jama (700 m).  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                     16  

                                                                                                                                             
Fig. B1: Planinsko polje and adjacent karst.  
  
Skednena jama  
           Skednena jama cave is 206 m long and 30 m deep cave situated on N edge of Planinsko polje.  
Cave  is  a  remnant  of  an  old  phreatic  passage,  10  m  wide  and  mostly  about  5  m  high.  It  has  three  
entrances, which  are  disposed  in  different  heights.  Larger  entrance  is  in  the  bottom  of  the  collapse  
dolina; smaller ones are on the surface of the terrain. The gallery floor form clastic sediments: rocks,  
gravel and smaller particles size of sand and silt. The main part of the cave passage, in the length of  
more than 100 m, is smooth and levelled to an even surface with inclination of 7-10º and horizontal in  
cross section.   
           The mean annual temperature of the area is about 8ºC. The coldest month is January (– 1ºC)  
and the warmest July (+18ºC). During the winter there is a strong air draft in the cave, and the cave  
temperatures  at the floor  are  for  several  months  below  0ºC.  Air temperatures measured  at  the cave  
floor are similar to those on the surface, but in domes in the ceiling or in side passages temperatures  
are much higher, they even do not fall below the freezing point.   
           Levelled  cave  floor  show  recent  patterned  ground  cryoturbation  features  like  sorted  stone  
circles, sorted polygons, stripes and clay hummocks. These features develop due to repeated freezing  
and  thawing  of  the  cave  sediments,  which  cause  the  shifting,  or  movement  rocks  mixed  with  finer  
sediments that contain moisture.   
           Cryoturbation develop due to increasing of the volume of the ground when it freezes and thus  
expands its volume. This causes the upwards mowing of the whole cave floor. For three seasons we  
measured the upward movements of the selected stones. The upward movements from 5 –  10 cm in  
vicinity of the dripping water over 20 cm were measured.  
  

  

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                            17  

                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                  
Fig. B2: Topographic map of N edge of Planinsko polje. Skednena jama and Vranja jama are marked.  
 Unica here disappears in numerous swallow holes in alluvium.  
  

                                                                                                                                                               
Fig. B3: Cross section through Skednena jama.  
  
             Vertical movements are also causing horizontal shifting of the particles down dip, because the  
particles, which are  uplifted  perpendicular  to the inclined  surface,  are  lowered vertically  during  the  
thawing. This is morphologically important, and it levelled the whole cave floor bottom to even dip.   

  

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                           18  

Vetrovna jama  
           Vetrovna jama is 700 m long and 115 m deep cave. It was discovered after long digging in  
narrow passages following the strong winds that blew out of cave. The cave reaches underground flow  
of  Ljubljanica  river  between  Planinsko  polje  and  springs  at  Vrhnika.  It  is  mainly  fed  by  the  water  
coming from the eastern rim of Planinsko polje.  
           The cave ends under the slopes and close to the bottom of large collapse dolina Laška kukava.  
Cave  and  dolina  are connected  by  impassable  passages  through  strong  air  currents transfer  cold air  
into  dolina  at  summer.  Kukava  is  one  of  the  dolines  where  temperature  inversion  was  studied  by  
biologists but the low temperatures of the air were attributed to cooling of the air between the collapse  
boulders on the slopes of the dolina.                   The inversion of temperature is more pronounced in summer  
time, when bottom temperatures do not exceed much the cave temperatures of the cave.   
  

                                                                                                                                     
                                                                          
Fig. B4: Topographic map of Laška kukava and the position of the cave. In some other large collapse  
dolines the summer temperature inversion is also maintained by the cold cave air.  
  

Fig. B5: Schematic cross section through Vetrovna jama and Laška kukava.  

  

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

    th 
 20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                19  

                                                                                                                                     
Fig. B6: Stage response to a flood in   caves Ne from Planinsko polje. Note the delayed recession in  
 Vetrovna jama.  
  

                                                                                                                                                                  
Fig.  B7:  An  elevation  profile  of  the  area  between  Planinsko  Polje  and  Ljubljana  Basin  
 approximately   in   S-N   direction.   The   cross-sections   of   the   caves   are   generalised   and  
simplified.  Vetrovna Jama is shifted to the S, because it would overlap with Najdena Jama if  
positioned correctly. This way its connection to E ponors is emphasised. Dashed lines show  
 the estimated level and direction of groundwater.  

  

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                 20  

                                                          FIELD TRIP C  
                    HIGH DINARIC KARST OF TRNOVSKI GOZD PLATEAU  
                                        Wednesday, 20. 6. 2012, 13:30-20:00  
                                                                     
  
Trnovski gozd  
           Central part of Dinaric Karst in Western Slovenia comprises a relief of high karst plateaux of  
total area of approximately 700 km2 . In these plateaus deep karst is developed, through which water is  

drained towards several karst springs located along the river valleys that border them or to karst poljes  
that are between them.  
           Trnovski gozd one of these karst plateaus. It is about 10 km across and 20 km long. On the  
northern side there are deep valleys of Idrijca river and tributaries, on southern Vipava valley. From  
Banšice plateau is separated by Čepovanski dol, huge dry valley, while towards E there is more gentle  
transition to another high plateau Hrušica.  
           The area of Trnovski gozd geotectonicaly belongs to the Outer Dinarides for which the nape  
overthrust tectonic is characteristic. Overthrusting started after Eocene. The direction of overthrusting  
was from NE to SW  
           The surface of Trnovski gozd is mostly between 800 –  1200 m a.s.l., the highest peaks are  
1495  m  high  Mali  Goljak.  Surface  of  the  plateau  is  well  levelled  but  dissected  by  numerous  large  
dolines and uvalas (Mojska draga, Mrzla draga and Smrekova draga, Velika Lazna and others) and  
conical hills among them.  In cold parts of Pleistocene there were small glaciers on the plateau, but  
they  didn’t  move  much  over  the  rough  karst  terrain. They  discharge  their  melt water  mostly  in  the  
karst directly. Some depressions are partly filled with glacial or fluvioglacial sediments.   
           In the central, highest part of Trnovski gozd the climate is rather cold. Mean temperatures in  
January are  from  -4º C to  -2º C. Warmest month is July with temperatures 12 -  14º C. Main annual  
temperature is between 7 - 9º C. There is between 1700 and 2000 mm of precipitations on the plateau  
but in the central part at Mali Goljak up to 3200 mm. Precipitations are distributed all over the year  
with maximums in October and November and from April to June.  
            

                                                                                                                                         
  

  

----------------------- Page 21-----------------------

     th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                                                                     21  

                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Fig.  C1,  2:  Geological  map  and  cross-section  (1.  Periglacial  breccia  and  rubble,  2.  Eocene,  
Palaeocene and Upper Cretaceous flysch, 3. Palaeocene limestone, 4. Upper Cretaceous organogenic  
limestone,  5. Lower Cretaceous bituminous limestone with dolomite inliers,  6. Jurassic limestone and  
dolomite,              7.   Norian-Rhaetian   limestone   (Dachstein),   8.   Norian-Rhaetian   dolomite,   9.   Carnian  
granular dolomite, alternation of siltstone and sandstone) (Janež et al. 1997)  
  

                                                         Most na 
                                                           Soči                                                                                        A 

                                                                             HOTEŠK 

                                                                                                                                                       SLO 
                                                                                                                                             I 
                                                                                                             I 
                                                                                                              d                                                      CRO 
                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                 i 
                                                                                                                 j 
                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                                                                   a 
                                                  KAJŽA 
                                                                    E 
                                                                      
                                                                 C  
                                                                    
                                                               I                                                                                     10 km 
                                                                 
                                                           Š  
                                                              
                                                        J  
                                                           
                                                     N                 Čepovan 
                                                       
                                                  A  
                                                    
                                               B  

                                                                                                                  Idrija 
                                    MRZLEK                             T 
                                                                          
                                                                           
                                                                          R                                  DIVJE         PODROTEJA 
                                                                             
                                                                             N                               JEZERO 
                                                                                
                                                                                O                                                                               LJUBLJANICA 
                                                                                    
                                                                                   V 
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                      a                                               S 
                                                                                          
                                     č                                                            Belo 
                                                                                          
                                                     LIJAK                               K 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    o     Nova                                              I     brezno 
                                  S                                          G 
                                                                                
                                                                                 
                                          Gorica                                O 
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                         Črni vrh 
                                                                                   Z               Otlica 
                                                                                       
                                                                                      D                                                   Hotedršica 

                                                                                                      Zavrhovec 
                                                                                                                         Mrzli 
                                                                                       HUBELJ                    Malo 
                                                                                                                         log 
                                                                                                                 polje 

                                                                                                   Ajdovščina 
                                                         Vipava 
                                                                                                                                                  A                U 
                                                                                                                                                                     n 
                                                                                                                                               C                      i 
                                                                                                                                                                       c 
                                                                                                                                            I                           a 
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                         Š  
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                               VIPAVA                                 U  
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                   R  
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                H  

                                                                                                                 N           Slapenski       Lokva 
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                    A              ledenik 
                                                                                                                        
                               LEGEND                                                                                   N                                                 R 
                                                                                                                                                                            a 
                                                                                                                           O                                                 k 
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                              S 
                                      1                4                   7                                                                              Postojna 

                                     2                 5                   8 

                                     3                 6                   9                                                                 Pivka               Poček 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
  
Fig.  C3:  Proved  underground  water  connections  in  the  area  (1.  River,  2.  Surface  stream,  3.  Karst  
spring,  4.  Tracer  injection  point,  5.  Settlement,  6.  Main  direction  of  underground  flow  -proved  by  
tracing tests after 1993,  7. Secondary direction of underground flow - proved by tracing tests after  
1993,  8.  Main  direction  of  underground  flow  - proved  by  tracing  tests  before  1993 ,  9.  Secondary  
direction of underground flow - proved by tracing tests before 1993)   
  
                There is no superficial flow in the area; all waters appear on the edge of the plateau in large  
springs like Hubelj (discharges from 250 l/s to 60 m3                                                                                                                                             3 
                                                                                                           /s) and Lijak (discharges from 0 l/s to 32 m /s) in  
the Vipava valley, Mrzlek (estimated discharges from 600 l/s to 40 m3/s) and Kajža (discharges from 7  
l/s to 2 m3                                                                                                                                                                      3 
                      /s) in the Soča valley, and Hotešk (estimated discharges from 30 l/s to 6 m /s), Podroteja  
(estimated discharges from 200 l/s to some m3/s) and Divje jezero (estimated discharges from 0 l/s to  
more than 60 m3/s) in the Idrijca valley. These three rivers belong to the Adriatic water system, but a  

small part in the eastern section of the described area is drained towards the Ljubljanica springs near  
Vrhnika, which belongs to the Black Sea water system.  

  

----------------------- Page 22-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                22  

            There are hundreds of caves in the area, the deepest are Bela griža 884 m and Velika  
Paradana, 650 m deep ice cave, and there are 18 others deeper than 100 m, but there are no horizontal  
caves in the whole area.   
  
Smrekova draga  
            Smrekova  draga  is  about  1  km  wide,  1.5  km  long  and  more  than  150  m  deep  closed  
depression,  a  large  composed  dolina.  Whole  dolina  is  formed  in  Triassic  dolomites  and  dolomitic  
limestone.   
  

                                                                                                                                                     
  
Fig. C4 : Topographic map of central part of Trnovski gozd with numerous large dolines.   
  
            The dolina is well known for its and vegetation inversion, a phenomena that there are belts of  
vegetation according to height, but in inverse order, in this case beech threes at the rim,  coniferous  
trees like Picea and Abies below and Pinus mugho and Salix at the bottom. The phenomenon was first  
attributed to temperature inversion. But from distribution of cold air in vertical and horizontal and low  
temperatures  which  maintain low  all  summer  time  (about 2-3º  C)  indicate that the cold  air  is  more  
likely  coming from  caves.  Only large cave system of the whole massive  above the Smrekova draga  
can provide such a source of cold air  
  

  

----------------------- Page 23-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                     23  

                                                                                                                                        
                                                                       
Fig. C5: DEM of the central part of Trnovski gozd karst plateau. Dry valley  Čepovanski dol separates  
it from another plateau on NW.   
  
Ice cave Velika ledena jama v Paradani   
           Velika ledena jama v Paradani (Great Ice cave in Paradana) or simply Paradana is probably  
the best known ice cave in Slovenia. The entrance is 1130 m above sea level in the bottom of large, 50  
m deep, 500 m long and 250 m wide dolina between peaks that are over 1400 m high.  
           The cave is 4000 m long and 650 m deep. The entrance part is a funnel-like depression formed  
by collapse that continues into three chambers and few metres of horizontal passages. From here  
several series of inner pits continue into the depth.   
           Sporadic measurements and observations show strong air currents into the cave in winter time  
and much weaker air movements out of the cave in summer. The air in summer is about 2º C, while  
winter temperatures are much lower.   
           Ice  (estimated volume 8000 m3)  is only in the entrance parts, to a depth of about 100 m, but  

the cold air currents can cause freezing of water as deep as 200 m.                              Measurements  of  temperature  
at March 28. 2001 are representative for the distribution of temperatures in the cave . In the inner parts  
the temperature was 4.4˚ C at depth 650 m (480 m a.s.l), 2.2° C at depth 300 m (830 m a.s.l), -1.6˚ C at  
-50 m and 0° C on the edge of the doline above the entrance.  
           Ice was thawing between 1950 and 1960 but later it build up again. Ice was melted from below  
in some parts of cave after 1977, than rebuilt and at the moment in is melting some parts, while in  

  

----------------------- Page 24-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                        24  

others  it  is  building  up  again.  It  all  shows  an  intrinsic  and  self-regulating  mechanism  of  the  ice  
forming  in  the  cave.  Large  opening  means  strong  winter  circulation  and  cooling  of  the  rock  and  
forming of the ice. When the entrance is choked by ice, the warmer air from the depth and surface  
melt the ice and opens the entrance and start the circle again.  
           Important is inflow of the cold air in summer from the karst massive above. This cold air is  
keeping the temperature low and so preventing the melting of the ice.  
  

                                                                                                                              
             
Fig. C6: Schematic cross section and some climatic observations from the Velika ledena jama v  
Paradani.  
  
           The ice was quarried from the cave already in 19. century when the forestry roads were build.  
Moser  (1889)  reports that  in  the  year  1867  800  m3  of  ice  was  extracted from  the  cave  and  sold  to  

coastal city Trieste. The ice was used for the supply of the town and the port.  It was shipped also to  
Alexandria, where ice was sold at good price.  
           In Paradana in 1906 G. Beck (Die Umkehrung der Pflanzenregion in den Dolinen des Kars.  
Sitzber.  Akad.  Wiss.  CXV.  Wien)  described  the  temperature  inversion  and  with  it  connected  
vegetation inversion. Later these phenomena were much studied in vicinity in Smrekova draga.  
  
Mala Lazna and Lokve   
           Along  the  Avški  prelom  fault  that  crosses  Trnovski  gozd  from  NW  to  SE  two  karst  
depressions  Mala lazna and Lokve  formed.  In both  depressions  karst surface was in cold phases of  
Pleistocene covered with periglacial, glacial and fluvioglacial sediments. The bottom of Mala lazna is  
at  about  110  m  a.s.l.,  it  was  glaciated  and  filled  with  sediments.  Those  are  at  the  higher  parts  of  

  

----------------------- Page 25-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                      25  

depression already partly washed into the karst. Several sinks, suffusion  dolines were already  formed  
in former  levelled  sediments. The melt water flow from ice and filled Lokve  (950)  depression with  
fluvioglacial  gravels,  here  sometimes  still  surface  brook  flows,  mostly  because  of  more  dolomitic  
rocks and that water sinks into the ponors at the edge of the depression.  
  
Dry valley Čepovanski dol  
           Dry valley separates karst plateaus Trnovski gozd on E and Banjška planota on W. Dry valley  
is about 16 km long,  300 –  400 m deep,  and is the largest dry valley in Slovenia. It was cut in the  
limestone  and  dolomite  by  the  river,  which  was  flowing  from  the  promontory  of  the  Julian  Alps,  
possibly Idrijca river or one of its tributaries.   
           On N side Čepovanski dol bottom is about 350 m above river Idrijca below, and on it  S side  
about 150 m above the Soča river valley.   
           The bottom of the dry valley is dissected by numerous dolines, while the slopes are smooth.  
Near the Čepovan, the largest settlement in valley is small brook collecting its waters on dolomite and  
sinking after short course in the village.   
           There  are  no sediments to date the  age of dry valley. Most likely is the same that the age of  
dry valley that cross Kras plateau. They formed with tectonic uplift and tilting after upper Miocene.  
             

  

----------------------- Page 26-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                     26  

                                                            FIELD TRIP D  
 KARST GEOMORPHOLOGY AND HYDROGEOLOGY OF LJUBLJANICA RIVER   
                                           Thursday, 21. 6. 2012, 8:00-19:30  
                                                                       
Ljubljanica river system  
           The calculated size of the Ljubljanica drainage basin is 1779 km2                                                             2 
                                                                                                     , of which about 1100 km   
are composed of karstic rocks.  The location of the water divide is approximate, but bifurcations have  
been proved at several boundaries by water tracing. According to studies during the complex water  
tracing experiments of the nineteen-seventies, the catchment area of the Vrhnika springs, where the  
main river definitively leaves karst terrain, covers 1108.78 km2                                                                 3     -1 
                                                                                     . The mean discharge is 38.60 m  sec                ,  
with a specific run-off of 34.8 l sec-1               -2                                                     3     -2  -1 
                                                  km    . Average mean denudation rate is 65 m  km                    a  .  
  

                                                                                                                                            
  

Fig. D1: Water basin of Ljubljanica river. High karst plateaus, lower poljes and levelled surfaces are  
main characteristics of the relief.  

  
           The  karstic  rocks  are  generally  micritic,  locally  oolitic,  limestone  and  dominantly  late- 
diagenetic  dolomites,  mostly  of  Mesozoic  age.  They  were  formed  on  the  Dinaric  platform  under  
conditions of continuous sedimentation which  enabled high rock purity, generally with less than 5%,  
but locally as little as 0.1%, insoluble residue. The total thickness of the carbonate sequence is about  
6850m.  
           Structurally, the whole of the Ljubljanica basin belongs to the Adriatic sub-plate. The area is  
composed of several napes that were over thrust during the peak of Alpine orogeny in Oligocene, in a  
NE to SW direction. Later change of the plate movement direction brought about the formation of the  
Idria (dextral strike-slip) Fault, which runs through the area in a NW-SE direction.   
  

  

----------------------- Page 27-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                        27  

                                                                                           
  
Fig. D2 : Influence of the Idria Fault zone upon the karst poljes hydrology  
  
           The highest parts of the basin are high karst plateaus Hrušica, Javorniki,  Snežnik and Racna  
gora. On the poljes among them surface rivers appear only, but they have different names: Trbuhovica,  
Obrh, Stržen, Rak, Pivka, Unica and finally after the springs at Vrhnika the name Ljubljanica. Besides  
these rivers there are some sinking rivers that are collecting waters from dolomite or flysch. These are  
Nanoščica, Cerkniščica, Logaščica, Hotenka and Rovtarica and many smaller.   
           The highest lying is the karst polje near Prezid (770 m),  followed by Babno polje (750 m),  
Loško polje (580 m) , Cerkniško polje (550 m), Rakov Škocjan and Unško polje (520 m), Planinsko  
polje (450m), Logaško polje (470 m) and finally by Ljubljansko Barje (300 m) where the Ljubljanica  
springs are at 300 m a.s.l.  There are several large springs are dispersed along the edge of the Barje,  
part  of  Ljubljana  tectonic  basin,  which  is  connected  with  gradual  tectonic  subsidence  of  the  area.  
Mean annual discharge of the Ljubljanica at springs is 38.6 m3.  

           There  are  1540  caves,  accessible  fragments  of  underground  drainage  system  known  in  the  
catchments  area  of  the  Ljubljanica.  The  average  length  of  the  cave  is  48  m  and  the  depth  18  m.  
However, the largest caves are the ponor or spring caves; in them we can follow the 71 km of passages  
of the main rivers, tributaries of Ljubljanica.  
  
  
Cerkniško polje  
           Cerkniško polje is the largest karst polje in Slovenia. Often it is called also  Cerkniško jezero  
(Lake of Cerknica), because of its regular floods, or intermittent lake. The intermittent lake covers 26  
km2  when  is  full; it  is 10.5  km  long  and  almost  5  km  wide.  Its  hydrological  properties caused that  

already in the beginning of New Age scholars from all round Europe were attracted to it. The lake  
becomes still more known through the Valvasor’s description in 1689.  

  

----------------------- Page 28-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                       28  

           It is a karst polje developed in the important regional fault zone –  Idrija fault. Idrija fault has  
“Dinaric” direction (NW-SE); in the same fault zone are developed: Planinsko polje, Loško polje and  
Babno polje. Bottom of Cerkniško polje covers 38 km2 in elevation of about 550 m. Bottom is formed  

on Upper Triassic dolomite, which is presented also on the N, E and SE side of the polje, there are  
some  Jurassic  dolomites  also  presented.  On  W  and  NW  the  Cretaceous  limestone  are  presented.  
Inflows are on E, S and partly on W sides of polje. The largest tributary to polje is Cerkniščica drained  
the  dolomite  catchments  area.  The  important  karst  springs  are  Žerovnica,  Šteberščica  and  Stržen.  
Stržen flows on the W side of polje towards the ponors in the middle of the polje, from where water  
flows directly to Ljubljanica springs,  and towards NW side of polje,  from where the water flows to  
Rakov Škocjan. From the foot of Javorniki mountain to the contact with dolomite in the polje bottom  
is 12 ponor caves. They are connected to Karlovica cave system to which also the highest waters from  
polje flows. It the system there is more the 7 km of passages. Passages are generally low, because they  
are filled by alluvia. Thickness of alluvia in Jamski zaliv, before the caves entrances, is about 8 – 10 m.  
  

  
                                                                                                                                        
  

Fig. D3: Longitudinal cross section of Ljubljanica karst river basin (Gospodarič & Habič 1976).  

  
           The bottom of Cerkniško polje covers 38 km2 in elevation of about 550 m. Inflows are on E, S,  

and  partly  on  W  polje's  side.  There  are  some  small  superficial  tributaries  to  polje,  the  largest  is  
Cerknišcica, with about 45 km2 of hinterland mostly dolomite.  

           Flat bottom of Cerkniško polje is regularly flooded for several months in autumn winter and  
spring  time,  at  floods  it  alters  to  spacious  karst  lake.  Lower  waters  are  sinking  mostly  in  marginal  
swallow holes and in numerous grounds swallow holes and estavellas, which are disposed in central  
polje's bottom. Principal ponor caves and swallow holes are disposed at NW polje's border.   
           Next to the polje  border,  from  the  foot  of  the Javorniki  to  the  contact  with  dolomite  in  the  
polje  bottom  is  12  ponor caves  with  more  than  7  km  of  passable  channels.  Largest  are  Velika  and  
Mala Karlovica caves. Most of caves are short; they get narrow or end with breakdowns or sumps.  
           Outflow from the polje was not oriented to one channel, rather to a mesh of channels, which  
about 200 m from the edge of polje combine into a couple of larger galleries. They are generally low,  
because the bottoms are filled with alluvia. Alluvium at altitude of 550 m is distinctive in all the ponor  
caves; its thickness is possibly the same as a thickness of alluvia in Jamski zaliv, 8 -  15 m respectively.  
  
  
Rakov Škocjan  
           Rakov Škocjan is a karst depression about 1.5 km long and 200 m wide. It is situated below  
the N side of Javorniki Mountain at elevation about 500 m between Planinsko and Cerkniško polje.  
Through  the  depression  flows  the  permanent  river  Rak.  The  Rak  springs  from  Zelške  jame  cave,  

  

----------------------- Page 29-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                      29  

bringing water from Cerkniško polje. Zelške jame are about 5 km long; the end of the cave is in huge  
collapse doline Velika Šujca, where from the other side the Karlovica cave system ends. In Karlovica  
system is the main outflow from Cerkniško polje. Numerous collapse dolines are situated around the  
entrance of Zelške jame. In one of them the Small natural bridge is present. Downstream the valley  
widens  and  several  springs  bring  additional  water  to  the  Rak  River.  The  valley  is  narrowed  at  the  
Great Natural Bridge and afterwards the Rak sinks into Tkalca jama cave from where the water flows  
towards  cave  Planinska  jama  at  Planinsko  polje.  The  connections  of  the  Rak  with  water  from  
Cerkniško polje and with the Unica springs at Planinsko polje were proved by water tracing.  
           Before 1st World war Rakov Škocjan was owned by the Windischgrätz family and was closed  
as their private park; between 1st  and 2nd  World war, the Italians also closed the area for the public.  

From 1949 Rakov Škocjan has been a Landscape Park.  
  

                                                                                                                                             
  
Fig. D4: Cross-section along Rakov Škocjan karst depression between spring at Zelške jame and sink  
in  Tkalca  jama.  Legend:  1 –  rocky  bottom,  2  –  alluvia,  3- fault  zone ,  4  – flood  in  1982 ,  5  –  karst  
spring, 6 – water flow directions,  7 – terraces, 8 – boulder rocks, 9 – altitude (Gospodarič et al. 1983)   
  
  
Žejna dolina contact fluvio karst  
             
                                2 
           About  100  km   large  N  part  of  Ljubljanica  catchment  and  structurally  belongs  the  south- 
eastern part of a vast nape structure over trusted on the Mesozoic limestone. The oldest rocks are non- 
carbonate Palaeozoic  and Triassic slate, conglomerates and sandstone. The larger part of the relief is  
composed of carbonate rock, predominantly upper Triassic dolomite.   
           Large  relief  forms  are  ridges  and  medium-sized  up  to  200  m  deep  fluvial  valleys  and  dry  
valleys, which extend into levelled karst plains on the edge: to the Logaško polje and the Hotenjsko  
polje plain. It is characteristic that rivers sink at the bottom of the valleys they flow across; from there  
dry or intermittently dry valleys extend. Great contact depressions sometimes formed next to swallow- 
holes, which were later filled with fluvial sediments. Young erosion terraces or alluvial dolines  and  
sinks formed in them later.  
           In Žejna dolina valley, water from Triassic dolomite and slate is collected by the Žejski potok.  
The  stream  cut  a  wide  valley  that  narrows  upon  reaching  the  swallow-holes  in  the  limestone.  The  
water sinks at 549 m a.s.l. into the 340 m long cave Kmetovo brezno, which formed at the contact of  
Triassic dolomite and cretaceous limestone.  The river flows partly to the springs of Ljubljanica and  
partly to the springs of Idrijca river.  
           A dry valley extends from the swallow-holes to the south. In it water from the dolomite slopes  
is collected into the small Hlevišarka stream in this dry valley. It  sinks at the contact with limestone  
next to the first houses in Hotedršica 540m a.s.l.  
           During the floods that occur every few years, Žejski potok floods the land around the swallow- 
holes and flows through the dry valley together with the Hlevišarka to Hotedršica, where it sinks in  
swallow-holes on the karst flats or field.  
             

  

----------------------- Page 30-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                        30  

                                                                                                                                         
             
Fig. D5: Schematic cross section trough active  valleys of three sinking brooks Pikelce, Žejnski potok  
and Hlevišarka and dry valleys in between to Hotenjsko polje.   
  
  
Floods on Hotenjski ravnik   
             
           Hotenjsko podolje is 13 km long and up to 3 km wide  levelled  karst  surface, a belt of lower  
relief between high karst plateau Hrušica (700  –  800  m) on SW and relief of dolomitic fluvial and  
karst  plateaus  like  Žibrše  and  Rovte  (600  –  700  m)  on  NE.  Surface  of  Hotenjsko  podolje  is  in  
elevation between 600 and 500 m that developed within the Idria (dextral strike-slip) Fault, which runs  
through the area in a NW-SE direction. Podolje is tilted towards SE. Most of podolje is formed on  
Jurassic and Cretaceous limestone; on NE side is along the fault lines also on Triassic dolomite.  
           Relief of podolje is in general  levelled but dissected by numerous dolines that in some areas  
cover  entire  surface.  Where  brooks  from  dolomite  brought  some  sediment,  no  more  than  1  m  is  
preserved on the surface, making agriculture in this part possible. Hotenjsko podolje developed as a  
karst polje, but is now degrading because of drop of the ground water level.  
           There are several caves, mostly simple vertical shafts. Two of them reach  the level of karst  
water which is about 70 m below the surface. However, when  heavy  rains,  like in September 2010  
when in the area in three days fell about 400 mm of rain. Hotenjka and other  surface  waters flood  
because the capacity of the ponors was not great enough. Besides karst water level rose for 30 –70 m  
and more. Main inflow was from karst plateau on SW side where also a groups of springs appeared  
and created a river with discharge of several m3s-1.Part of Hotenjsko podolje was flooded too and as  

last such a flood occurred about 70 years ago, there were also some houses flooded.  

  

----------------------- Page 31-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                          31  

                                                                                                                                           
Fig. D6: DEM of Hotenjsko podolje. Marked is high water stand during September 2010 flood . With  
numbers +35m,  +70 m and +30 m is marked the rise of ground water in karst.   
  
  
Logaško polje  
           Logaško polje is border polje,  developed on the contact of dolomite and limestone between  
470 and 480m a.s.l. A number of small streams flow onto it, the largest being the Logaščica, which  
collects run-off from a dolomite area of 19 km2                                                       3 
                                                                   . The mean flow is 0.3 m /s. Short lasting floods occur  
at the swallow-holes on the Logaško polje when the flow exceeds 30 m3/s.  

           In the past, another large water flow flowed to the Logaško polje – the Petkovski potok brook  
with the Rovtarica brook. The Petkovski potok flowed across the present dry valley away from Log  
and  deposited  thick  beds  of  non-carbonate  rubble  on  the  northern  part  of  the  Logaško  polje.  The  
covered valley relief was already fragmented by transport of the sediment onto the karst.  

  

----------------------- Page 32-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                           32  

                                             WHOLE-DAY EXCURSION (E)  
                GEOMORPHOLOGY AND HYDROGEOLOGY OF KRAS PLATEAU   
                                            Friday, 22. 6. 2012, 8:00-19:00  
  
          Dinaric  Karst  is  the  major  karst  area  of  Slovenia.  The  dominant  relief  features  are  rather  
extensive levelled surfaces at different elevations,  large closed depressions (e.g., polje),  and conical  
hills. Fluviokarst features like dells are common on dolomites. Karst rivers appear only in the bottoms  
of  poljes,  where  they  result  from  high  level  of  karst  water.  Allogenic  rivers  flowing  from  non- 
carbonate regions either sink at the karst boundary forming blind valleys, or cross the karst through  
deep karst valleys and canyons. There are numerous extensive and complicated cave systems formed  
by sinking rivers and connected with the surface also by numerous vadose shafts. The surface karst  
morphology  is  typified  by  the  abundance  of  karren,  dolines  of  various  diameters  and  depths,  
sometimes extensive collapse dolines, cave entrances, unroofed caves, etc.  
          In past centuries, the Dinarski Kras of Slovenia represented one of the world‘s prime sites of  
early scientific exploration of karst phenomena due to the large number of outstanding karst features  
such as caves, large sinking rivers and flooded poljes. Speleology, karst hydrology and biospeleology  
were born here. The most prominent phenomena are situated in the north-western part on the plateau  
named Kras.  
          In Slovene language, kras means a rocky, barren surface. The name is often used as toponym.  
Kras plateau became a textbook example for such kind of landscape because of the extraordinary karst  
phenomena,  and  explorations  done  in  the  19th  Century.  The  name  Kras  in  the  German  form  of  the  

word (der Karst) became an international scientific term. The area where these early explorations took  
place is called the Classical Karst.  
          The Kras is a distinct plateau, especially when viewed from the seaward side. There are steep  
limestone  slopes  few  hundred  meters  high  rising  directly  from  the  sea  or  from  the  neighbouring  
lowlands on the north-west. On the north-east, the plateau ends above the broad and low lying Vipava  
valley. Higher relief on flysch on the east separates the Kras from the Pivka region. On the south-east,  
the border of Kras is again well defined by contact with the non-carbonate flysch of the Brkini hills  
and the valley of the Reka river. Toward the south, the transition to karst ridges and Matarsko podolje  
karst plateau is less obvious.  
  
Kras plateau  
          The Kras  is  a  low,  40  km  long  and  up  to  13  km  wide, NW–SE-trending  limestone  plateau  
lying between Trieste Bay, the northernmost part of the Adriatic Sea, Vipava valley in north-east, and  
Friuli–Venezia  Giulia  lowlands  and  river  Soča  in  north-west.  The  45°45´´N  and  14°00´´E  lines  of  
latitude and longitude cross the Kras near Divača village.   
          The name itself has a pre-Indo-European origin from word karra, which means rock –  stone.  
The ancient word for “stone” gave the origin to the ancient name for the region (Carusadus, Carsus)  
and  this  word  changed  according  to  different  languages  into  Kras  (Slovene),  Karst  (German)  and  
Carso  (Italian).  From  this  toponym  the  international  term  –  karst  –  for  such  type  of  landscape  is  
derived. The name and some other terms from the area like dolina, polje, and ponor have entered to  
international scientific terminology from here.  
          Climate is sub-Mediterranean with warm dry summers and most of the precipitation in autumn  
and  spring.  Cold  winters,  with  NE  wind  "burja«  (bora  =  borealis)  show  strong  influence  of  the  
continent.  Average  yearly  precipitation  on  Kras  varies  from  1400  to  1650  mm,  and  average  yearly  
evapotranspiration from 700 to 750 mm. Because of different land use, pasturing, in past centuries, the  
Karst was bare, with rocky and grassy surface. Last decades the bushes and trees are overgrow the  
landscape.   
          The Kras belongs to Adriatic–Dinaric Carbonate Platform of the External Dinarides composed  
of shallow marine fossil-bearing Cretaceous and Palaeogene carbonates. Eocene flysch rocks encircle  
the carbonate plateau. Kras and Matarsko podolje tectonically belong to Komen thrust sheet, which is  
thrust over Eocene flysch and Palaeocene/Eocene limestone of the Podgorski kras.   
          The main part of the plateau is essentially levelled, inclined slightly towards the north-west,  
with  numerous  dolines,  caves  and  other  karst  features.  About  3490  caves  are  known  on  the  Kras  
plateau.  In  seven  of  them  we  can  reach  21  km  of  passages  of  the  underground  Reka  which  flows  

  

----------------------- Page 33-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                  33  

between 200 and 300 m below the surface. There is a belt of slightly higher relief in the central part of  
the plateau, formed by conical hills like Grmada (324 m a.s.l.), and dissected by large depressions. The  
higher  relief  divides  the  Kras  into  two  separated  levelled  surfaces.  In  the  north-western  part,  the  
plateau descends to below 50 m a.s.l. on the edge of the Friuli Plain; on its south-eastern edge altitudes  
are  about  500  m  a.s.l.  There  is  about  300  m  of  accessible  vadose  zone  with  caves  formed  at  all  
altitudes from the surface to the sea level and below it.   
            No superficial streams occur on the Kras surface, because all rainwater immediately infiltrates  
to carbonate rocks. There are two dry valleys crossing the plateau and some NW–SE-trending belts of  
lower relief which are result of young tectonics.   
              

                                                                                                                                                         
  
Fig. E1: DEM of the Kras plateau  in centre and adjacent karst and fluvial relief.  
              
              
            The  age  of  the  karst of Kras  plateau  can  be  defined as the time  when  the  karst  rocks  were  
uplifted out of the sea. For the most of Dinaric karst in Slovenia this occurred after the Eocene, since  
after that there is there is no evidence of younger marine  sediments. As soon as the carbonate rocks  

  

----------------------- Page 34-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                              34  

were exposed, we can expect that the karst was formed, but there are no remnants of karst features  
from that time. Most likely denudation has already destroyed them.  
           The oldest features in the karst relief are unroofed caves. They were caves that were formed  
by  sinking  rivers,  bringing  allogenic  sediments  to  caves  in  Kras.  At  the  end  of  the  morphogenetic  
phase all these caves were filled with fluvial sediments. This indicates the diminishing of the gradient  
in the whole area. Diminishing of the gradient which ended with planation could mean tectonic phase  
which ended at about 6 Ma ago. After that a new tectonic phase started. Three areas faced uplift and  
tilting for several hundred meters. The uplift was stronger in the SE part of the area. Karst denudation  
was evenly lowering the surface, so the surface remained well preserved, dissected on central parts of  
karst  with  dolines,  which  represent  few  per  cent  of  total  area  only.  The  even  denudation  exposed  
former old caves to the surface. Some of them are filled with sediments, from some sediments were  
washed away or were never filled.   
          On the surface, they are expressed as narrow and often meandering shallow trenches, shallow  
oblong depressions, and doline-like forms in rows and collapsed dolines.  
          The appearance  of  old  unroofed  caves  and  their  fills  resulted  from  denudation,  erosion  and  
chemical  dissolution  of  limestone  above  the  cavities.  Fills  exposed  on  the  present  surface  include  
speleothems  and  cave  fluvial  deposits.  The  ancient  directions  of  flow,  different  catchment  areas  of  
sinking rivers and different organisation of the ancient underground drainage were reconstructed from  
several unroofed caves opened during highway construction in the Divaški kras. The thickness of rock  
overburden removed above cavities was established to have been 50– 100 m. The age of cave fills was  
calculated from denudation rates and the expected thickness of missing overburden to 0.7–5 Ma. This  
large time range resulted from the expected minimum (20 mMa-1) and maximum denudation rates (50  

       -1 
mMa     ) calculated or measured in the area.  
  
Divaški kras  

          Karst surface above Škocjanske jame, Divaški kras is a SE part of the Kras plateau between  
the  sinks  of  Reka  river  and  the  village  Divača.  It  is  built  mostly  by  Cretaceous  and  Palaeogene  
limestone. The surface is levelled in elevations between 420 and 450 m a.s.l, inclined slightly towards  
NW. The karst features here are exceptional; there are sinks  of Reka river,  15 large collapse dolines  
and hundreds of dolines.  
          In the Divaški kras there are known 64 caves with the total passages length of 18, 500 m. The  
largest caves of the area are Škocjanske jame, 5800 m long and 250 m deep cave. They were formed  
by the sinking river Reka that after sinking flows towards Kačna jama, Labodnica and then to springs  
of Timavo.  
          The largest collapse doline in the area is the Radvanj double collapse doline (volume 9 million  
   3                                                                                                   3 
m ). It is followed by the 122 m Sekelak, the volume of which is 8.5 million m   and Lisični dol (6.2  
million m3                                                          3                                  3 
              ). Then there are: Globočak (4.6 million m ), Bukovnik (1.7 million m ), Risnik (1.5 million  
   3 
m ) and others. As rooms as big are not known in the Kras, we must assume that collapse dolines this  
large could develop only with simultaneous rock removal. If this were not the case, the room would  
fill up with caved-in rocks and only collapse dolines much smaller than the primary cave would appear  
on the surface.  
          Kačna jama is the longest cave system of Reka River in the continuation of Škocjanske jame.  
The entrance lies west from Divača 435 m a.s.l. The total length amounts to 12.500 m. In the lower  
level the actual underground flow of Reka is met at 195 m respectively.  
  
Unroofed cave at Lipove doline  
            
          Unroofed caves are an important part of the surface morphology of Divaški kras where 2, 900  
m of the unroofed caves was mapped.   
          They are caves exposed to the surface due to the surface denudation lowering which re-shapes  
them into the surface relief forms. In such features flowstone, allochtonous sediments and morphology  
are  testifying  their  cave  origin.  Several  unroofed  caves  were  studied  and  sediments  were  analysed;  
clastic sediments are dated to 1.6 -  1. 8 Ma or/and 3.8 to 5 Ma.  

  

----------------------- Page 35-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                            35  

                                           214 m  

                                                                  450 m  

                                                                    

                                                                                                                                                                   
  
Fig. E2: Position of the unroofed cave and Škocjanske jame beneath it. The red lime is the location of  
the profile from the next Figure.  
  
  

                                                                                                                                                          
Fig. E3: Cross section of the unroofed cave at Lipove doline.   
  
Reka River  
             The Reka river is the main sinking river of the Kras edge. It gathers the water from the area of  
more  than  350  km2 .  Around  60  %  of  it  is  with  surface  drainage  network  on  Eocene  flysch.  In  the  

                                                                                                                                      3 
period  1961-1990  the  minimal  measured  discharge  of  the  Reka  River  was  0.18  m /s  and  the  mean  

  

----------------------- Page 36-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                  36  

                          3 
discharge 8.26 m /s. In the time of extremely high waters its discharge can reach up to more than 300  
   3 
m /s. At such conditions the water is dammed in the underground and over 100 m high floods occur in  
Škocjanske and other caves.  
            After  underground  flow  the  Reka  and  rainwater  from  the  Kras  and  inflows  from  the  rivers  
Soča,  Vipava  and  Raša  reappear  at  springs  as  Timavo  about  35  NW  from  Škocjanske  jame.  Three  
main springs with mean discharge 30.2 m3/s are on the coast are connected by a network of passages  

that reach a depth of about 80 m below the sea level.  
  

                                                                                                                                                  
  
Fig.  E4:  The  map  of  the  Divača  karst.  On  the  levelled  surface  the  large  collapse  dolines  are  
dominating  features,  solution  dolines  are  frequent,  but  they  represent  only  small  proportion  of  the  
surface. The outlines of the main caves and the main unroofed caves are marked. On the map made of  
DEM with 12.5 m grid the road cuts or causeways are also seen.  
Legend:  1.  Outline  of the active  river  caves,  2.  Divaška jama cave,  3.  Unroofed  cave,  4.  Unroofed  
caves  mentioned  in  the  text:  A:  Unroofed  cave  near  Povir,  B:  Unroofed  cave  in  doline  Radvanj,  
continuation of Divaška jama,  C: Unroofed cave above Škocjanske jame,  5. Height of the surface,  6.  
Height of the water level in caves,  7. Reka river and ponors, 8. The supposed direction of water flow,  
9. Outline of the town Divača.  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 37-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                37  

Škocjanske jame  
  
           The  Škocjanske jame  caves  are  5.8  km  long.  The  Reka  river,  mean  annual  discharge  8,  26  
   3 
m /s enters the cave at an altitude of 317 m; in the Martelova dvorana room,  it is 214 m above sea  
levelled at terminal sump at about 190 m a.s.l. (i.e. 127 m lower). At low waters Reka sinks before it  
enters the cave.  Floods  usually  reach  up to  30  m.  The  largest  known flood  in the  previous  century  
raised the water table level for 132 m.   
           Morphology  and  development  of  Škocjanske jame  cave  are  described  according  to  Mihevc  
(2001).  Caves  are  developed  in  a  contact  area  of  cretaceous  thick-bedded  rudistic  limestone  and  
Palaeocene thin-bedded dark limestone. Most primary channels developed along tectonized bedding- 
planes.  
           Škocjanske caves are composed of phreatic tunnels and gravitational or paragenetic reshaped  
galleries.  The  proto-channels  developed  in  phreatic  conditions,  formed  along  tectonized  bedding- 
planes.  The  water  flow  demanded  a  high  degree  of  phreatic  rising  and  falling  between  individual  
bedding-planes  which  are  in  the  area  of  the  chambers  Svetinova  dvorana  and  Müllerjeva  dvorana  
approximately 175 m. Large quantities of water could flow through all these tunnels, but meanwhile,  
rubble was transported through caves above them. Remnant of such a cave is unroofed cave in Lipove  
doline at an altitude of around 450 m. A long period followed when the piezometric water table was  
340-300  m  above  sea  level  and  the  gradient  was  towards  SW.  The  Reka  formed  new  or  adopt  old  
passages  by  paragenesis  and  bypassing.  The  large  galleries  Mahorčičeva  and  Mariničeva  jama,  
Tominčeva jama, Schmidlova dvorana in Tiha jama were formed.   
           In  the  further  development  of  Škocjanske  caves,  potent  entrenchment  prevailed.  Cutting  
occurred in inner parts of the cave, in Hankejev channel for about 80 m, much less about 10 m, in the  
eastern, entrance part of the cave.   
           First paths in the cave area were made in 1823, but construction of paths for exploration and  
for the  visitors started in 1884.  Cave  exploration  was  done  by  cavers  of  DÖAV  (Litoral  section  of  
Austrian Alpinistic club) from Trieste. The most important explorer was Anton Hanke. In 1891 they  
already reached the final sump in the cave.  
           The largest chambers are Martelova dvorana, with a volume of 2,  100,  000 m3, and Šumeča  
jama (870 , 000 m3). Some of big chambers collapsed forming the big collapse dolines like Velika and  

Mala dolina.  
           Because  of  their  extraordinary  significance  for  the  world's  natural  heritage,  in  1986  the  
Škocjanske jame were included in UNESCO’s World Heritage List. The Republic of Slovenia pledged  
to  ensure  the  protection  of  the  Škocjanske  jame  area  and  therefore  adopted  the  Škocjanske  jame  
Regional Park Act.   
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 38-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                        38  

                                                                                                                                        
Fig. E5: Map and stratigraphy of Škocjanske jame.  
  
Bestažovca and Perkova pečina caves  

           The main part of the  Kras  plateau is essentially  levelled  inclined slightly towards the north- 
west. There is a belt of slightly higher relief in the central part of the plateau, named Taborski griči. It  
divides the Kras into two separated levelled surfaces. The southern one is Nabrežinsko podolje, which  
southern part is S of Sežana in elevation about 400 m is named Lipiški ravnik.   
           In Taborki griči there are some interesting old caves. Most important is 250 m long and 45 m  
deep  cave  Bestažovca.  The  cave  is  located  near  the  ridge  between  hills  on  the  in  altitude  460  m  
(45°41'34.92"N,  13°53'30.22"E). At the entrance to the cave there are two deep shafts that lead to the  
main  part  of  the  cave.  This  consists  of  about  150  m  long  and  about  10  m  wide  nearly  horizontal  
passage. In this passage the rock art was found.   
           The  passage  was  in  past  accessible  through  another  cave,  today  just  a  large  abri  Perkova  
pečina.  The  traces  of  visits  of  prehistoric  people,  a  fireplace  with  charcoal  and  ashes,  pieces  of  
charcoal which is remnant of torches, bones and Neolithic pottery are preserved on the surface of the  
passage  floor.  The  connection  between  the  two  caves  was  later  closed  due  to  the  sediment  creep  
caused  mostly  by  frost  heaving.  Present  climatic  conditions  in  the  main  passage  are  stable,  mean  
annual temperature is about 9° C, and oscillations of temperature and humidity are small.  
           Cave paintings consist of drawings made with red ochre on the walls and black dots on the  
passage ceiling. Besides drawings there are on three places remnants of grass or some another plants  
that  were  on  purpose  placed  where  drip  water  deposited  on them  thin  layer  of  calcite  and  preserve  
their shape.  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 39-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                            39  

                                                                                                                            
Fig. E6: Neolithic drawings.  
  
            Radiocarbon dating of charcoal from a drawing, from fireplace and from a torch show narrow  
time span of about 500 years, between 7289 - 6730 BP which matches with the age of pottery found in  
 cave. The drawings from Bestažovca cave present at the moment the only known Neolithic cave  art  
this time in the wider area of Dinaric mountains and neighbouring Alps.  

                                                                                                                                                   
Fig. E 7: Schematic cross section trough Hrbec and remnants of an old cave. Cave with mostly filled  
passages  was  transformed  during  its  long  speleogene sys  by  denudation  of  surface,  collapse  and  
sediment creep. Position of Neolithic drawings cave is marked.  
                                                                                
            The main passage  of Bestažovca is after  some  30 m exposed in a slope of the hill as a large  
unroofed cave that ends in large dolina. Cave is filled with cave sediments, clays and flowstone from  
which also some Pleistocene fauna was extracted, but so far no datation of the cave sediments was  
possible.  
            The system  Perkova  pečina  –  Bestažovca  cave  and  unroofed  cave  are  good  example  of  the  
transformation of old caves to a collapse, unroofed cave and cave entrance.  
  

Brezno v Kanjeducah and flood winds in caves above the underground Reka river  

            The aquifer of Kras is as complex as a karst aquifer can get. More than 300 m deep vadose  
zone,  huge   underground   cavities,  all   possible   flow   regimes,  complex   recharge   and   discharge  
 conditions and multiphase evolution are enough to believe that the system is far from being resolved.   
  

  

----------------------- Page 40-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                             40  

                                                                                                                                                
  
Fig. E8: Simplified cross-section of the Kras plateau with  main caves and measurement points.  
            The  epiphreatic  zone  is  characterized  by  high  flow  variability  of  the  Reka  river.  At  the  
moment we know five caves leading to the active subsurface flow: Kačna cave and Labodnica/Grotta  
di  Trebiciano  are  well  known  and  have  already  been  thoroughly  investigated.  Recently,  three  
additional caves were pushed down to the depths of active Reka flow: Lazzaro Jerko in Italy; Jama 1 v  
Kanjaducah and Brezno v Stršinkni dolini in Slovenia. The river has also been reached through Brezno  
3G, which turned out to be a possible second entrance of Kačna cave.  
            In   Škocjan  caves   and  Kačna   cave   it  is   possible   to   follow   several   kilometers   of   the  
underground while only small fragments are accessible in other caves as the confining siphons are not  
far apart, therefore further exploration is left to cave divers.  
            In   2005   we   have   established   a   monitoring   of   water   level,  temperature   and   electrical  
conductivity in all known caves that reach the Reka river. It is based on Schlumberger’s CTD Divers  
which  enable  unattended  long  term, high  frequency  record  of  given  parameters.  The  water  level  in  
selected caves responds vigorously to the floods. The highest known stages are more than 100 meters  
above the base flow stage.   
              

                                                                                                                                       
              
Fig. E9: Part of the recorded time-series showing the seasonal temperature variations and response to  
the flood events.  
              
            Figure  4.6  shows  the  response  of  stage,  temperature  and  SEC  in  Škocjanske jame  during  a  
flood event in December 2009, the largest flood since the beginning of monitoring. The stage rose for  

  

----------------------- Page 41-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                           41  

                                                                   3 
66  meters  at  maximum  flow  of  Reka  255  m /s.  The  rising  rate  reached  6  m/h,  while  during  the  
recession  period;  the  water  level  was  dropping  up  to  11  m/h.  Data  in  other  caves  have  not  been  
collected yet.   

                                                                                                                                     
Fig. E10: Discharge, stage,  temperature and SEC of Reka during  the flood event in December 2008.  
Discharge is measure at the gaging station about 6 km upstream from Škocjanske jame.  
              
            The morphology of caves (i.e. large voids connected to the surface with series of shafts and  
small  entrances)  combined  with  vigorous  stage  response  to  the  flood  inputs  also  dictates  extreme  
ventilation  in  these  caves.  Four  of  these  caves  have  been  explored  by  following  the  leads  along  
openings, where strongest air currents were sensed during the flood events.   
            One of these is Jama 1 v Kanjaducah, where the exploration breakthrough to the Reka river  
was done in 2003.  The cave is 310 m deep.  Most of the entrance part is in the fractured zone with  
boulder-chocks, where small passages have been excavated following the main air currents. The cave  
continues  with  large  inclined/vertical  gallery  down  to  the  level  of  Reka.  Large  passages  have  been  
found in the upstream and downstream directions along the Reka river. Recent diving revealed another  
large dry gallery behind the terminate siphon.   
              

                                                                                                                                     
              
Fig. E .11: Extended elevation of Jama 1 v Kanjaducah with the positions of instruments.  
              
            To follow the air  during the flood event we have installed Schlumberger’s barologger  at the  
top of big gallery to measure the air pressure  and anemometer close to the entrance, additional to the  
diver in the terminate lake (see figure 4.8). Figure 4.9 presents the results of measurements. Stage rose  
to 50 m, with maximal rate of about 1 m/s. This pressed the air out through the caused the rising of the  
air pressure rise for 30 cm                                                                                                                   2 
                                     H2O approc. 30 mbar) in 8 hours. A rough estimation (assuming area of 5 m )  

  

----------------------- Page 42-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                    42  

                                    6    3 
gives,  that  about  0.6  x  10   m   of  air  was  squeezed  through  the  entrance.  The  “negative”  pressure  
difference and wind speed was recorded during the flood recession.  
  

                                                                                                                
Fig. E .12: Water level, air pressure and wind speed during the flood event in November 2005.   
  

Blind valleys of Matarsko podolje  

           The Matarsko podolje is 20 km long and 2-5 km wide levelled karst surface south of Brkini  
hills.  Surface  probably  developed  as  a  base-levelled  plain,  later  it  was  dissected  by  the  dolines.  It  
gently rises from about 490 m on NW to 650 m on SE side. The lowered surface continues towards SE  
but from the highest point near the blind valley Račiška it lowers on the distance of 2 km for 200 m  
towards  SE  to  leveled  surface  ob  Brgudsko  podolje.  This  bend  is  most  likely  result  of  neotectonic  
movements.  
           Along the contact of a series of 17 brooks sinks. Most of the brooks developed blind valleys  
bottom widened by corrosion bottom. The bottoms of these valleys are situated between 490 to 510 m.  
As the valleys are incised in the border of the karst, uplifted towards SE, the blind valleys lying more  
to the south are deeper. The first, Brezovica blind valley is cut for 50 m only while the deepest is the  
last Račiška and Brdanska blind valleys. They are deepened into border limestone for 250 m and its  
bottom lies 120 m below the surface of the Matarsko podolje.  
           Possible sequence of the morphological events and dominant factors which were decisive for  
the formation of the actual relief forms were as follows: 1. The former shape along the contact with  
impermeable hills was levelled karst corrosion plain. The water flowing on it had modest gradient in  
karst and was capable of the applanation of the surface only. 2. Tectonic uplift and lowering of the  
piezometric level enabled formation of deeper drainage and deepening of the blind valleys at the edge  
of  Matarsko  podolje.  Alochthonous  rivers  no  longer  affected  surface.  3.  Surface  has  been  lowered  
since for several hundred meters and is now cutting trough many old caves. This has created unroofed  
caves or new entrances to caves. In some such a features old sediments are preserved.  
           More  than  hundred  vadose  caves  are  known  in  the  karst  plain.  Great  oscillation  of  karst  
ground water was observed. Water tracing showed that the sinking streams flow to three groups of  
springs.  
  

  

----------------------- Page 43-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                              43  

                                                                                                                                               
  
Fig. E .13: Row of blind valleys along the southern edge of the Brkini hill  and very clear difference  
between  karst  and  fluvial  relief.  From  left  to  right  are:  Brezovica,  Odolina,  Hotična,  Slivje,  Velike  
loče, Jezerina, relict one and Male loče blind valley.  
  
Podgorski kras and Socerb castle  
  
            The Podgorski kras (Podgora karst) is  about 5 km wide and up to 15 km long karst plateau  
between Slavnik mountain (1025 m a.s.l.) on the north-east and littoral flysch hills of the Koprska brda  
on the south-west. The plateau represents the continuation of the Kras towards the south-east, but is  
separated from it by an important tectonic line with a drop of about 50 m.   
            The  area  belongs  to  the  Čičarija  imbricated  structure.  Several  flysch  and  limestone  thrust  
slices are elongated in NW–SE, with a dip of about 20–30o towards the north-east. The sub-thrusting is  

well  expressed  in  the  relief  as  an  escarpment  at  the  south-western  edge  of  Podgorski  kras,  where  
carbonate rocks are thrust over marl and flysch. The plateau is planned at 500 to 450 m a.s.l.   
           Numerous shallow dolines with flat bottoms in which some sediments are preserved represent  
the  principal  surface  karst  forms.  There  are  also  several  unroofed  caves,  remnants  of  larger  cave  
systems indicating that the karst is ancient. Old caves both, empty and filled, are dissected by younger  
vadose invasion shafts in places.   
              

  

----------------------- Page 44-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                    44  

                                                                                                                                                    
  
Fig. E14: LIDAR image of dolines and unroofed caves on Podgorski kras plateau (0.5 m grid).  The  
scale bar is 100 m.   
  
Socerb  
            On  the  edge  of  the  Podgorski  kras  there  is  a  willage  and  a  castle, which  were  named  after  
Sanctus Servolus, who was a Roman Christian martyr. According to legend Saint Servolus lived here  
in a cave Sveta Jama (Holly Cave). Cave is 231 metres long and 44  m deep.  Its entrance part was  
transformed to the only underground church in Slovenia.   
                                                                              

  

----------------------- Page 45-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                      45  

                                                          Selected References  
  
Čar J. & Gospodarič R., 1984: O geologiji krasa med Postojno, Planino in Cerknico. Acta carsologica,  
           12(1983/1984), 91-105.  
Cucchi F., Forti F. & Ulcigrai F., 1994: Lowering of karst surface by corrosion. Acta carsologica, 3, 55-62.  
Dreybrodt,  W.,  Gabrovsek,  F.,  and  Romanov,  D.,  2005,  Processes  of  speleogenesis:  A  modeling  approach:  
           Carsologica, v. 4: Ljubljana, Založba ZRC, 375 p.  
Gams I., 1974: Kras. Slovenska matica, 359 pp., Ljubljana.  
Gams I., 2003: Kras v Sloveniji v prostoru in času. Založba ZRC, ZRC SAZU, 516 pp., Ljubljana.  
Gospodarič R., 1976: Razvoj jam med Pivško kotlino in Planinskim poljem v kvartarju. Acta carsologica, 7, 5-139.  
Gospodarič R., 1981: Generations of speleothems in the Classical Karst of Slovenia. Acta carsologica, 9 (1980), 90- 
           110.  
                                                                                                                                       th 
Gospodarič R. & Habič P. (Eds.), 1976: Underground water tracing, Investigations in Slovenia 1972-1975. 3    
           Symposium on Water Tracing (SWT) Ljubljana–Bled 1976, Institute of Karst Research, 312 pp.,  
           Ljubljana.  
Grund A., 1914: Der geographische Zyklus im Karst. Geschichte der Erdkunde, 52, 621-640.  
Habič P., 1982: Kraški relief in tektonika. Acta carsologica, 4, 23-43.  
Kranjc A., 1997: Introduction. In: Kranjc A. et al., Eds: Kras. Slovene Classical Karst, 11-17, Znanstvenoraziskovni  
           center SAZU, Inštitut za raziskovanje krasa, Ljubljana.  
Krivic P., Bricelj M., Trišič N. & Zupan M., 1987: Sledenje podzemnih vod v zaledju izvira Rižane. Acta  
           carsologica, 16, 83-104.   
Melik A., 1955: Kraška polja Slovenije v pleistocenu. Dela Inštituta za geografijo SAZU, 3, 163 pp., Ljubljana.  
Mihevc A., 2001b: Speleogeneza Divaškega krasa. Zbirka ZRC, 27, 180 pp., Ljubljana.  
Mihevc A., 2007: The age of karst relief in West Slovenia. Acta carsologica, 36/1, 35-44.  
Placer L., 1981: Geološka zgradba jugozahodne Slovenije. Geologija, 24/1, 27-60, Ljubljana.  
Placer L., 1999: Contribution to the macrotectonic subdivision of the border region between Southern Alps and  
           External Dinarides. Geologija, 4, 223-255, Ljubljana.  
Placer, L., Vrabec, M., Celarc, B., 2010: The bases for understanding of the NW Dinarides and Istria peninsula.  
           Geologija. 53/1, 55-86.   
Prelovšek, M., Šebela, S., Turk, J., 2012 Spremljanje temperature zraka in CO2 v Postojnskem jamskem sistemu  
           ob povečanem številu obiskovalcev. V: KUHAR, Miran (ed.). 17. strokovno srečanje Slovenskega  
           združenja za geodezijo in geofiziko, Ljubljana, 26. januar 2012. Raziskave s področja geodezije in  
           geofizike2011, 31-35, Ljubljana.  
Radinja D., 1985: Kras v luči fosilne fluvialne akumulacije. Acta Carsologica, 14-15, 99-108.   
Roglič J., 1957: Zaravni u vapnencima. Geografski glasnik 19, 103-134, Zagreb.  
Shaw T., 1992: The History of Cave Science, the Exploration and Study of Limestone Caves, to 1900. Sydney  
           Speleological Soc., 338 pp., Broadway.   
Stepišnik U., 2004: The origin of sediments inside the collapse dolines of Postojna karst (Slovenia). Acta carsologica,  
           33/1, 237-244.  
Šebela S., 1998b: Tektonska zgradba sistema Postojnskih jam. Založba ZRC, 18, 112 pp., Ljubljana.  
Šebela S. & Sasowsky I., 2000: Paleomagnetic dating of sediments in caves opened during highway construction  
           near Kozina, Slovenia. Acta carsologica, 29/2, 23, 303-312.  
Turk, J.: Dynamics of underground water in the karst catchment area of the Ljubljanica springs. Carsologica 11,  
           ZRC Publishing, 136, Ljubljana.   
Zupan Hajna N., 1992: Mineralna sestava mehanskih sedimentov in nekaterih delov slovenskega krasa. Acta  
           carsologica, 21, 115-130.  
Zupan Hajna N., Mihevc, A., Pruner, P., Bosák, P., 2008: Palaeomagnetism and magnetostratigraphy of karst  
           sediments in Slovenia, Cartologica 8, Založba ZRC SAZU, 266, Ljubljana.   
Mihevc, A., Zupan Hajna, N., Prelovšek, M., 2010: Introduction to the Dinaric Karst. Karst Research Institute at  
           ZRC SAZU, 49-66, Ljubljana.  

  

----------------------- Page 46-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                    46  

                                                                ABSTRACTS  
                                                                              
               Inside-out solution of carbonate clasts - an analogue model for hypogene karstification  
                                                     Ivana Adžić*, Tihomir Marjanac**  
* Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, email: ivana7x565@gmail.com  
** Department of geology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, email, marjanac@geol.pmf.hr  
  
Voids  in  Miocene  (Badenian)  limestone  of  the  Medvednica  Mt.  in  Croatia,  locally  known  as  "Litavac",  were  
recognized as  solution casts  of Upper Triassic dolomite fragments by  Zebec (1975). These  voids are actually  
micro-caverns  since  they  occur  inside  partly  dissolved  dolomite  clasts.  Identical  micro-caverns  are  also  
recognized in limestone cobbles of Jurassic age in Pleistocene coarse-grained deltaic conglomerates of Seline in  
Northern  Dalmatia.  The  clasts  in  Litavac  are  dark  grey,  commonly  bituminous  dolomites,  whereas  those  at  
Seline are grey bituminous crystalline limestone. In both cases their sedimentary bodies are deltaic, although the  
age is  markedly different; Middle Miocene (Badenian) on the Medvednica Mt. and Middle Pleistocene at the  
Seline  locality.  The  matrix  of  Litavac  limestone  is  micritic  calcite  with  abundant  corallinaceans  which  are  
originally aragonitic, whereas the matrix of Seline conglomerate is micritic calcite, but locally the conglomerate  
is cemented by dog-tooth calcite spar. The clasts are apparently dissolved from the centre outward, and in most  
cases the solution was only partial, leaving outer shell of the host rock preserved, which allowed for recognition  
of  their  lithology.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any  solution  of  the  clast  surface,  and  in  the  Litavac  limestone  the  
matrix,  as  well  as  aragonite  fossils  do  not  show  any  traces  of  karstification.  The  carbonate  debris  commonly  
contains  calcite  veins  which  by  the  rule  remain  undissolved  in  the  solution  voids.  The  voids  thus  represent  
differentially dissolved host rock, and the aggressive brine must have originated within the clast itself. The high  
H2S  content  in  clasts  at  both  localities  suggests  that  the  acidification  of  connate  water  was  most  likely  a  
consequence of its solution  in formation  water. The  margins of voids are lined by  small sparry calcite  which  
resembles  secondary  cavern  infill.  Partial  solution  of  bituminous  carbonate  debris  thus  represents  a  possible  
small-scale  analogue  to  formation  of  large  hypogene  caverns  of  Dinaric  Alps  where  formation  waters  with  
dissolved H2 S (sulphuric acid) dissolved fractured bituminous host rocks.  Highly bituminous rocks in Dinaric  
Alps are attributed to Middle and Late Permian, Middle and Upper Triassic, Jurassic, and Early Cretaceous age,  
although  locally  there  also  occur  bituminous  limestone  of  Palaeocene  and  Early  Eocene,  even  Miocene  age,  
which provides wide stratigraphic "window" for formation of hypogene karst.  
References:  
Zebec V. (1975): Kalcit i dolomit iz okolice sela Bizek i Dolje kod Podsuseda u Medvednici (Zagrebačka Gora).  
Acta Geol. 8, Prirodosl. istraž. 16, 287-314.  
  
  
             The importance of recognition of sink-hole process in water engineering projects in Iran  
                                                              Ahmad Afrasiabian*  
*Pars karst consulting company, Teheran, Iran, email: ahmadafrasibian@hotmail.com  
  
The  recognition  of  sinkholes  is  an  important  part  of  the  water  projects  in  karst  regions.  The  direct  and  most  
noticeable result of karstification is a special morphology that makes karst regions quite different from any other  
non  karstic  region.  One  of  the  most  representative  geomorphic  forms  characteristic  of  karst  regions  is  the  
sinkhole (doline). The direct and the most noticeable result of karstification is a specific morphology that makes  
karst regions quite different  from any other non karst region. Since these karst forms and their evolution are an  
immediate consequence of the water solution work on soluble carbonate media, therefore the full understanding  
of their morphology is required  The most representative morphological forms associated specifically with karst  
regions  are:  karren,  dolines  (sinkholes),  dry  valleys,  shafts  (pits)  caves,  poljes,  and  karst  plains.  Dolines  
(sinkholes) aside from karren are the most represented morphological forms in karst. In most cases, they are the  
result  of  chemical  action  of  water  on  soluble  rock.  This  is  the  most  important,  but  not  the  only  factor  that  
influences the formation of sinkholes. The aim of his paper is to outline this problem. As case study the result of  
research done in Hamadan. Area in S.W. of Iran where more than 40 sinkholes which were a great hazard in the  
area is discussed. It is finally concluded that in these project area beside limestone solution the over exploitation  
of ground water has great influence in creation of these sinkhole in the region.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 47-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                47  

                    Evaporite Karst on Mars: Evidence of global climate change in the recent past  
                                                 1                  1                  1                         2 
                                    Baioni D. , Serventi G.  , Sgavetti M.   & Zupan Hajna N.    
1Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra Università degli studi di Parma, Parma, Italy, email:  

davide.baioni@unipr.it  
2 Karst Research Institute ZRC SAZU, email:zupan@zrc-sazu.si  

  

The presence of soluble  evaporite minerals on Mars has been provided by OMEGA instrument on board Mars  
Express and by the Mars Exploration Rovers. Many authors suggested the development on Mars of evaporite  
karst  similar  to  that  observed  on  the  Earth  and  karstic  terrains  with  associated  possible  caves.  Moreover,  the  
presence  of  karst  landforms  and  processes  in  the  evaporite  deposits  in  different  regions  of  Mars  has  been  
confirmed  by  recent  works  based  on  the  observations  of  new  HiRISE  (High  Resolution  Image  Science  
Experiment  camera)  images  available.  The  observed  karst  landforms  strongly  resemble  the  terrestrial  karst  
morphologies and appear to be formed as  a result of flowing water as do similar landforms on evaporite rocks  
observed on Earth. On Mars, several evidences suggest that possible ice-rich deposition from the atmosphere that  
may occur as the result of changes in the obliquity of the planet. The melting of ice provided the necessary liquid  
water  for  the  solution  and  collapse  processes  observed.  The  evaporite  karst  indicate  that  the  environmental  
conditions on Mars have been much different from those that exist today, highlighting the presence of ice in the  
equatorial  region  and  providing  evidences  that  climate  change  also  occurred  in  the  recent  past  history  of  the  
planet, probably in the Amazonian age.  
  
  
                                                  Protection of karst caves in Kosovo  
                                                                Fadil Bajraktari  
Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning, Kosovo Environment Protection Agency, email:  
fadilbajraktari@yahoo.com  
  
Kosovo is located in the central part of the Balkan Peninsula, with the surface of 10.908 km2, and with over 2  

million  inhabitants.  It  has  a  favourable  geographical  position  and  is  located  at  important  transversal  and  
longitudinal roads of the Balkan Peninsula. The geological structure, relief, climatic conditions, hydrography and  
biological  diversity  are  special  features  of  the  territory  of  Kosovo.  From  geological  perspective,  Kosovo  is  
located in a very specific area. It is characterized by a distinguished diversity of geological formations. It starts  
from the old crystalline rocks of Palaeozoic up to quaternary rocks, including various types of sedimentary and  
magmatic rocks and metamorphic rocks that are less prevalent. Karst terrains in Kosovo are built from karstified  
limestone of Triassic and Cretasic ages and of Palaeozoic marble. These terrains include an area of 1.300 km2 or  
11% of Kosovo's territory. There are created numerous surface and underground forms of relief, where caves are  
the most important. Caves in Kosovo are quite common, but very few of them are researched and opened for  
visitors. The largest number of caves is found in the massifs of Bjeshket e Nemuna Mountains, Sharr Mountains,  
Zatriq  Mountains,  Drenica  Mountains  and  along  the  downstream  of  the  Mirusha  River.  Among  the  most  
important caves in Kosovo are: Cave in Gadime, Grand Canyon Cave, Cave in Radavc, Cave in Panorc, Cave in  
Dush, Peshterri Cave in Zatriq, etc. Among the most important caves in Kosovo that are known to the general  
public is the Cave in Gadim, which due to the aragonite crystals of various shapes and sizes is considered as a  
rare  cave  in  the   world.   Caves  in  Kosovo  are  distinguished   with   numerous  stalactites  and  stalagmites,  
characterised  with  columns  and  lunette  decorations.  These  ornaments  in  different  shapes  and  sizes  with  
astonishing colours are present in most of Kosovo caves. Kosovo caves are distinguished also, for the rich fauna  
(especially on bats and insects) but still not sufficiently researched.  Cave protection in Kosovo is regulated by  
the Law on Nature Protection (Nr; 03/L-233). So far, five caves have been taken into legal protection in Kosovo:  
Cave in Gadime, Cave in Radavc, Cave in Gllanasellë, Cave in Baicë and Cave in Kishnarekë. Several Initiatives  
and  proposals  are  made  for  taking  under  legal  protection  the  following  caves:  Grand  Canyon  Cave,  Cave  in  
Pjetershticë, Cave in Panorc, Bozhuri Cave, Cave in Lladroviq, Cave Temeqina, etc.   
  
  
Large Dinaric karst plateaus in Croatia – differences and similarities as waymarks to understanding their  
                                                                geomorphology  
                                                                  Neven Bocić  
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Science, Department of Geography, Department of Physical geography, email:  
nbocic@geog.pmf.hr; nbocic@gmail.com  
  
Karst plateaus are, together with karst poljes, the biggest karst landforms in Dinaric karst. They are characterized  
by polygenetic and polyphase morphogenesis. In the small scale karst plateaus are big flat areas with very low  
relative relief, but in the large scale there are a lot of differences in the micromorphology. Dinaric karst plateaus  

  

----------------------- Page 48-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                  48  

can stand by itself like big plateaus or can be parts of the karst-polje depression bottoms or can be small tectonic  
fragmented and uplifted plateaus in mountainous area. In the Croatian part of the Dinaric karst there are three big  
karstic  plateaus:  Istrian  plateau  (~1400  km2),  Karlovac  plateau  (Una-Korana  plateau,  ~1300  km2)  and  North  
Dalmatian plateau (~1200 km2). This large plateaus spread over almost 4000 km2 (7% of Croatian territory and  
15% of Croatian kart area). Past researches were directed on exploration of processes and time of karts plateaus  
morphogenesis.  There  were  three  groups  of  the  theories  of  the  karst  plateau  genesis:  erosion,  corrosion  and  
abrasion  theories,  while  time  of  plateau  genesis  were  assumed  in  range  from  Mesozoic  to  Pleistocene.  This  
research   is   directed   to   the   comparison   of   location   properties,   morphogenetic   types   and   morphometric,  
geotectonic, geologic, macro and micro geomorphologic characteristics of these three large plateaus. According  
to differences and similarities of these properties one can make some conclusions of the conditions of the karst  
plateau genesis.   
  
  
                                        Detection of filled dolines by 3d surface modelling  
                                                             Mateja Breg Valjavec  
GIAM ZRC SAZU, email:mateja.breg@zrc-sazu.si  
  
This paper presents a method for determining filled dolines through modelling digital surface model (DSM) of  
the former landscapes. Starting from the thesis that anthropogenic terrain changes are a lot stronger and faster  
than natural karst processes, there are less dolines today than they were 50 years ago. We created a DSM of the  
former landscape for 1972 using archival aerial photographs. The sampled area of Logatec covers five sequential  
stereo-pairs. We applied digital photogrammetry methods to perform image triangulation and surface modelling.  
The DSM was analysed with different geomorphometric methods (combination of different GIS programs) and  
quantitatively  compared  with  the  recent  surface  and  terrain  (DEM5,  ©  GURS,  2006).  We  determined  the  
potential  filled  dolines,  their  depth  and  volume.  The  results  were  verified  and  complemented  with  field  
measurements.  
  
  
  Shallow-water carbonate succession from Jazvina locality (Gorski kotar, Croatia): an example of typical  
                           late Jurassic sedimentary events on the Adriatic carbonate platform  
                                                      Damir Bucković & Ana Markić  
Department of Geology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, email:buckovic@geol.pmf.hr  
  
At the Jazvina locality, five facies units  have been recognized; the Jazvina 1 unit (Jz-1),  with  mudstones and  
pelletal wackestones; the Jazvina 2 unit (Jz-2), with bioclastic floatstones and grainstone/rudstones; the Jazvina 3  
unit (Jz-3), with peloidal-skeletal wackestones and packstones; the Jazvina 4 unit (Jz-4), composed of shallowing  
and  coarsening-upward  cycles  with  mudstones  or  pelletal  wackestones  as  the  lower  cycle  types,  fenestral  
mudstones or pelletal wackestones as the middle cycle types, and ooid grainstones as the upper cycle types; and  
the Jazvina 5 unit (Jz-5), composed of shallowing- and coarsening-upward cycles that differ from the underlying  
Jz-4 cycles by the presence of the pisoid-intraclastic grainstone/rudstones as the upper cycle types.   
The depositional environment for the Jz-1 unit  is interpreted as a shallow, low-energy lagoon below the  fair- 
weather wave-base, situated in the inner platform region. The Jz-2 unit is typical example of bioclastic carbonate  
sediments deposited on a carbonate platform in high energy  shoals, in  which large quantities of  fossil debris,  
transported by  waves and tidal currents,  have been  accumulated. High carbonate  mud content  within the Jz-3  
unit suggests a subtidal depositional environment. However, contrary to the depositional environment of the Jz-1  
unit, rich foraminiferal content (particularly in the packestones) indicates better water circulation above the fair- 
weather wave-base and thus more favorable ecological conditions than those in the Jz- 1 unit. Within the Jz-4  
unit,  three  sedimentary  environments  with  different  depositional  styles  can  be  recognized.  By  periodically  
changing  conditions,  ranging  from  shallow  subtidal  to  oolite  shoals,  series  of  shallowing-  and  coarsening- 
upward cycles have been produced. The first two facies types of the Jz-5 unit originated under similar conditions  
as the first two cycle types of the underlying  Jz-4 unit. However, after the final emergence of the middle cycle  
types,  carbonate  detritus  (mainly  intraclasts),  thrown  onto  the  emergent  surface  from  the  adjacent  subtidal  
environments by action of storm waves and high tides, was exposed to vadose diagenesis. During these periods,  
some intraclasts developed pisoid envelopes, and internal sediment was produced.  
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             

  

----------------------- Page 49-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                             49  

    Jurassic carbonates of western Gorski kotar (Karst Dinarides - Croatia) as sedimentary signature of  
                             geodynamics within the inner Adriatic carbonate platform realm  
                                                     Damir Bucković & Ana Markić  
Department of Geology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, email: buckovic@geol.pmf.hr,   
  
The  Jurassic  succession  of  Gorski  Kotar  reveals  typical  sedimentary  signature  of  inner  Adriatic  carbonate  
platform  realm.  Due  to  its  facies  characteristics,  eleven  informal  lithofacies  units  can  be  distinguished.  Their  
origin is grouped into three depositional settings that alternated over the spacious Adriatic platform area during  
the Jurassic. These are: (1) subtidal below the fair-weather wave-base to higher-energy subtidal above the fair- 
weather wave-base; (2) subtidal below the fair-weather wave-base  with episodic higher-energy influences; (3)  
peritidal.  The  alteration  of  depositional  settings  reflects  periods  of  intensive  regional  large-scale  tectonic  
movements during the geodynamic evolution of the Western Neo-Tethys region, such as the opening/closing of  
the Dinaridic branch of the Neo-Tethys and opening of the Adriatic basin.   
  
  
    Jurassic carbonates of western Gorski kotar (Karst Dinarides - Croatia) as sedimentary signature of  
                             geodynamics within the inner Adriatic carbonate platform realm  
                                                              Damir Bucković  
Department of Geology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, email: buckovic@geol.pmf.hr  
  
The shallow-water carbonate succession of Gorski kotar (Karst Dinarides - Croatia) contains typical sedimentary  
signature  of  Jurassic  inner  Adriatic  carbonate  platform  depositional  events.  During  the  most  of  the  Early  
Jurassic, deposition was characterized by the periodic sea-bottom oscillations around the fair-weather wave-base  
when  successive  series  of  autocycles  were  formed.  As  these  environmental  conditions  existed  throughout  the  
platform, the uniformity of sedimentary events and their apparently simultaneous alternation took place.   
From  the  late  Early  Jurassic  till  the  end  of  the  early  Late  Jurassic,  platform  sedimentary  environments  
experienced a slight deepening, when micritic limestones were predominantly produced in great amount all over  
the  platform.  They  were  sporadically  and  irregularly  intercalated  with  the  coarser-grained  intercalations  of  
varying  structure  and  thickness  as  a  consequence   of  sporadic  storms  and/or  higher  tides  that  triggered  
progradations from the neighboring topographic highs, characterized with more favorable ecological conditions  
for abundant inhabitance of various organisms. This long-term  micritic dominated sedimentary interval  was a  
reflection  of  geodynamics  within  the  Peritethyian  region,  caused  by  opening  of  the  Dinaridic  branch  of  the  
Tethys on the NE side of the Adriatic carbonate platform, and the opening of the Adriatic basin on the S-SW side  
of it. Namely, this  extensional events at both platform sides caused slight and steady deepening of the Adriatic  
platform interior, with predominant carbonate deposition within the subtidal below-the fair-weather wave-base  
when predominant micritic-rich limestones originated.  
The  establishment  of  long-lasting  peritidal  conditions  observed  within  the  late  Upper  Jurassic  part  of  the  
succession,  indicate  the  shallowing  of  the  Adriatic  platform  realm.  This  was  a  consequence  of  advanced  NE  
platform margin shifting towards the S-SW, which triggered simultaneous and gradual uplift of S-SW platform  
margin. This uplifting stopped when further shifting at the NE Adriatic carbonate platform margin stopped, i.e.  
at  the  end  of  the  Late  Jurassic  when  closing  of  the  Dinaridic  branch  of  the  Tethys  began.  This  led  to  
predominance of a slight subsidence rate within the sedimentary environment that, combined with global eustatic  
sea-level  rise,  enabled  the  pronounced  drowning  of  the  S-SW  Adriatic  platform  margin  as  well  as  the  inner  
platform area during the transition from the Late Jurassic to the Early Cretaceous.  
  
  
       Facies characteristics of the upper Jurassic limestones along the road Banska vrata-Breze (Karst  
                                                            Dinarides, Croatia)  
                                              Damir Bucković* & Eduard Vasiljević**  
*Department of Geology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Horvatovac 102a, 10000- Zagreb,  
buckovic@geol.pmf.hr  
** Krapina Neanderthal Museum, Šetalište Vilibalda Sluge bb, 49000-Krapina  
  
The  facies  succession  exposed  along  the  road  Banska  Vrata-Breze  suggests  that  after  deposition  of  the  Early  
Upper  Jurassic  shallow  subtidal  deposits  of  Facies  A,  synsedimentary  tectonics  caused  the  formation  of  a  
regional connected with the open basin. On the margin of such a deeper-water sedimentary environment below  
the  fair-weather  wave-base,  deposits  of  facies  B  slowly  accumulated  simultaneously  influenced  by  pelagic  
material brought from the open sea area. By periodic shedding of the shallow-water carbonate material from the  
reefal/perireefal margin of the intraplatform trough by mechanisms of the gravity flows, triggered by periodical  
storms and/or, more likely, smaller earthquakes, the deeper-water marginal part of the trough was progressively  

  

----------------------- Page 50-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                   50  

filled up when normaly graded bioclastic intervals of facies C were deposited. When this shallowing reached the  
shallow  subtidal  the  shallow-water  allochems  and  bioota  of  facies  D  was  developed.  Therefore,  once,  the  
shallow subtidal environment was re-established, the rate of carbonate accumulation was rather high capping the  
thick bioclastic unit of facies C, resulting in further shallowing which reached the low tide and even intertidal  
levels with sporadic subaeral exposure.  
  
  
        Middle lower Jurassic coarsening-upward sedimentary signature within the carbonate platform  
                                   succession of Velika kapela mt. (karst Dinarides, Croatia)  
                                                     Damir Bucković & Josip Filipović  
Department of Geology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Horvatovac 102a, 10000-Zagreb,  
buckovic@geol.pmf.hr  
  
The middle Lower Jurrasic sedimentary succession has been formed within the interior of the isolated Adriatic  
carbonate platform area. It reveals successive coarsening-upward trend from the subtidal below the fair-weather  
wave-base   as   the   predominant   response   to   the   autocyclicity   in   the   sedimentary   environment.   Gradual  
aggradation        of   the    muddy       carbonate      material,      deposited      below      the    fair-weather       wave-base       reduced  
accommodation  space,  causing  the  sea-bottom  to  rise  above  the  fair-weather  wave-base.  Here,  more  grainy  
carbonates   were  deposited,  creating  one  coarsening  upward  cycle   with   mudstones  or  peloidal-bioclastic  
wackestones  as  the  lower  cycle  member  and  peloidal-bioclastic  wackestones/packstones  to  grainstones  as  the  
upper cycle member. During the "lag phase", the sea-bottom has sunk below the fair-weather wave-base, which  
enabled the formation of the next coarsening upward cycle. The progradations of the neighbouring oolitic shoals  
periodically  and  randomly  interrupted  this  process.  Oolitic  shoals  sporadically  formed  on  topographic  highs  
within the subtidal area, progradated over the surrounding environment below or above the fair-weather wave- 
base, producing sporadic coarsening-upward cycles with ooid grainstons and/or ooid-bioclastic packestones to  
grainstones as the upper cycle member. Therefore, the middle Lower Jurassic coarsening-upward arhitecture of  
Velika  Kapela  Mt.  resulted  from  interplay  of  repeated  sediment  aggradations,  interrupted  by  periodical  and  
random oolitic shoal progradations.  
  
                                                             Gypsum speleothems  
                                                     (in gypsum and limestone caves)  
                                                             Jose-Maria Calaforra,  
Water Resources and Environmental Geology, University of Almeria, Spain, email: jmcalaforra@ual.es   
  
Gypsum  speleothems  developed  in  both  gypsum  and  limestone  caves  had  been  scarcely  studied  until  recent  
decades. Recently some research groups related to the study of such caves have started a detailed analysis to see  
which  kind  of  information  these  speleothems  can  provided  especially  from  the  paleoenvironmental  point  of  
view.  In  particular,  formations  such  as  “Gypsum  Hollow  stalagmites”  ,  “Gypsum  Balls”,  “Gypsum  Trays”,  
"Gyspusm  Christmas  Trees",  Gypsum  anemolites,  Gypsum  "Chandeliers"  or  huge  selenite  megacrystals  are  
described in this work with some proposals on their speleogenesis. Examples come from limestone karsts related  
to sulfide oxidation origin and hydrothermal water uplifting such as Lechuguilla (USA) and Kup-Kutan Sytem  
(Turkmenistan)  where  the  development  of  subaerial  gypsum  speleothems  is  extremely  spectacular.  Other  
examples are from the study of large megacrystals as in the case of Naica (Mexico) and Pulpí (Spain) generated  
in thermal underwater conditions. Special emphasis on the information provided by subaerial speleothems are  
also taken into account, such as peculiar genesis of the hollow gypsum stalagmites  where the precipitation of  
carbonates   in   the   form   of   calcite   (Kart   Sorbas,   Almeria,   Spain)   and   /   or   aragonite   (Lechuguilla   and  
Turkmenistan) controls the speleogenesis of such formations. On the other hand, condensation, evaporation and  
corrosion processes control the genesis of many gypsum speleothems reaching a chemical-physical equilibrium  
in which deposition conditions are kept very peculiar for hundreds and thousands of years, as is the case of the  
trays, "Christmas Trees" and gypsum stalactites (anemolites type). In summary, this article attempts to collect  
the  information  that  gypsum  speleothems  can  provide  from  examples  all  around  the  world.  The  gypsum  
speleothems can become a good paleoclimatic proxy where peculiar paleoenvironmental situations are detected  
and can supplement the information supplied by other cave proxies like the carbonate speleothems or sediments.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 51-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                            51  

                             Cave minerals and their potential to trace past sea-level changes  
                                     M.I. Călugăr*, J. Diehl**, C. Moldovan*, B.P. Onac**  
* Department of Geology, Babeş-Bolyai University, Kogălniceanu, Cluj, Romania, email:  
monicalugar@yahoo.com  
** Department of Geology, University of South Florida, Tampa, USA  
  
In  a  non-cave  environment,  sea-level  fluctuations  are  recognized  based  on  a  variety  of  geomorphological,  
geochemical,  clay  mineralogy,  and  trace  element  proxies.  Clay  mineral  assemblages  recovered  from  various  
marine and terrestrial sites reflect climate evolution and associated sea-level fluctuations (Steinke et al., 2008).  
Caves are natural underground laboratories where crystal growth processes can be directly observed. Because the  
cave  environment  typically  maintains  constant  temperature,  relative  humidity,  and  CO2  partial  pressure,  cave  
minerals  provide  invaluable  insights  into  the  chemical  and  physical  conditions  existing  within  various  cave  
environments at the time of their precipitation (Onac, 2012). Studies of cave minerals and their relationship with  
changes of sea level are scarce. So far, calcite and aragonite were documented to precisely pinpoint past sea- 
level positions when precipitated in the form of phreatic overgrowths on vadose speleothems (Ginés et al., 2012).  
Onac et al. (2001) first interpreted a 5-cm thick fluorapatite/chlorapatite crust in Lighthouse Cave (San Salvador)  
as possibly representing sea-level fluctuations. The layers composed of fluorapatite were precipitated during sea- 
level lowstands due  to the reaction of fresh  guano  with the limestone bedrock. Chlorapatite  was deposited in  
relation with sea-level highstands when Cl- from seawater becomes available.  
Csoma et al. (2006) pointed out that by closely investigating the mineralogy, fluid inclusions, and stable isotopes  
of  such  carbonate  deposits,  the  difference  between  precipitations  under  vadose  or  mixing  zones  conditions  
(brackish) becomes decipherable.  
This presentation is an attempt to summarize past and ongoing studies aiming to link the presence of certain cave  
minerals with present and past sea-level stands.  
References:  
Csoma,      E.A.,     Goldstein,     R.H.,     Pomar,      L.   2006.     Pleistocene      speleothems       of   Mallorca:      implications  
forpalaeoclimate and carbonate diagenesis in mixing zones, Sedimentology, 53: 213-236.  
Ginés, J., Ginés, A., Fornós, J.J., Tuccimei, P., Onac, B.P., Gràcia, F. 2012. Phreatic overgrowths onspeleothems  
(POS) from Mallorca, Spain: Updating forty years of research. In: Ginés, A.  (ed), Mallorca. A Mediterranean  
benchmark for the study of Quaternary. Mon. Soc. Hist. Nat. Balears, 18:xxx-xxx.  
Onac, B.P. 2012. Minerals. In: Culver, D. & White, W.B. (eds), Encyclopedia of Caves, Elsevier, 499-508.   
Onac, B.P., Mylorie, J.E., White, W.B. 2001. Mineralogy of cave deposits on San Salvador Island, Bahamas.  
Carbonates and Evaporites, 16 (1): 8-16.  
Steinke,  S.,  Hanebuth,  T.J.J.,  Vogt,  C.,  Stattegger,  K.  2008.  Sea  level  induced  variations  in  clay  mineral  
composition in the southwestern South China Sea over the past 17,000 yr. Marine Geology, 250: 199-210.  
  
  
      Change detection analysis of karst areas: the case study of the Classical Karst and Sardinia (Italy)  
                                                                Arrigo Cigna  
UIS, email:arrigocigna@tiscali.it  
The remote sensing image change detection  analysis of important karst areas allows us to the identification of  
landuse and land cover changes  from the recent past (after the 2nd WW) to present, as a consequence of the  
human population  needs. Through aerial and  satellites image processing is possible to  highlight  if and  where  
such  changes  occur  and  their  impact  on  the  environment.  The  absence  or  a  lesser  impact  of  the  anthropic  
pressure  might  be  also  displayed.  This  procedure  is  an  effective  tool  for  achieving  sustainable  development  
indicators  as  presently  required  to  avoid  irremediable  damages.  Two  case  histories  of  typical  karst  areas,  
Classical Karst and Sardinia which are characterised by different geographical and cultural conditions, are here  
considered.  The  trend  of  the  anthropic  and  environmental  evolution  is  examined  in  order  to  guide  towards  a  
sustainable development of the speleological treasures of these regions.  
  
  
                            Process length scales in karst: from simple models to applications  
                                                              Matt Covington  
Karst Research Institute ZRC SAZU. Postojna, email:speleophysics@gmail.com  
  
Simple models often provide insight into the function of natural processes. Here I will introduce a framework for  
the treatment of the physical, chemical, and biological processes that occur along karst flow paths.  1  Central to  

this framework is the concept of a process length scale.  Process length scales have been discussed previously  
within a variety of karst disciplines, but the concept, particularly as a quantitative tool, has been underutilized. I  
will show how one can obtain length scales associated with the damping of conductivity and temperature signals  

  

----------------------- Page 52-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                           52  

within karst conduits.  These length scales allow one to make explicit connections between the signals observed  
at a karst spring and the properties of the flow paths in the system.  However, process length scales have quite  
broad potential applications beyond the interpretation of spring signals. I will demonstrate how they can be used  
to  interpret  field  data  of  longitudinally  changing  dissolution  rates  observed  along  the  Lekinka  cave  stream  in  
Slovenia. In particular, calculation of the length scales associated with different processes allows discrimination  
between various mechanisms that could be responsible for the observed changes.  The results of this theoretical  
analysis  suggest  that  the  systematic  decrease  in  dissolution  rates  along  the  Lekinka  stream  is  due  to  the  
degassing of CO2 . This was then confirmed through the focused collection of further field data. Ultimately, the  
results of this study suggest the presence of feedback mechanisms that act between stream CO2 and the incision  
process.  
 Covington, M.D., Luhmann, A.J., Wicks, C.M., and M. Saar,"Process length scales and longitudinal damping in  
karst conduits," 2012, Journal of Geophysical Research - Earth Surface, 117, F01025,  
doi:10.1029/2011JF002212.  
  
  
  Palaeoclimatic significance of a fast growing submerged stalagmite of Grotta Verde cave, NW-Sardinia.  
                       Jo De Waele*, David A. Richards**, Laura Sanna***, Sandro De Muro****  
* Italian Institute of Speleology, University of Bologna, email:jo.dewaele@unibo.it  
** School of Geographical Sciences, University of Bristol  
*** Department of Hydrogeology, University of Almeria, email:speleokikers@tiscali.it)  
**** Department of Earth Sciences, University of Cagliari  
  
Sardinia  is the  most relatively stable island of the Mediterranean and along its coast are preserved caves that  
represent a unique heritage to understand both the eustatic and the palaeoclimatic history during the Quaternary.  
In this work, Early Holocene palaeoclimatic conditions were reconstructed for the western Mediterranean region  
through  an  oxygen  and  carbon  stable  isotope  record  in  a  submerged  speleothem  from  Grotta  Verde  cave  
(Alghero, North-West Sardinia). In this cave, a wide and steep gallery developed within Cretaceous limestones  
of Capo Caccia descends from 90 m asl up to sea level, where a sump is located. The submerged part has been  
explored for over 50 m of depth below present sea level. The entire cave, in both its subaerial and subacqueous  
passages, contains several interesting continental records.  
A 6.7 cm long white and well laminated calcite stalagmite has been sampled at 10 m water depth. U/Th dating  
has given ages of 11.8 and 11.9 ky, at 66 and 10 mm from the bottom of the stalagmite respectively, placing the  
speleothem’s growth right before the Younger Dryas.  
The speleothem shows a very rapid growth rate, around 560 mm in 1000 years, one of the fastest ever recorded  
in speleothems. Although this growth rate is only indicative, it records an extremely rapid deposition of calcite,  
as the one occurred during the early to middle Holocene in the East Mediterranean. The stable isotope signal,  
moreover, shows an increase in both δ18O and δ13C, suggesting a rapid climate change towards colder and more  
                                                                                                                                            18O  
arid  conditions.  The  oxygen  isotopic  composition  directly  reflects  the  temperature  of  deposition  with  a                         
                                                                 18O value of about -1 ‰.   
value around -4 ‰ relative to V-PDB rising to a                   
Also the carbon isotopic composition with values that fall in the range of  -9 ‰ to -7 ‰, reflects changes of the  
vegetation type reflecting a low activity in the soil during a drier and colder period (-1 ‰ V-PDB).  
This  would  be  in  agreement  with  an  onset  of  the  Younger  Dryas  in  N-Sardinia  around  11.8  ky  BP,  some  
centuries later than what happened in areas located a little more to the North.  
  
  
                                 Speleogenetic Processes in Karst Modelling: An Overview  
                                            Wolfgang Dreybrodt1,2 & Franci Gabrovšek1  
1Karst Research Institute SASA, email: gabrovsek@zrc-sazu.si  
2Karst Processes Research Group, University of Bremen, Germany, email: dreybrodt@t-online.de  

  
An overview over concepts of speleogenesis and their implementation into numerical models of cave evolution  
is presented. Basic concepts of speleogenesis are presented in an evolution of a single plane-parallel fracture.  
Such fractures can be composed into different fracture networks, which enable numerical calculations of Ford’s  
classical High-dip and Low-dip models of karstification. In these networks, we focus on the role of exchange  
flow between fractures of the karst aquifer as an important mechanism of enhancing karst evolution. Transition  
to vadose flow presents new mode of karst network evolution. We present a model which accounts for the  
relative importance of phreatic and vadose speleogenesis. From these telogenetic settings in mature fractured  
rock we turn to eogenetic karst in young porous created by mixing corrosion, e.g. flank margin caves in  
carbonate coasts and isolated caves in Florida. Further more we present an outline of recent modelling of  

  

----------------------- Page 53-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                          53  

speleogenesis in different settings such ad hypogene karst in the gypsum rock of the Western Ukraine, modelling  
of karst aquifers with interdispersed non-soluble rocks and the evolution of collapse dolines.  
  
  
  
  
                                                 GIS modelling of karst landscape change  
                                                                 Anamarija Durbešić  
Hrvatske šume, d.o.o., Vukotinovićeva 2, Zagreb, email: anamarija.durbesic@hrsume.hr  
  
The research area is southern slope of Svilaja mountain, situated in the interior part of central Dalmatia, Croatia.  
It  is  a  typical  karst  landscape,  with  the  considerable  human  impact  in  the  human-environment  interrelations.  
Coping with scarcity of water, soil and regular summer droughts, as main constraints related to Dalmatian karst,  
pastoralism  has  been  the  most  adaptable  economic  activity  and  lifestyle  throughout  the  centuries.  Excessive  
pastoralism in the conditions of Mediterranean climate, thin soil cover and especially steep slopes eventually led  
to  the  deforestation.  However,  abandoning  of  land  due  to  the  process  of  litoralization  in  the  littoral  zone  of  
Dalmatia in the second half of the XX.th century, initiated the process of natural succession and re-afforestation.  
The research is tracing the environmental and landscape change of southern slope of Svilaja mountain since the  
XIX.th  century,  through  three  main  periods:  initial  (1830-1846),  transitional  (1975)  and  recent  period  (2004- 
2010). The application of GIS model in analysing the landscape change is based on the original cadastral sources  
(State  Archives  of  Split,  Map  Archives  of  Istria  and  Dalmatia),  on  the  Institute  for  Adriatic  Crops  and  Karst  
Reclamation database and Hrvatske šume (Croatian Forests) database, on CORINE Land Cover Croatia, as well  
as on fieldwork data.  Landcover has been the main criterion used in classification of the landscape types. The  
GIS  model  of  landscape  change  is  organized  around  three  levels:  1.  landscape  types,  2.  types  of  landscape  
change and 3.trends of landscape change. GIS technology enabled the comparison of main areas of landscape  
change  and  the  areas  of  most  intensive  population  pressure.  Overall  results  show  the  importance  of  human  
impact in landscape change, both in the processes of degradation, deforestation, as well as re-afforestation, due  
to the depopulation and rural exodus, and in the process of deliberate reclamation and protection of previously  
degraded and eroded slopes.  
  
                                                                                 
                                        Gravimetric measurements in the Grotta gigante site  
                                                                 Alessio Fabbricatore  
Grotta Gigante - Società Alpina delle Giulie,Trieste, email: alex.stor@libero.it  
  
As  well  as  the  georeferenced  survey  and  the  planimetry  of  the  Grotta  Gigante  area,  the  Bouguer  anomaly  
contours  are  highlighted  by  means  of  many  surveying  stations  (about  200).  The  gravimetry  is  faded  and  
superimposed onto the planimetric map of the surveyed area.  Gravimetric measurements are one of the results  
obtained thanks to the topographic and georeferenced survey carried out in 2011 with laser scanner technology,  
by means of aerial scanning for the outside area and terrestrial scanning for the underground area.  They were  
carried out by means of a Lacoste&Romberg microgravimeter (mod.D45).  
  
  
                                 Role of sediment in speleogenesis; paragenesis and alluviation  
                                                                    Andrew Farrant  
British Geological Survey, Keyworth, Nottingham, Great Britain, email: arf@bgs.ac.uk  
  
Although the effects of sedimentation in caves have been recognised for many years, its role in speleogenesis has  
been widely underestimated. Influxes of sediment into a cave system fundamentally alters the way cave passages  
develop, either by alluviation in a vadose environment, or upwards dissolution in a phreatic environment through  
a process commonly known as paragenesis. This presentation will give an overview of the mechanisms of cave  
sedimentation,  describe  how  the  process  of  alluviation  and  paragenesis  affect  speleogenesis  and  identify  the  
characteristic  meso-  and  micro-scale  features  that  can  be  used  to  recognise  paragenetic  development.  The  
geomorphological situations where alluviation and paragenesis are most likely to occur are outlined.  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 54-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                      54  

                                              Pocket valleys on the Nullarbor escarpment  
                                                          Mateja Ferk*, Matej Lipar**  
* Anton Melik Geographical Institut, ZRC SAZU, email: mateja.ferk@zrc-sazu.si  
** Environmental Geoscience, La Trobe University  
  
The Nullarbor Plain is well known for its karst, especially caves and blow holes. However, on the edge of the  
Nullarbor escarpment pocket-valley-like  karstic  features occur,  which have not been  studied yet,  neither  have  
they been mentioned in the literature. They are most visible where the escarpment slopes to Roe Plain. Based on  
the  remote  sensing  and  detailed  field  work,  these  features  have  been  identified  as  pocket  valleys,  which  
functioned  in  past  wetter  climate  conditions  and  were  controlled  by  elevation  of  the  regional  water  table.  In  
present climate condition, intermittent  karstic  outflow is  still recognisable in certain pocket  valleys,  however,  
dominant slope processes influence their morphology.  
  
  
                                   Intertidal coastal karst morphologies in the Gulf of Trieste  
                                                Furlani S.*, Biolchi S.**, Franco Cucchi**  
*Dipartimento di Matematica e Geoscienze, Università degli Studi di Trieste, email:  sfurlani@units.it  
** Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Università degli Studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia  
  
The Eastern part of the Gulf of Trieste is characterized by rocky coasts, in particular limestone plunging cliffs  
and collapsed limestone blocks of the cretaceous-tertiary carbonate sequence or sandstones and marls belonging  
to  the  Flysch  of  Trieste  Formation.  The  structural  setting  of  the  study  area,  consisting  in  the  overlay  of  the  
carbonate platform succession on the turbiditc one and in a trend of subsidence toward NW, is responsible of the  
outcropping of limestones only in the Northwestern sector of the Gulf (Sistiana and Duino). Other outcrops are  
represented  by  olistholites  (Miramare)  and  collapsed  blocks  from  slopes  (Canovella  de  Zoppoli  and  Marina  
Aurisina).  Morphological  features  of  the  limestone  coast  overlooking  the  Gulf  of  Trieste  are  influenced  by  
geological or physical/chemical factors: the coastal slope, the structural setting, the textural characteristics of the  
limestones and the meteoclimatic and hydrological conditions.  We present new and published data collected in  
the  gulf  on  the  karstic  forms  outcropping  in  the  intertidal  zone.  Morphometric  parameters  of  coastal  karst  
landforms  and  lowering  rates,  measured  using  the  micro  erosion  meter,  have  been  compared  to  study  the  
evolution   of   the   limestone   intertidal   forms   The   studied   landforms   are   mainly   characterized   by   small  
morphologies (<2 cm) related to the bioerosion, such as pits,  microrills, etc,  while large karst features (1  m),  
such  as  tide  pools  and  shore  grikes  etc,  are  usually  rare.  Where  the  topography  is  favorable,  pinnacles  and  
grooves,  characterized  by  irregular  morphology  and  sharp  contours,  occur.  Locally,  the  intersection  between  
different  discontinuity  systems  favor  the  development  of  small  terraces  on  which  potholes  or  pools  occur.  A  
submerged tidal notch can be observed along the carbonate coast of the gulf, at depths increasing towards NW,  
from -0.6 m (Miramare) to -1.2 m (Canovella) on the blocks, and from -1 m (Sistiana) to -2.8 m (Duino) on the  
plunging  cliffs.  Limestones  lowering  rates  indicate  that  they  are  one  order  of  magnitude  higher  than  those  
measured in the inner karst and they range from 0.145 mm/year to 0.349 mm/year (Furlani et al., 2011). Their  
variability seem to be the result of the complex pattern of distribution of the intertidal morphologies in the Gulf  
of Trieste. The relative lack of coastal karst features > 1 m could be due to wide-ranging factors:  (1) the high  
vertical tectonic rates which affect the area (Antonioli et al., 2007; Furlani et al., 2011), since they could prevent  
the  development  of  intertidal  karst  morphologies,  (2)  the  subsequent  short  exposure  of  local  limestones  to  
intertidal processes, (3) the morphological structure of the coast, dominated by steep to vertical.  
References:  
Antonioli, F., Anzidei, M., Lambeck, K., Auriemma, R., Gaddi, D., Furlani, S., Orrù, P., Solinas, E., Gaspari, A.,  
Karinja, S., Kovacic´, V., Surace, L., 2007.  Sea level change during Holocene from Sardinia and northeastern  
Adriatic  (Central  Mediterranean  sea)  from  archaeological  and  geomorphological  data.  Quaternary  Science  
Reviews                                                                    26,                                                                2463–24.  
Furlani,  S.,  Biolchi,  S.,  Cucchi,  F.,  Antonioli,  F.,  Busetti,  M.,  Melis,  R.  (2011).  Tectonic  effects  on  Late- 
Holocene sea level changes in the Gulf of Trieste (NE Adriatic Sea, Italy). Quaternary International, 232, pp.  
144-157.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 55-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                            55  

                                     Limestone lowering rates in the Mediterranean area  
                         *Furlani S., *Cucchi F., **Gauci R.,  ***Gomez-Pujol L., ****Inkpen R.,   
                                            **Schembri J. A., ****Tretiach M., *Zini L.  
*Dept. of Mathematics and Geosciences, University of Trieste, Italy, email:  sfurlani@units.it  
*Dept. of Geography, University of Malta, Malta  
**SOCIB, Balearic Islands Coastal Observing and Forecasting System, Palma (Balearic Islands), Spain   
***Dept. of Geography, University of Portsmouth, England  
****Dept. of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Italy  
  
Limestone lowering rates have been measured all over the world in different environmental contexts since the  
seventies. Limestones are said to provide more reliable lithologies than other rock types because of the processes  
and forms that characterize their rock surfaces. Micro erosion meter (MEM) stations are widely distributed also  
in the Mediterranean area, both along the coasts and in the inland karst settings and are commonly used to study  
the evolution of limestone surfaces. MEM stations have been installed on a range of geomorphological sites such  
as shore platforms, plunging cliffs, caves, karst surfaces. The rock type is also thought to be significant in this  
context.  
In this paper we review studies about limestone lowering rates in the Mediterranean area and we present new  
data collected in more than 600 stations using the Micro Erosion Meter (MEM), Traversing MEM (TMEM) or  
laser scanner other in situ instruments (limestone tablets, laser scanner, etc).  
We compare limestone erosion rates measured in the study areas. In particular, we highlight some correlations  
over time  and space and between processes and their related environments. We also discuss the impact on the  
evolution of limestone surfaces.  
Our  results  suggest  that  limestone  surfaces  are  affected  by  erosion  over  the  mid-  to  long-term  while  more  
complex  behaviour  affects  the  limestone  surfaces  in  the  short  term.  Peaks  in  erosion  rates  are  affected  by  
contingency. Despite the large amount of measurements in some areas, micro erosion data are still now spatially  
limited. Moreover, data collected on steep slopes or vertical surfaces should be used with caution because not all  
the methods can be correctly applied on the aforementioned surfaces. It is recommended to use a combination of  
methods in order to compare the data.  
  
  
                            Distribution and classification of springs in Western Desert of Egypt  
                             Gebril.M. * , El-Torkomany.G.* , Kranjc. A** & Abdel-Hamid. A.*  
* Geography Department, Faculty of Arts, Cairo University, email: mai_nero2000@yahoo.com  
** Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts  
  
Karst springs in Egypt have a vital importance to all life activities in this region of hyper-arid climate inside the  
Great Sahara. Egypt has more than 1440 springs, where97   % of them located in Western Desert. The classical  
landform and geomorphic unit comprising the desert springs is the oasis/depression landscape. The most famous  
depressions  are  Dakhla  (564  springs),  Bahariya  (495  springs)  Siwa  (226  springs)  Kharga  (102  springs)  and  
Farafra depression (22 springs).  
Methods of spring’s classification in the area of study are not easy, since all classification criteria are applicable;  
the  major  methods  used  in  our  research  are:  geological  origin,  geochemical  analysis,  geomorphological  
characteristics, and rate of deterioration.   
Based on these criteria, 33 springs around western desert depressions have been classified. Water temperature of  
sampled springs ranges between 47 C and 22 C. ; PH ranges between 4, 4 and 8.4, and TDS ranges between 264  
and 7560 mg/L. Elevation of spring’s sites ranges between -16 m and 150 m below/above sea level.   
In order to prepare detailed maps of distribution and classification, Baharia depression was selected as a case  
study  in  this  stage  of  research  .  This  oasis/  depression  area  is  very  important  for  various  economic  and  
environmental issues. The area comprises a national park, ancient Egyptian monuments, traditional cultivation  
activities, and recent touristic destinations.   
  
  
       Record of anthropogenic (urban) pollution in sediments of the karst lake Modro jezero, Croatia  
                                                                Ozren Hasan  
Croatian Geological Survey, Sachsova 2, Zagreb, email: ozren.hasan@hgi-cgs.hr  
  
Modro jezero (Blue Lake) is a karst lake formed as a collapse doline. A Lake was probably formed, together  
with a neighboring Crveno jezero, at the edge of a late Miocene lake. It is surrounded by the the town Imotski  
located in Dalmatia, southern Croatia. The wider area is inhabited since Neolitic. During the 9th century AD a  
fortress was built at the edge of a lake’s steep southeastern slopes. A highest edge of a lake is at 527 m a.s.l., and  

  

----------------------- Page 56-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                            56  

the lowest at 385 m a.s.l. It is 350 x 920 m wide, with very steep, almost vertical northwestern and southeastern  
slopes. Other slopes are less steep. A lake bottom is located at 242 m a.s.l., and is 195 x 75 m wide. The highest  
recorded water level was at 345 m a.s.l.  Through the 20th century the lake has dried out 7 times. The drought  
period, which started in summer 2011, provided the access to the lake bottom, and therefore a possibility for a  
drilling campaign, performed in January 2012. A 8,2 meter long undisturbed sediment core was extracted from a  
Lake  bottom  using  a  Eijkelkamp  percussion  drilling  equipment.  Preliminary  analyses  of  magnetometric  
susceptibility, mineralogical and chemistry measurements were performed on sediment samples. Bulk mineral  
analysis of surface sediments showed that they are highly calcareous. They are mainly composed of high-  and  
low-Mg calcite. The highest magnetic susceptibility was measured in a 10 cm thick red clay layer at the depth of  
30  cm,  which  corresponds  probably  to  the  activities  when  access  walking  paths  were  made  to  the  lake  
waterfront.  The  increased  values  gradually  drop  down  core  to  the  depth  of  1,30  m  indicating  anthropogenic  
activity  and  soil  erosion  in  the  catchment.  The  rest  of  the  sediments  show  low  magnetic  susceptibility,  
characteristic for carbonate/calcite rich lake sediments.  
  
  
          Speleothems as Archives in the Production of a Holocene Palaeoclimate Record for Slovenia  
                                                               Tim Horsfield  
University of Hull, Cottingham Road, Hull, email: t.e.horsfield@2006.hull.ac.uk  
  
Much attention is focussed on reconstructing and monitoring climate on both very long (i.e. >10^6 years) and  
very short (i.e. hourly and daily observations) time scales. However, climate records on the yearly to decadal  
scale are more elusive, particularly from times which predate the routine observation and recording of climate  
using  instruments,  (pre-seventeenth  century).  Ice  cores  provide  excellent  resolution  records  for  high  latitude  
areas, but cannot be arbitrarily applied to the entire globe. As such, high-resolution records from areas such as  
the Mediterranean are scarcer, especially covering the Mid-Late Holocene period. Due to the lack of availability  
of ice cores in the area of study, speleothem studies offer the only means of palaeoclimate reconstruction in the  
North West Balkans.  
Where ice cores are unavailable, climate records obtained from speleothems often offer the next best possibility.  
Speleothems offer many advantages over other archives for palaeoclimate records; for example, the relatively  
straightforward  growth  geometries  of  stalagmites  in  particular  make  constraining  the  resulting  data  to  an  age  
model less complicated than for other archives such as lake cores. Speleothems collected from carefully chosen  
locations can be free of effects of varying cave temperature and humidity, making it easier to relate the variations  
in  signal  to  climate  effects  above  ground  and  speleothems  contain  multiple  useful  proxies,  including  stable  
isotopes and trace elements, from which climate signals can be derived. They can also be dated accurately by  
multiple methods, the most common of which is U-series dating.  
Here, we present a late Holocene climate record derived from two stalagmites, SLO-1 and SLO-2, which were  
collected from Jazbina cave, Slovenia. SLO-1 and SLO-2 are clean, with little sign of detritus. They also grew at  
exceptionally high growth rates (~0.28mmyr-1) to impressive lengths (2.2m and 1.4m, respectively) and show  
little kinetic effects (Hendy tests show R2 < 0.3). Together, they promise a remarkably clear record of Slovenian  
climate.  A  1mm-resolution  (~3-4  years/sample)  stable  isotope  record  for  the  period  ~2000-590  years  BP  has  
been  collected,  which  displays  evidence  of  documented  climate  variations,  in  line  with  documented  glacier  
fluctuations. A higher resolution (0.1mm) record is also presented for the period ~625-590 years BP, as well as  
trace element data collected by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES).  
Exploited down their entire length, the two stalagmites together form a long continuous record stretching back to  
the beginning of the Holocene, with a period of overlap from ~4.5-9.1ka BP, which allows for cross validation of  
the data between them. This will result in a highly resolved, continuous climate record for the region.  
                                                                          
                                                                          
 Environmental changes during Late Pleistocene and Holocene in the karstic lakes along eastern Adriatic  
                                                                     coast  
                                                              Nikolina Ilijanić  
Croatian Geological Survey,email: nilijanic@hgi-cgs.hr  
  
Environmental changes can be tracked based on informations from a variety of sources in lakes and lacustrine  
sediments. These sediments contain paleoenvironmental information that can reflect changes on local or regional  
scales. Such changes can be better understood by mineralogical and geochemical studies. Observations of the  
clay  minerals  were  made  from  three  lakes  along  the  eastern  part  of  the  Adriatic  Sea:  Vrana  Lake  (northern  
Adriatic), Bokanjačko blato and Baćinska lakes (southern Adriatic). Vertical cores were approximately 7-10 m  
long. The multyproxy study of the period spanning the transition of the Late Glacial to the Holocene included  
studies  of  change  in  clay  composition  between  glacial  and  interglacial  lake  samples  assuming  transformation  

  

----------------------- Page 57-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                         57  

processes  in  the  soils  from  the  catchments.  Clay  mineral  assemblages  were  determined  by  X-ray  diffraction  
(XRD  analysis)  in  order  to  model  the  environment.  Dominant  clay  mineral  phases  are  illite,  chlorite  and  
kaolinite. Clay mineral abundances and clay-mineral ratios are used to reconstruct the weathering conditions. In  
sediments, clay minerals may be originally detrital, diagenetic or neoformed. Mineralogical results are compared  
with palaeomagnetic-derived time scale. Clay data are further compared with diatom and pollen core material.  
The evolution of clay derived climate proxies (kaolinite/chlorite ratio) is compared between locations. The cold  
and dry periods during the glacial times were responsible for physical weathering and thus contribution of higher  
amounts of chlorite and illite, as they are less sensitive to chemical weathering. The abundance of kaolinite is  
good indicator of warm and humid interglacial period caused by extensive chemical weathering. Therefore clay  
mineralogy has become more significant in understanding the changes in paleoclimate conditions and sediment  
source.   
  
  
Surface analysis of the karstic landforms in the karst of Abaliget-Orfű (Mecsek mountains, Hungary) with  
                                                                            GIS  
                                                Kiss Klaudia, Lippmann László, Móga János  
Eötvös Loránd University, Geography and Earth Science Institute, email: kissklau7@gmail.com  
  
The karst of Abaliget –  Orfű are rich in karst forms: it has many dolines, ponors, caves and gorges, too. It is  a  
typical  karst  covered  region:  the  significant  part  of  its  karstic  bedrock  is  covered  with  several  meters  of  
pleistocene loess sediments.   
We used geoinformatics analyses to get to know the morphometric parameters of the most representative karst  
forms, the dolines, and the connection between dolines and structural, geological and relief conditions. We made  
three groups of the dolines with cluster analysis and collected the differences between them.   
Because the real doline density is higher than what is figured on the topographical map, we selected one sample  
area near Orfu. On this place we measured coordinates and the most important morphometric parameters of all  
dolines and compared the dolines by size.  
  
  
                  Preliminary studies of freshwater tufa and cave deposits in Mecsek Mts., Hungary  
                                                                    Gabriella Koltai  
University of Szeged, Department of Climatology and Landscape Ecology, email: gabikoltai@gmail.com  
  
Annually laminated carbonate deposits such as freshwater tufas and speleothems are of particular importance in  
paleoenvironmental  studies  as  a  result  of  their  suitability  for  high-resolution  analyses.  Our  main  aim  is  to  
reconstruct the Holocene paleoclimate of Mecsek Mts by using freshwater tufa sites combined with data gained  
from speleothems. The basic physicochemical parameters of eight carbonate depositing tufa streams have been  
monitored on a regular basis since September 2011. Rock samples were collected for stable-isotope analyses at  
all sites and core drillings were carried out in four cases. Furthermore, in order to do a comparative analysis two  
actively  forming  speleothems  were  selected  for  future  investigations.  The  present  study  focuses  on  our  
preliminary results in Mecsek Mts.  
  
  
                                         Ice mass balance – examples from Slovene ice caves  
                                                                     Jure Košutnik  
  
Občina Domžale, Slovenia, email: jurekosutnik@gmail.com  
  
Ice mass balance – variation of ice volume over time can tell us about past conditions inside the cave, whether  
the  ice  is  shrinking  or  accumulating.  We  must  distinguish  between  annual  and  multiannual  or  decadal  mass  
balance.  Annual  cycles  are  normal  and  correlate  with  temperature  changes  inside  the  cave,  while  decadal  
changes  indicate  changes  of  caves  microclimate.  Mass  balance  can  be  measured  with  simple  measurement  
indicators, embedded in the ice. For past ice levels older photographs are essential.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 58-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                              58  

                        The origin and morphology of submarine spring Vrulja Zečica (Croatia)  
                                Petra Kovač Konrad*,**,****, Vedran, Jalžić*,**, Nenad Buzjak*,***  
* Speleological section HPD "Željezničar", Zagreb  
** Karst research society Freatik, Zagreb  

*** 
   University of Zagreb, Faculty of Science, Department of Geography  
**** 
    State Institute for nature protection email: petrakovkon1@gmail.com  
                                                                           
The occurrence and characteristics of submarine springs along Adriatic coast in Croatia are determined by the  
geological and hydrogeological  conditions of the littoral and its  higher hinterland, geotectonic relations, karst  
porosity  and  climate.  Due  to  favorable  conditions,  Velebit  Channel  located  between  Velebit  Mt.  and  large  
islands of Krk, Rab and Pag is very rich in different types of submarine springs (vruljas) and coastal springs.  
They are outlets of well developed karst aquifers fed by high precipitation in the mountain area and water from  
sinking zones, mostly in Lika region.   
The  submarine  spring  Vrulja  Zečica  is  located  in  the  SE  part  of  Velebit  Channel  7.8  km  SE  from  Starigrad.  
Although  it  was  known  to  the  divers  and  researchers  for  decades  ago,  from  2011  it  is  an  object  of  intensive  
speleological and geomorphological researches. It is a branched cave with vertical (shaft) entrance. The entrance  
is located on an inclined sandy sea bottom at a depth of 6-9 m. It is followed by the vertical passage of spiral- 
shaped plan. The start of horizontal passage is at the depth of 37.5 m. The lowest passage bottom point is at the  
depth of 43 m. After series of cave diving explorations total length of known passages is 650 m and 197 m was  
surveyed. In surveyed part it is up to 17 m wide, and up to 5 m high.   
The cave is located in the area build of intensively karstified Cretaceous and Tertiary carbonate beds (limestone  
and breccia). The passages  were formed along fissure systems of E-W, NE-SW and NNE-SSW direction. All  
observed horizontal passage parts have typical phreatic cross section. But the abundant speleothem accumulation  
indicates changes in hydrological regime of the cave in geological past. Termination of speleothem deposition is  
the result of groundwater level rising and the gradual penetration of sea water due to Late Plesitocene/Holocene  
transgression. Based on the size of stalagmites (>1.5 m long) and columns (2.5 m in height and 1 m in diameter),  
it can be concluded that vadose phase lasted relatively long. Apart from speleothems in their primary position of  
growth,  along  the  horizontal  passage  numerous  broken  speleothems  can  be  found.  It  is  a  result  of  strong  
mechanical action of flowing water throughout the hydrologic activity of the spring. It is periodically active only  
during the wet season, as a result of abundant precipitation or snow melting in higher mountain hinterland.   
  
  
                                                     The architecture of big rooms  
                                                            Stein-Erik Lauritzen  
Department of earth Sciences, Bergen University, Norway, email: stein.lauritzen@geo.uib.no  
  
The  morphology,  stress  relationships  and  collapse  mechanisms  around  passages  of  unusually  large  cross-  
sections is (“Big Rooms”) is discussed. Several large passages in Norway, Slovenia, the US and in Mexico have  
been  mapped  with  laser  techniques  at  various  levels,  ranging  from  simple  hand-held  laser  rangefinders  with  
clinometer to full LIDAR scans of great detail. Several rooms which appear as “perfect vaults” by the naked eye,  
are  in  fact  quite  dominated  by  rock  structure  and  are  far  from  “circular”,  “parabolic”  or  “elliptic”.  The  most  
common and probably strongest compromise is the A-frame structure, where one wall is a  prominent fracture  
(fault-plane) or a bedding plane. The work presented builds on support from a large number of colleagues and  
friends up through the years.  
  
  
    Limestone pinnacles in Western Australia – the result of karstic processes and microbial cementation  
                                                       Matej Lipar*, John Webb**  
*Environmental Geoscience, La Trobe University, email: mlipar@students.latrobe.edu.au;  
** Environmental Geoscience, La Trobe University  
  
Limestone pinnacles in Western Australia occur abundantly in Nambung National Park. They are up to 5 metres  
high  and  up  to  3  metres  wide  and  usually  occur  in  dense  fields  with  an  average  spacing  between  0.5  and  5  
metres.  They  vary  in  shape  (conical,  cylindrical  with  rounded  top,  mushroom-like,  or  multiple  peaks)  and  
material (laminated, bedded, palaeosoils). Most often they have been described as karstic feature, resulting from  
widening and coalescence of solution pipes. However, their formation has also been interpreted as a result of  
focused cementation, trace fossils of trees, or cemented filling of solution pipes.  
Based  on  detailed  field  work,   morphometrical  analysis  of  the  pinnacles,  thin  section  examination,  and  
mineralogical, chemical and isotopic analysis of rock samples, karstic weathering was recognized as a process  
which  has  modified  the  pinnacles’  shapes  multiple  times  during  their  genesis.  However,  the  process  of  

  

----------------------- Page 59-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                         59  

lithification by microbial cementation in a freshwater lake has played the major and basic role in the formation  
of the pinnacles.  
  
  
 The hydrodynamic profile of subsurface flows reflected by drip water in the cave, Velika Pasica, Slovenia  
                                                                     Allen Wei Liu  
National Institute of Biology, Slovenia, email: Allen.Wei.Liu@nib.si  
  
The hydrodynamic flow characteristic of the vadose zone was studied in detail in a small epikarstic cave, Velika  
Pasica,   located   south   of   Ljubljana   (Slovenia).   Hydro-meteorological   data   has   been   collected   from   four  
permanent  drips  (designated  as  VP1-VP4)  from  the  cave  since  June,  2006.  At  each  dripping  site,  continuous  
measurements  of  the  percolation  water,  which  discharged  from  the  cave  ceiling,  were  collected  at  one-hour  
intervals by means of sensors connected to a data-logger. Another data-logger with a sensor for precipitation was  
established on the surface near the entrance to the cave. The hydrodynamic  of the drip water in the cave is a  
functional  response  to  the  precipitation,  epikarst  storage  capacity,  and  non  defined  underground  structures.  
According to the speed and intensity in response to the precipitation, the drips can be divided into four types:  
“rapid response without hysteresis” (VP1); “no response with congest discharge” (VP2); “fast response with lag”  
(VP3) and “rapid response with congest discharge” (VP4). These drip water discharge patterns indicate different  
groundwater flows within the vadose zone, most of them pertain to the seasonal flow, while the extreme events  
of individual drips were clustered in distinct groups, which provided additional information on the cave cover  
structure.   
  
  
  Hydrological Inter-Relations between Cerkniško and Planinsko Karst Poljes –Dynamics of Surface and  
                                                            Groundwater Interaction  
                                              Anja Maglica*, Josip Rubinić*, Metka Petrič**  
*Faculty of civil engineering, University of Rijeka, email: anja.maglica@gmail.com  
** Inštitut za raziskovanje krasa ZRC SAZU, Titov trg 2, Postojna  
  
The  paper  presents  results  of  the  conducted  hydrological  analyses  of  surface  waters  and  groundwaters  in  
Cerkniško and Planinsko karst poljes, both at a long-term and intra-annual scale. The focal point of the analysis  
is the rate of  surface and  groundwater reaction and establishment of  inter-relations  under extreme conditions.  
Long-term values of characteristic annual discharges and their trends were also analyzed. During the conducted  
analyses, both original weather data series as well as their modular values were used.   
  
  
                             Appraisal of Environmental Conditions In Postojna Cave, Slovenia  
                         Magda Mandić*, Andrej Mihevc** Albrecht Leis***Ines Krajcar Bronić****  
*Physics Department, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, email: magdamandic@yahoo.com  
**Karst Research Institute, Postojna, Slovenia  
*** Joanneum Research Institute, Graz, Austria  
****Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia  
  
In  order  to  investigate  stable  environment  conditions  for  carbonate  precipitation  in  Postojna  Cave,  Slovenia  
comprehensive one year monitoring of geochemical, physical and spatial conditions has been undertaken.   
Special  attention  has  been  appointed  to  characterization  of  stable  isotope  composition  of  speleothems  (old,  
modern and recent carbonates), drip and river water, together with cave and outside air.  
Postojna  Cave  is  one  of  the  most  famous  karst  caves  in  South  Eastern  Europe  visited  by  numerous  tourists.  
There  is  evidence  of  vegetation  change  during  the  past  and  recently  also  of  land  use  change,  as  well  as  of  
modification of a cave structure itself.   
The appraisal of these changes can give us information whether they influence on speleothem formation, and if it  
is  possible  to  determine  stable  chemical  and  isotopic  composition  to  interpret  the  proxy-data  stored  in  
speleothems and to estimate paleotemperature and other paleoenvironmental conditions.   
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 60-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                        60  

Discontinuity surfaces related to subaerial exposure of shallow-water platform carbonates (Early Jurassic  
                                           of Gorski kotar and Velebit Mt., Croatia)  
                        Maja Martinuš*, Slavena Mesić*, Nikolina Ilijanić** & Damir Bucković*  
*  Department  of  Geology,  Faculty  of  Science,  University  of  Zagreb,  email:  maja.martinus@geol.pmf.hr,  
slavena.mesic@gmail.com, buckovic@geol.pmf.hr  
** Croatian Geological Survey, email: nikolina.ilijanic@hgi-cgs.hr  
  
Area of Gorski kotar and Velebit Mt. are mainly built of Mesozoic carbonate deposits, which were formed on a  
vast Adriatic Carbonate Platform (AdCP). From the late Early Jurassic until the end of the Cretaceous, the AdCP  
was an area of carbonate production that resulted in an up to 5 km thick succession of shallow marine carbonates  
and was punctuated by periods of subaerial exposure and several pelagic drowning episodes. The subject of this  
research is Lower Jurassic carbonate succession with common discontinuity surfaces, which is nowadays well  
exposed in the area of Gorski kotar (locality Gornje Jelenje) and Velebit Mt. (localities Kubus and Mali Alan).  
The biostratigraphic age of the studied succession ranges from the latest Hettangian to the Late Pliensbachian.  
The  aim  of  our  work  is  to  describe  and  interpret  macro-  and  microscopic  features  observed  on  discontinuity  
surfaces  (DS),  which  can  be  related  to  ancient  subaerial  exposure  of  this  shallow-water  platform  carbonates.  
In the  studied section, emersion surfaces are characterized by subaerial exposure ranging  from (1) occasional  
influence  of  meteoric  waters  (development  of  diagenetic  discontinuities),  (2)  intermittent  subaerial  exposure  
(inter-  to  supratidal  hardgrounds)  to  (3)  prolonged  exposure  leading  to  pedogenesis  and/or  karstic  dissolution  
[palaeosols (3a) and paleokarst/microkarst (3b)].  
(1)   Diagenetic   discontinuities   show   meteoric   influence   visible   only   in   thin-sections   as   dissolution   and  
recrystallization  of  skeletal  and  nonskeletal  particles,  and  vadose  cements  (pendant  and  meniscus  cements).  
These   features   indicate   periods   of   occasional   influence   of   meteoric   waters   without   subaerial   exposure.  
Diagenetic discontinuities are overlain by rocks showing features of marine diagenesis.  
(2) Inter- to supratidal hardgrounds (HG) show circumgranular and desiccation cracks (macro-  and microscopic  
scale), sheet cracks, brecciation, birdseyes, black pebbles, and pisoids. These diagenetic features imply formation  
by repeated sediment drying and wetting in subaerial conditions. Fillings of the polygonal desiccation cracks are  
preserved  on  many  bedding  surfaces,  but  tepee  structures  have  been  seen  only  rarely.  Many  microbial  and  
fenestral limestone laminites are capped by dolomitic crusts with dolomitization being most intense in the upper  
part  of  the  bed  and  penetrating  downwards  for  about  10  cm.  Some  bedding  surfaces  covered  by  such  
stromatolites show strong reddish-brown to dark reddish staining (possibly by iron oxides) indicating oxidation  
during  subaerial  exposure.  Stained  surfaces  often  show  laminated  microcrystalline  carbonate  in  thin-sections,  
i.e., incipient calcretization. However, the possibility that this alteration is due to outcrop weathering should also  
be taken into account. Possible vertebrate footprints have been found on the top of one inter- to supratidal HG.  
(3a)  Palaeosols  show  features  of  incipient  soil  development,  plant  activity,  and  vadose  conditions  indicating  
prolonged  subaerial  exposure.  In  the  field,  they  show  irregular  relief  and  a  brecciated  appearance  due  to  
dissolution   processes   and   rhizoturbation.   The   alteration   of   limestones   (dissolution,   recrystallization,   and  
calichification)  reaches  10–20  cm  into  the  strata  below  the  DS  and  is  characterized  by  reworked  lithoclasts  
within a brownish to yellow clayey matrix. Preliminary XRD analyses of clayey matrix show the presence of  
illite. Contact with the overlying bed is mostly sharp and a thin clayey covering is rarely preserved on the upper  
bedding  plane,  probably  because  of  the  erosion  during  the  following  marine  flooding.  Blackened  clasts  
comparable  to  the  black  pebbles  typical  of  pedogenic  settings  are  observed.  Microfacies  analysis  revealed  
characteristic  circumgranular  cracking,  solution  vugs,  and  root-related  structures  (tubular  branched  voids  of  
decayed roots filled with sparite, alveolar-septal and nodular fabrics, i.e. glaebules).  
(3b) Paleokarst (microkarst) surfaces show dissolution vugs and fissures penetrating not more than 15–20 cm  
into  the  bed  and  never  reaching  into  the  underlying  bed.  Irregular  cracks  and  fissures  pervade  the  bed  
perpendicularly in relation to the upper bedding plane, indicating their paleokarst character and excluding the  
possibility that they result of Recent karstification. Fissure walls are sharp, indicating that dissolution occurred in  
completely lithified rock. The fissure infill contains many angular millimetre to centimetre sized fragments of  
host rock and, on rare occasions, yellow to brown clayey to marly sediment. Small dissolution cracks and voids  
seen in thin-sections sometimes have a brownish coating preserved on their walls, indicating ancient corrosion in  
subaerial conditions.  
Discontinuity surfaces related to subaerial exposure, recognized in the studied succession, represent breaks  in  
sedimentation  occurring  periodically  on  the  shallow  marine  carbonate  platform.  Their  formation  is  dependent  
upon  many  interrelated  factors,  such  as  platform  morphology,  subsidence  rate,  high-frequency  and  low- 
amplitude sea-level changes,  action of  waves and currents, climate and other locally active processes  such as  
wind  patterns  and  nutrient  levels.  It  can  be  assumed  that  the  duration  of  emergence  events  that  produced  
palaeosols, paleokarst or inter- to supratidal HG-s was not long, due to the fact that features of mature palaeosols  
or  paleokarst  were  not  found.  Nevertheless,  common  subaerial  exposure  -  related  discontinuities  bring  into  
question the stratigraphic completeness of the studied succession and give valuable information about carbonate  

  

----------------------- Page 61-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                     61  

platform evolution. Also, parts of the succession with abundant discontinuity surfaces (e.g. the one of earliest  
Pliensbachian age) can be used as useful field markers for stratigraphic correlation.  
  
           New insights into the functioning of the Lurbach system (Central Styrian Karst, Austria)  
                           Cyril Mayaud*, Thomas Wagner*, Ralf Benischke** & Steffen Birk*  
 * Institute for Earth Sciences, University of Graz, Austria, email:cyril.mayaud@uni-graz.at,  
 thomas.wagner@uni-graz.at, steffen.birk@uni-graz.at  
 * Department of Water Resources Management, Institute for Water, Energy and Sustainability, Joanneum  
 Research Forchungsgesellschaft mbH,Graz, Austria, email: ralf.benischke@joanneum.at  
   
 Karst aquifers are widespread (~20% of the ice-free emerged areas are constituted of limestone or similar other  
 karstifiable rocks; FORD & WILLIAMS, 2007) and well-known for their large heterogeneities essentially due  
 to a triple porosity, a duality in their storage and a dual flow behaviour. These features need to be addressed in  
 groundwater modelling. Because karstic waters represent an important part of the water supply for the world’s  
 population  (20-25%;  FORD  &  WILLIAMS,  2007)  but  are  highly  vulnerable  to  chemical  and  bacterial  
 contamination,  and  under  pressure  by  an  intensive  agricultural  use,  it  is  necessary  to  improve  the  global  
 understanding  of  processes  which  govern  flow  through  karst  aquifers  and  to  assess  how  changes  in  these  
 systems might influence the spring behaviour over time.  The here investigated aquifer belongs to the Lurbach  
 system, a 22.3 km2 binary karst  catchment located 15 km north of Graz, in the Central Styrian Karst, Austria.  
 The  Lurbach  drains  the  upper  low-permeable  part  of  the  catchment  and  disappears  into  the  Lurgrotte  cave,  
 some hundred meters after it enters the karstified area. Then, the water flows through the limestone massif and  
 resurges at the Hammerbach spring and the Schmelzbach outlet at the western border of the catchment. Spring  
 hydrograph  analyses  suggest  that  a  change  in  behaviour  happened  in  the  system  between  2005  and  2009.  
 Previous work showed that a redistribution of sediments within the conduits of the Hammerbach network could  
 explain  this  temporary  behaviour  (WAGNER  et  al.,  2011;  MAYAUD  et  al.,  2011).  The  present  study  uses  
 MODFLOW to investigate whether the behaviour can be reproduced using different hypotheses like a reservoir  
 filling and emptying water over the time.  The role of turbulent flow is also investigated using the equivalent  
 porous  media  approach  of  the  Conduit  Flow  Process,  a  MODFLOW-compatible  package  developed  by  the  
 USGS (SHOEMAKER et al., 2008). The study focuses first on the behaviour of the Hammerbach spring where  
 long continuous time series are available; then we investigate the interactions of the Hammerbach/Schmelzbach  
 system where overflow from the Hammerbach system to  the  Schmelzbach system is known to occur at high  
 water levels.  
 References:  
  FORD D., & WILLIAMS P. 2007. Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
 MAYAUD C., WAGNER T., BENISCHKE R., & BIRK S. 2011. Changes in the hydrological behaviour of a  
 karst aquifer (Lurbach system, Austria). Proc. H2Karst, 9th Conference on Limestone Hydrogeology, Besançon  
 (France) 1-4 Sep. 2011, pp. 331-334.  
 SHOEMAKER W.B., KUNIANSKY E.L., BIRK S., BAUER S., & SWAIN E.D. 2008. Documentation of a  
 Conduit Flow Process (CFP) for MODFLOW-2005. U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Methods 6-A24.   
 WAGNER T., MAYAUD C., OSWALD S., RINDER T., LEIS A., STADLER H., BENISCHKE R., & BIRK  
 S. 2011.  Understanding intercatchment flow in a karst aquifer  –  using the Lurbach system  example (Eastern  
 Alps – Austria). Geophysical Research Abstracts, Vol. 13, EGU2011- 7962, EGU General Assembly 2011.  
  
  
 Karst systems relationships and their influence on transport of potential leachate contamination at Mole  
                                                   Creek, Tasmania, Australia.  
                                                             Sarah McNab  
GHD Pty Ltd, 2 Salamanca Square, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, email: Sarah.McNab@ghd.com  
  
The Mole Creek Karst of northern Tasmania is an internationally recognised system of high conservation value,  
encompassing the UNESCO World Heritage listed Marakoopa Cave. However, land tenure is highly fragmented  
in the region, arising in conflicting land uses that impact significantly on  water quality and cave biodiversity.  
Poor management practices have threatened  the environmental integrity of this karst system for many decades,  
including the siting of a municipal landfill within solution sinkholes. The decommissioned Mole Creek Refuse  
Disposal Site (RDS) is located on a surface drainage divide within highly karstified Gordon Group limestone of  
Ordovician age. Continuing leachate development within the landfill pits may be flushed directly into the aquifer  
through a largely unfiltered pathway. This aquifer has long been hypothesised to drain via Bachelors Spring into  
Sassafras Creek, an untreated domestic and agricultural water supply and important habitat for several species of  
cave  fauna.  As  a  result  of  the  incomplete  understanding  of  active  processes  affecting  the  landfill,  the  local  
environmental authorities could not establish how it may be continuing to influence the karst system.  

  

----------------------- Page 62-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                    62  

A  hydrogeological  study  was  designed  to  identify  the  karst  catchments  potentially  being  influenced  by  the  
landfill, and determine whether contamination attributable to the Mole Creek RDS is affecting the chemistry of  
water supplies within Sassafras Creek. This was achieved through (1) a water tracing experiment to demonstrate  
the  hypothesised  groundwater  flow  path  beneath  the  landfill;  (2)  a  hydrogeochemical  investigation  to  detect  
contamination  of  the  water  supply,  and  to  constrain  the  location  of  any  contaminant  source(s);  and  (3)  a  
geophysical electrical resistivity survey to model the subsurface structure of landfill pits and their likely drainage  
paths.  Geochemical  analyses  provided  strong  evidence  for  the  groundwater  flow  path  below  the  Mole  Creek  
RDS,  with  iron  and  manganese  concentrations  indicating  a  connection  between  the  sinking  point  of  surface  
waters  upstream  of  the  landfill,  and  the  water  that  resurges  downstream  from  the  landfill.  Although  the  
hydrogeochemical results showed no leachate contamination, geophysical  modelling identified direct drainage  
pathways below one of the largest refuse pits, and suggests that leachate may still be flushed into the drinking  
water supply under varying flow regimes.  
Combining several methods, this study characterised the forms and processes of the localised karst system and  
contributed to the overall understanding of the systems relationships of the protected Mole Creek Karst. It also  
served to highlight the environmental legacy problems inherited by our generation, which are largely due to a  
lack of understanding of karst systems relationships in the past. Despite the fact that the Mole Creek Karst is of  
international conservation significance, knowledge of the processes affecting the system remains incomplete and  
poses an ongoing challenge for environmental authorities.  
  
  
  
  
                                        The geomorphology of the Slovene Classical Karst  
                                                                  Andrej Mihevc  
Karst Research Institute SRC SASA, Postojna, Slovenia, email: mihevc@zrc-sazu.si  
  
Descriptions of Classical karst in Slovenia can be traced back to the 17th century when first good descriptions  
and questions about the curiosities like caves, unusual hydrological phenomena and the stony character of the  
surface and lack of water appeared.   
In the second half of the 19th century karst and karst relief as such was discovered and characteristic forms were  
identified and described. The geographic cycle model of karst evolution introduced later failed to contribute to a  
better understanding of karst. This paradigm was later modified with climatic geomorphology that emphasise the  
importance of changes of warm and cold climate with time.   
Less   schematic   approach   to   karst   geomorphology   in   recent   decades   enabled   the   development   of   new  
measurement  methods  and  the  general  progress  in  earth  sciences  and  better  understanding  on  the  processes  
involved in formation of karst features.  
The  latest  understanding  of  karst  geomorphology  in  the  north  western  part  of  the  Classical  karst  is  based  on  
considering  the  gradual  and  differentiated  development  of  individual  units  of  karst  in  conditions  of  active  
tectonics.  This  development  has  been  taking  place  since  the  Oligocene  when  marine  sedimentation  stopped,  
leading to the exposure of karst rock and the beginning of the current phase of karstification:  
Individual  structurally-conditioned  segments  of  karst  were  gradually  included  in  the  karst’s  development  and  
then began to form under varying hydrological conditions. Thus larger karst relief units or forms such as levelled  
surfaces, karst poljes, or karst plateaus and mountains were created.  
Easily recognizable and diagnostic forms appeared on larger units, including various depressions like dolines,  
blind valleys, pocket valleys, dry valleys and conical hilltops. These forms are mostly result of locally enhanced  
corrosion and can define the age and evolution of larger units.   
Besides the enhanced corrosion during this period, general denudation removed several hundred meters of rock.  
Because of that the current surface cuts across older underground karst features. On that manner unroofed caves  
and the majority of cave entrances were formed. Through these entrances it is possible to enter relict or reach  
still active water caves. Collapse dolines, which in places are the dominant relief form, formed from the bottom  
up due to speleological processes that locally caused the ceilings of caves to collapse.  
This approach to karst geomorphology requires the study of individual relief forms, study of  combinations of  
forms in space and time and study of small segments of karst. It also calls for studies of individual processes,  
primarily of corrosion or the local factors that accelerate or direct dissolution of rock.  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 63-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                          63  

            Denudation of eogenetic limestone during the last glacial cycle in a tropical environment  
   Blaž Miklavič**, John E. Mylroie*, John W. Jenson**, Richard H. Randall**, Nataša Zabukovec Logar***,  
                                                          Danko Taboroši****  
*Mississippi State University, USA, blaz.miklavic@gmail.com  
**University of Guam, USA  
***National Institute of Chemistry, Slovenia  
****Island Research & Education Initiative, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia  
  
The research was done on Guam, tropical west Pacific. Theoretical considerations as well as field data were used  
in order to estimate the denudation on reef limestone that has retained most of its primary porosity and aragonitic  
composition.  
The equation used to estimate the maximum denudation rate takes into account rock composition and density  
(porosity), temperature, CO2 levels, rainfall and evapotranspiration. For the given present conditions on Guam it  
ranges between 0.034 mm/yr (barren rock) and 0.155 mm/yr (rock with organic-rich tropical soil cover) which  
would  account  for  ~4  to  19.5  m  for  the  period  of  the  last  glacial  cycle  (~125  000  yrs).  However,  more  
conservative values of the above range should be considered as the soil layer is thin and it took some time for the  
soil cover to develop after the exposure of the limestone, and the rainfall was lower during the ice age.  
The research area, in northern Guam, is dominated by a MIS 5e coral reef terrace and adjacent ~150 m high Plio- 
Pleistocene limestone cliff. On the MIS 5e terrace, tropical Karrentische (singular Karrentisch) were observed.  
The term Karrentisch  was coined for the analogous phenomena occurring in previously glaciated areas and is  
strongly  associated  with  deglaciation,  where  erratic  blocks  lie  on  limestone  pedestals  created  by  post-glacial  
denudation.  In  order  to  distinguish  the  two  phenomena  we  refer  to  the  features  discussed  here  as  tropical  
Karrentische.  The  tropical  Karrentisch  pedestals  are  formed  of  the  MIS  5e  reef  limestone  while  the  capping  
boulders consist of the Plio-Pleistocene limestone. Such Karrentische began to develop after boulders fell off the  
cliff on the MIS 5e reef terrace after its deposition and exposure following the sea-level drawdown after the peak  
of  the  MIS  5e  interglacial  (~  125  ka).  As  the  ground  around  the  boulder  has  been  subject  to  denudation,  the  
surface immediately under the boulder has been protected from denudation and consequently a pedestal has been  
developing  under  the  boulder  forming  a  tropical  Karrentisch.  The  sooner  after  the  exposure  of  the  MIS  5e  a  
boulder fell on the terrace, the higher is the pedestal and the better approximation of denudation since MIS 5e  
sea-level fall it represents. The pedestal of the tallest tropical Karrentisch found in the research area is 5 m high  
but gives still just the minimum denudation since the exposure of the MIS 5e reef as we do not know exactly  
when after the exposure of the reef terrace the boulder fell. In order to determine the elevation of the original  
surface of the MIS 5e terrace, sea-level indicators such as sea-level notches proved to be useful as the upper limit  
of a reef terrace deposition is the sea level at the time of notch formation. Indeed, a sea-level notch is found 8 m  
above the modern surface of the terrace indicating the original position of the MIS 5e terrace.   
From the above it can be concluded that the denudation on Guam since the end of the last interglacial MIS  5e  
was at least 5 m but most probably 8 m (0.064 mm/yr). Field estimates fall within the expected lower range of  
theoretically predicted values.  
  
  
     Karst groundwater potential for water supply of settlements on Zlatibor mountain massif (Western  
                                                                   Serbia)  
    Djuro Milankovic, Nenad Doroslovac, Bojan Doncev, Nevena savicMarina, Jovanović Ana Vranješ, Dejan  
                                                                   Milenić  
Faculty of Mining&Geology, Djusina 7, Belgrade, email: djuro2703@gmail.com  
  
In  recent  decades  tourism  has  been  developed  significantly  in  the  region  of  the  Zlatibor  mountain  massif,  
consequently  qualitative  drinking  water  requirements  have  increased.  Settlements  in  the  Zlatibor  region  use  
water from the public water system, as well as from rural and individual systems for the needs of water supply  
for population and industry. The water supply of large settlements in the  Zlatibor region is outlined to use the  
water from the surface reservoir on the Crni Rzav River which, as to quality, meets the needs of the Zlatibor  
Tourist Centre and the settlement of Cajetina as the administrative centre of this tourist region.   
The  water  from  this  reservoir  is,  unlike  its  satisfactory  quantity,  of  relatively  poor  quality  (increased  muddy  
brown colour, unstable regime, the presence of heavy metals), thus significant means are being invested in this  
water treatment. Small rural settlements on the Zlatibor mountain massif, mainly, have not solved the problem of  
centralized water supply adequately; this especially refers to settlements situated in karst parts of the terrain. In  
addition to the absence of a centralised water system, the deficit of water quantities during hydrologic minimums  
and incorrectness of the water required for water supply represent the water supply problem as well. Settlements  
on  the  eastern  border  of  the  Zlatibor  mountain  massif,  where  the  problem  of  water  supply  has  been  solved  
successfully by tapping of the Zmajevac Karst Spring, make an exception.   

  

----------------------- Page 64-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                64  

The Zlatibor mountain massif is mostly made of Mesozoic age rocks. There have been singled out ultramafic  
rocks,  a  diabase-horn  formation,  and  a  carbonate  rock  complex  of  Triassic  age  within  the  Mesozoic  rock  
complex.  The  distribution  of  a  karst  aquifer  being  the  most  significant  one  from  the  aspect  of  groundwater  
reserves and the potentiality of their multi-purpose utilisation is related to the Triassic carbonate complex whose  
thickness in the Zlatibor region varies from 150 m to 750m. The karst aquifer in the Zlatibor mountain massif  
region is drained by numerous springs occurring at the contact of Triassic limestone with Neogene sediments  
along the border of Neogene basins.   
The most abundant karst springs in the Zlatibor mountain massif region are the Susicko Spring, Dobroselička  
Springs,  Zmajevac,  the  Ljubisko  Spring,  the  Gostilje  Spring,  Kotren,  and  the  Golovsko  Spring.  Except  for  
Zmajevac, which is utilised for the needs of  water supply, the remaining karst springs are not utilised for the  
purpose. Overall karst groundwater reserves draining the Zlatibor mountain massif are estimated to over 1000  
l/s,  which  with  relatively  good  qualitative  properties  impart  regional  significance  to  this  resource.  Aiming  to  
resolve  the  issue  of  centralised  water  supply  for  small  settlements  in  the  Zlatibor  mountain  massif  region,  
detailed hydrogeological explorations in the most abundant karst spring in the Zlatibor mountain massif region- 
the Susicko Spring have been initiated. Past explorations have pointed out that the minimal yield of this spring is  
about 200l/s, which gives opportunity to solve, successfully, the problem of water supply for small settlements in  
the  Zlatibor  mountain  massif  region  by  karst  groundwater  tapping.  The  significant  yield  and  relatively  good  
quality  of  groundwater  from  the  Susicko  Spring  have  given  opportunity  to  connect  central  settlements  in  the  
Zlaibor region to the Susicko Spring water system, which will bring significant ecological and economic benefits  
to this tourist region.  
  
  
   Modern calcite precipitation rates on artificial medium from Bijambare cave, Bosnia and Herzegovina  
                                                               Simone Milanolo  
Centar za krš i speleologiju, Branilaca Sarajeva, BiH, email:simone.milanolo@heis.com.ba  
  
Calcite  precipitation  rates  over  glass  tablets  located  under  three  drip  sites  in  Bijambare  cave  (Bosnia  and  
Herzegovina) have been recorded almost monthly for around one year. Recorded rates range from 0.2 to 4.7 mg  
d-1. Results are compared with several potential predictors including external temperature, rainfall, drip rate and  
composition. Differences between sites have been found to be correlated mainly to drip flow while only within  
one  site  correlation   with  calcium  concentration  is  significant.  Theoretical  predicted  values  overestimate  
experimental  value  on  average  of  a  factor  two  and  fail  to  predicted  correlation  with  drip  rate.  It  has  been  
proposed  to  modify  standard theory  by  considering  an  effective  drip  rate  lower  than  measured  drip  rate  by  a  
factor  Φ1.  This  factor  accounts  for  drip  water  by-passing  the  glass  tablet  due  to  drop  splashing.  Best  fit  of  
experimental data is obtained when around 99.9% of water is ejected during drop impingement. The order of  
magnitude is confirmed by additional laboratory experiment and comparison with literature data.   
  
  
                         Limestone Geomorphology in Abu Zneima area Western Sinai, Egypt.  
                                                       Atef Abdel-Hamid Mohamid  
Cairo University, El-Giza , Cairo- Egypt, email: atefoov@gmail.com  
  
Abu Zneima area (600 km2) is a structural headland of Gulf of Suez, some 150 km south east of Suez. The study   
Zneima area is dissected by old fluvial networks and influenced by folding and faulting-associated landforms.  
Few locals contain current geomorphic process and landforms under the hegemony of hyper arid climate. The  
aim of this paper is to analyze the geomorphic characteristics of fluvial and structural effects on the development  
of the study area. Various techniques of data collection and interpretation have been  followed, especially field  
survey, GPS data collection, digital cartography and remote sensing methods.  
  
  
                             The speleological complex of the Ponikva cave and Stijene quarry  
                                                          Jasminko Mulaomerović  
Centar za krš i speleologiju, Branilaca Sarajeva 30, 71000 Sarajevo, BiH, email:  
jasminko.mulaomerovic@bhtelecom.ba  
  
Sarajevo’s speleologists have been active in the Vareš region and Mt. Zvijezda for a long time. One of the most  
important sites is the complex consisting of the Stijene quarry and the Ponikva cave (now also a tunnel).  
There are a number of caves in the Stijene quarry, some of which have become completely filled with sediments  
in  the  course  of  geological  history.  The  quarry  workings  have  cut  through  some  of  the  channels  and  totally  
destroyed others, but some still survive in their original form. Damage from the use of dynamite in the quarry  

  

----------------------- Page 65-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                            65  

can  also  be  seen  in  some  of  the  other  speleological  features.  The  location  of  the  various  caves  in  the  quarry  
reveals that this is a complex speleological feature with several levels.  
Apart from being an extremely important and valuable speleological complex, the Stijene quarry is known to be  
one of the rare sites where bones of the cave bear, Ursus spelaeus, have been found. There are just a handful of  
such sites in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
The Ponikva cave/tunnel is one of five caves worldwide that is used as a road tunnel. A few months ago the road  
through the tunnel was fully surfaced with asphalt. The Ponikva has an active channel in which the eponymous  
brook sinks when the water table is low. When the water table is high, the swallowhole is unable to take all the  
water, some of which is evacuated through an artificial channel laid alongside the road in the cave itself. Fossil  
channels extend the full length of the cave.  
The remains of pottery vessels dating  from prehistoric times have been  found in the cave above the entrance  
(part  of  the  oldest  fossil  channel).  Evidence  of  occupation  by  Palaeolithic  man  (flint  artefacts  and  a  bone  
harpoon) has been found in one of the side channels at the other end of the cave.  
Speleologists have launched a campaign to halt all works in the Stijene quarry and to place both the quarry and  
Ponikva cave under some form of statutory protection.  
  
  
    Salt karst: A GIS model to assess the dynamic and risk phenomena under natural and anthropogenic  
                                                                  conditions  
                                                            Magdalena Naparus  
  
Tular Cave Laboratory, Florilor 3, Comarnic, Romania, email: magda.naparus@gmail.com  
  
The  dynamic  of  salt  karst  (halo-karst)  become  lately  one  of  the  most  current  research  topics  in  Romania.  In  
Romania, salt mineral is widely distributed natural resource, covering the main surface of Sub Carpathians, as  
well as the eastern and southern hills bordering the Transylvanian depression.  
This study is comparing two salt deposit areas in Romania: the salt deposits of the Meledic Plateau (natural salt  
karst area, with minimal human impact) and Ocnele Mari salt mine (anthropogenic salt karst area). Both areas  
belong  to  the  same  geomorphological  unit  (Sub  Carpathians)  and  have  the  same  geological  age.  Though,  the  
studied areas differ in their structural geology and tectonics, as well as in the human pressure, e.g. conditions  
affecting the rate of karstification.  
Meledic Plateau salt is mixed with non-karstic layers (clays and breccias). Through the salt deposit tectonics,  
these layers were included in its geological structure. Such impure salt deposits are economically unrewarding,  
so the area remained untouched, with a very rich endo- and exokarst features.   
Ocnele Mari settlement, in the Vâlcea County, Romania, is an important salt exploitation site from 1970 to 1991,  
using  dissolution  technology.  Back  in  60’s,  the  salt  exploitation  technologies  (partially  invented  in  Romania)  
followed basically the  karst processes –  dissolution of salt  was  used to produce  high concentrated brine. The  
brine was then sent by pipelines to adjoining chemical platform for further use. Yet, the high productivity of this  
technology  brought  a  dramatic  impact  on  the  landscape.  While  the  fast  subterranean  salt  karstification  was  
poorly  monitored, the over dense network of  wells on the mine  field created underground voids of enormous  
proportions.   By   means   of   echo   measurements   taken   in   1993   and   1995   by   SOCON   (Sonar   Control  
Kavernenvermessung,  Germany),  a  gigantic  cavern  of  4  million  m3,  filled  with  brine,  with  a  diameter  of  
approximately  350  m  was  detected.  This  cavern  -  one  of  the  largest  in  the  world  -  was  linked  with  the  
acceleration of karst processes by human impact.  
Soon  after,  two  collapse  sinkholes  were  formed  (first  in  2001,  enlarged  in  2004  and  2007;  second  in  2009),  
covering more than 20 hectares, with destroying the nearby settlement.  
In  order  to  map  areas  with  high  and  very  high  susceptibility  for  karst  processes  and  to  include  them  in  
vulnerability  maps,  I  have  built  a  GIS  model  using  ArcGIS  Desktop  9.3.1  software.  The  model  was  applied  
separately on both study areas, using the same parameters. The proposed GIS model is based on two series of  
three parameters (raster maps with geology, hydrographical density, DEM, aspect, slope, and land-use), and their  
combination is conceived as  a cube diagram. The combination of  these parameters indicates areas of conflict  
among  these  parameters  and  areas  of  no  conflict.  The  conflict  occurs  i)  if  three  raster  cells  sharing  the  same  
spatial  location  have  equal  collapsed  preference  values  (major  conflict),  or  ii)  if  two  raster  cells  have  equal  
collapsed preference values and the third cell has a lower collapsed preference (moderate conflict). The conflict  
area is associated with the high susceptibility for karstification.  
The model predicts two types of salt karstification: small and disparate areas (natural salt karst area) and wide  
and  continue  areas  (anthropogenic  salt  karst  area).  Also,  the  model  has  accurately  predicted  the  last  collapse  
sinkhole produced in Ocnele Mari area (2009).  
The  proposed  model  could  be  very   helpful  on  other  areas  containing  evaporites   where  an  accelerated  
karstification could produce similar dramatic events.  

  

----------------------- Page 66-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                       66  

  Late Pleistocene evolution of Antelias valley (Lebanon): speleogenic approach applied on Kassarat cave  
                                     system with implication of U/Th datations records.  
                                                             Carole Nehme  
EDYTEM          Laboratory-      Savoie      university     Technolac,      Bourget      du    Lac,    Chambéry,        France,     email:  
carole.nehme@univ-savoie.fr  
  
Lebanon landscape is characterized by tow karstic  mountain chains  with a variety of surface karstic forms as  
well as endokarstic network systems.   
A research project on Lebanon’s karst geomorphology was conducted recently by EDYTEM laboratory CNRS- 
UMR 5204, France and Saint-Joseph University of Beirut and aims at reconstituting: i) speleogenic evolution  
based   on   geomorphologic   indicators,   ii)   karstogenesis   evolution   related   with   the   downcutting   of   the  
Mediterranean hydrographic network (Antelias river), iii) palaeogeographical stages of these valleys.  
Antelias valley is chosen as one of the main karst study sites. Located 10 km north of Beirut city, Antelias river  
has  20.4  km2  of  catchment  area  and  drains  directly  to  the  Mediterranean  sea.  Tow  caves  were  selected  
downstream of the valley: Kanaan cave (fossil cavern at 100 meters a.s.l.) and Kessarat active network with 4.6  
km of multiphase canyon galleries, located between 57 and 96 meters altitude.   
A  morphogenic  analysis  has  been  completed  in  each  cave  with  a  geomorphologic  approach,  using  detailed  
cartography, cross sections surveys as well as deposits analysis.   
The study completed in both Kanaan and Kessarat caves determined a paleo-phreatic zone at 95-98 meters a.s.l.  
This first erosional level is attributed to paragenetic forms such as tubular galleries, semi tubular channel and  
anastomosis ceiling, clay deposits notches and dissolution pockets. The water level migration downstream of the  
valley has disconnected Kanaan cave from the drainage network while Kassarat underground river entrenched a  
meander  passage  below  the  initial  phreatic  level.  The  base  of  Kassarat  Vadose  canyon  at  65  meters  is  
characterized by a semi-phreatic tube, while down cutted clay deposits are located at 70-75 meters, revealing a  
probable second erosional level with a long term stabilization of the water table level around these altitudes.   
The major siphon of Kessarat river is located actually at 57 meters  and connected to Fouar resurgence spring.  
Antelias river if fed by Fouar spring, located at 33 meters a.s.l. between the Jurassic limestone and the cretaceous  
impermeable Aptien/Albien stratas. This contact constitutes the water table level of the karst drainage as well as  
the Antelias river hydrographic network. The actual stage of the cave genesis and the valley’drainage system is  
attributed to a transitory erosional phase.   
The karstic levels revealed by the speleogenic study, the first around 100 meters and the second at 65-70 meters  
are  controlled  by  a  local  base  level.  Scallops  direction  in  Kanaan  cave  showed  a  dominant  NNO  paleo-flow  
direction closest to the river location rather than the Mediterranean sea. We conclude that Antelias river thalweg  
was the base level of Kanaan and Kassarat cave at the time when the karstic active level of the valley was at 100  
meters and Antelias valley was less downcutted. Local base levels such as Antelias thalweg and Fouar spring  
existed  and  affected  the  valley  drainage  system  even  with  a  close  Mediterranean  sea  level  (1.8  km  from  the  
valley to the shoreline).   
However,  slight  differences  between  water  table  level  (Fouar  spring  and  rver  thalweg)  and  sea  base  level  
(Mediterranean Sea) are to be taken into consideration. The Aptien-Albien hydrogeological barrier could explain  
this altitudinal shifts due to time that  Antelias drainage system  would take to erode impermeable strata’s and  
then to join the sea base level.  
To  complete  the  geomorphological  evolution  of  the  valley,  prospective  studies  and  analysis  was  completed  
(Sanlaville P, 1977) on nearby uplifted sea erosion levels in Dbayeh area. Marine abrasion surfaces and deposits  
were recorded at 10-12 m., 20-22 m., 40-60 m., 85-90 m. and 100-130 m. A first geomorphologic  correlation  
between  uplifted  marine  levels  and  karst  water  table  level  lead  us  to  suggest  four  karst  genesis  phases  for  
Antelias valley:   
i)  The  first  stage  is  the  development  of  a  phreatic  zone  nearby  the  water  table  base  level  set  at  100  meters  
altitude. We suggest a sea level at 85-90 meters controlling the water table level stationed around 100 meters  
with a paragenetic rise in the karstic system.  
ii)  The  migration  of  the  water  base  level  (Fouar  spring)  downstream  of  the  valley  has  initiated  the  Vadose  
entrenchment of Kassarat cave system and Antelias drainage system. iii) The third stage in characterized by a  
stable water table level (Fouar Spring) around 70-75 meters while we suggest a sea level around 40 to 60 meters  
altitude.   
iv) The actual stage is a continuous downcutting of the karst drainage as well as Antelias hydrographic network  
to a transitory water base level located at 33 meters a.s.l.   
Considering Lebanese restraining bend as an active tectonic margin, Mount-Lebanon uplift might explain a  fast  
down cutting of the karst drainage and the hydrographic system. Recent studies revealed evidence on continuous  
tectonic  pulsation  of  Mount-Lebanon  range.  The  LFS  shortening  began  in  mid-Miocene  period  (18-15  My)  
along  the  Lebanese  restraining  bend.  A  continuous  shortening  from  late  Miocene  (7.5-5  My)  to  Quaternary  

  

----------------------- Page 67-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                          67  

period (Elias et al, 2006; Gomez et al, 2006) is believed to uplifted Mount-Lebanon range with a 1 to 4 mm/a  
slip rate (Daeron et al., 2005; Mahmoud et al., 2005) along the Lebanese fault system.   
On the other hand, sea level oscillations should be taken also into consideration when marine terraces are dated  
and  integrated  in  the  geomorphologic  model.  To  confirm  the  evolution  model  we  proposed,  datations  are  
required to correlate karstic level with uplifted marine terraces. However, continuous urban extensions of coastal  
cities to nearby mountains slopes are deteriorating marine surfaces and deposits actually more difficult to find.  
Consequently,  the  speleogenic  approach  could  contribute  in  defining  an  approximate  age  to  a  karstic  level  
controlled by a nearby sea level.  
U/Th datations on stalgimite K2-2010 in Kanaan cave, attributed to the first karst stage, showed an age around  
194  ka  ±  0.98,  while  K1-2010,  a  stalagmite  developed  on  collapsed  block  after  a  vertical  drawdown  stage,  
revealed an age around 127 ka ± 0.74. We conclude that Kanaan cave was in place clearly before 200 000 years.  
Consequently, we suggest late Pleistocene period to Antelias valley at the time when the river thalweg and the  
karstic level was around 95-100 meters a.s.l. A continuous entrenchment of the valley from late Pleistocene till  
Holocene period is proposed with a probable intermediate river thalweg and karstic level stationed around 70-75  
meters.   
Unfortunately, no  datations were conducted on marine deposits located on elevated sea levels to complete the  
geology  age  model  we  proposed.  Only  few  C14  and  U/Th  datations  on  low  uplifted  marine  terraces  (0.8-1.2  
meters)  revealed  late  Holocene  ages  (Morhange  et  al.,  2006)  and  late  Pleistocene  ages  (20-25  meters).  
Correlations between high elevated lebanese terraces with marine terraces in other Levant region are too soon to  
be completed, due to the few results we obtained as well as differences in slip rates between lebanese restraining  
bend and other active margins.   
Therefore, further observations and U-Th datations on calcite will be completed in Jeita cave, in Kelb valley to  
correlate the geomorphologic model in Antelias valley to Kelb valley. Cosmogenic datations on quartz will be  
also conducted in the near future, as the deposits analysis in Kessarat network revealed cave infillings rich in  
quartz and attributed to the first karst genesis stage. Quartz datations will better insert high karstic level age in  
the geology history of Lebanon.   
  
  
                          Ikaite in the Scărisoara Ice Cave (Romania): origin and significance  
                                                             Bogdan P. Onac  
University of South Florida, email: bonac@usf.edu  
  
Ikaite,  CaCO3·6H2O,  is  a  rare,  metastable  carbonate  mineral  first  identified  in  submarine  reef-like  columns  
growing  from  the  bottom  of  Ikka  Fjord  (SW  Greenland)  at  temperatures  between  -1.9  and  7ºC.  Inactive  tufa  
towers found along the shore of Mono and Pyramid lakes in western US are believed to represent former ikaite  
structures that were converted to calcite. These sites, along with two others in Japan and Patagonia are so far the  
only terrestrial occurrences of ikaite. Notes reporting its presence in ice accumulations and icicles around some  
saline  springs  from  Shiowakka  (Japan),  prompted  us  to  search  for  ikaite  in  the  perennial  ice  deposit  of  the  
Scărisoara Ice Cave.  
A reconnaissance mineralogical study undertaken between 1996 and 2000 pointed out the presence in the glacial  
and periglacial sectors of the cave of large surfaces covered with thousands of micro-pearls (<400  µm), pearl  
conglomerates,        fibrous    efflorescent      calcite   (var.    lublinite)    as   well    as   monohydrocalcite.         Except     for  
monohydrocalcite,  the  deposition  of  all  the  other  mineral  phases  are  triggered  by  freezing  of  dripping  and  
seeping  water.  In  addition,  phosphate  minerals  and  abundant  organic  material  (leaves,  branches,  logs)  are  
common in many parts of the cave.  
Two types of ikaite were positively identified by XRD and environmental scanning electron microscope studies:  
1) various crystal shapes (< 670 µm across) forming white-light cream patchy accumulations within certain ice  
layers  and  at  the  surface  of  ice  stalagmites/domes,  and  2)  glendonite  (calcite  pseudomorphs  after  ikaite),  
typically shaped as rosettes (up to 4.7 cm). Glendonite samples were found protruding out from the ice tongue in  
the Great Reservation. Considering the particular cave settings and microclimate (temperature is always below  
2ºC) in which the two types of ikaite occur, it appears that they were cryogenically precipitated. This preliminary  
conclusion  is  largely  based  on  similarities  between  the  stable  isotope  signature  in  cryogenic  calcites  and  two  
glendonite samples recovered from the Great Reservation in Scărisoara Ice Cave.  
The high δ13C (0 to 10‰) and δ18O (-1 to -10‰) values, typical for cryogenic carbonates in Scărisoara Ice  
Cave, are due to rapid water freezing that is accompanied by swift kinetic CO2 degassing. In comparison to the  
cryogenic  calcite  samples,  the  very  low  δ13C  values  (-14‰)  found  for  the  ikaite  precursor  of  glendonite,  
implicate  biogenic  CO2,  as  the  main  carbon  source  for  its  precipitation.  Therefore,  glendonites  may  be  
considered  useful  indicators  of  warm/wet  conditions  outside  the  cave,  time  when  biogenic-derived  CO2-rich  
waters seeped into the cave.  

  

----------------------- Page 68-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                68  

Future  work  on  these  carbonate  precipitates  may  shed  light  on  the  relationship  between  the  oxygen  isotope  
values in the ice layers and ikaite’s temperature-restricted field of formation. The aim of this study is 1) to infer  
the δ18O  from  hydration  water of ikaite and cross-calibrate it against the δ18O obtained from ice  layers that  
contain ikaite and 2) better understand the precipitation of ikaite and its transformation into anhydrous carbonate.  
The  results  can  serve  as  basis  to  further  explore  other  paleoclimatic  and  paleoenvironmental  implications  the  
presence of ikaite in perennial ice cave accumulations might have.  
  
  
                        Mravljetovo brezno v Gošarjevih rupah cave: dissolution of dedolomite  
                     1                  2                                    3                          4  
Bojan Otoničar , Andrzej Tyc , R. Armstrong L. Osborne , Grażyna Bzowska 
1Karst Research Institute, Slovenia, email: otonicar@zrc-sazu.si;  
2Department of Geomorphology, University of Silesia, email: andrzej.tyc@us.edu.pl;  
3Faculty of Education & Social Work, email: armstrong.osborne@sydney.edu.au  
4Department          of     Geochemistry,           Mineralogy          and      Petrography,          University        of     Silesia,      email:  

grazyna.bzowska@us.edu.pl;  
  
The Cave MravljetovoBrezno v GošarjevihRupah (length  = 400m; depth = 74m; altitude of the entrances =  
613m and 618m) is located at the eastern flank of the Sora Valley some 100 m above the river on the lower part  
of elongated mountain ridge VrhSvetihTrehKraljev in RovtarskoHribovje, the pre-alpine region in the western  
part of central Slovenia.   
The mountain comprises a few hundred meters thick sequence of Middle Permian to Middle Triassic carbonate  
and  siliciclastic  rocks  with  intercalations  of  evaporates.  In  sixties,  during  the  drilling  course  in  the  area  of  
nearby  Rovte  Village  up  to  270  m  thick  evaporate  horizon  that  forms  up  to  59%  thickness  of  the  Upper  
Permian and over 29% of Lower Scythian dolostone succession has been found in the subsurface. There, up to  
metre  thick  lenses  of  gypsum  and  anhydrite  alternate  with  dolostone  that  comprises  veins  and  geodes  of  
gypsum.  The  outflow  from  500  m  deep  well  is  still  rather  constant,  a  few  litres  per  second  with  the  water  
                                           2- 
comprises over 300 mg/l of SO4               .  
The cave is developed in bedded fine to middle grained Middle Triassic dolostone. The cave channels exhibit  
ramiform and maze like orientation guided by faults and joints. The wall rock morphology show some features  
characteristic for dissolution with slowly flowing rising water (i.e. feeders, rising channels, cupolas, lack of fast  
flow scallops…) while some are characteristic also for descending percolating waters (i.e. shafts, down cutting  
vadose meanders, fluvial sediments of sandy and gravel size particles…). Locally wall rock surface is highly  
irregular and jagged.   
One  of  the  most  distinguished  characteristics  of  the  cave  is  particular  yellowish  to  reddish  brown  rock  that  
looks at first sight as an eroded infilling deposit. However, gradual transition from this type of rock to the host  
rock, its highly calcareous mineralogy, and preserved echinoderm bioclasts parallel to those in the host rock  
suggest different origin. Commonly, the cave floor is covered almost exclusively with cobles and blocks of this  
material.  XRD  analyses  reveal  that  unaltered  greyish  host  rock  is  built  mainly  of  dolomite  while  yellowish  
brown altered rock of calcite with traces of dolomite in some samples. Between  these two end members pale  
dolostone with gradually higher content of calcite occur. Yellowish to reddish brown colour of the samples is  
associated  with  small  amount  of  Fe  hydroxides  (i.e.  goethite  and  ferrihydrite).  Among  other  minerals  in  
yellowish brown deposit small amounts of kaolinite, illite, sericite and quartz have been detected. Locally, cave  
walls are coated with white up to a few mm thick crust predominantly comprises hydromagnesite while some  
ledges  are  covered  by  earthy  light  rusty-coloured  siltymaterial  built  of  gypsum  with  traces  of  goethite  and  
ferrihydrite andsandy particles of calcite.  
On the basis of known general geological data, basic morphology of the cave channels, cave rocky relief, field  
and mineralogical evidences of the host rock  alternation, and the limited geochemical data form the well we  
suggest that the major part of the cave has been primarily partly or mainly developed in deep seated phreatic  
condition initially by the dissolution of previously dedolomitized portion of the host dolostone. Later, the cave  
has  been  modified  above  the  phreatic  zone.  High  content  of  SO4 2-in  the  water  that  arising  from  the  well  

suggests continuous dissolution of evaporates and possible dedolomitization and/or in different location also  
dissolution of dolostone and limestone.  
The research leading to these results has received funding from the [European Community's] Seventh  
Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under grant agreement n°247616.  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 69-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                        69  

                                      What we know about the longest Croatian cave?  
             Dalibor Paar*, Andrej Stroj **, Teo Barišić***, Damir Lacković****& Vanja Radolić*****  
* Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Croatia, email: dpaar@phy.hr  
** Croatian Geological Survey, email:, andrej.stroj@hgi-cgs.hr  
*** Speleological Section HPK Sv.Mihovil, Croatia  
**** Croatian Natural History Museum, Zagreb, email:, damir.lackovic@hpm.hr  
***** Department of Physics, University of Osijek  
******Speleological Society Velebit, email: speleovelebit@gmail.com  
  
Intensive  speleological  research  on  Mt.  Crnopac  in  last  decades  resulted  in  2004.  with  the  discovery  of  the  
longest Croatian cave, Cave system Kita Gaćešina – Draženova puhaljka. The length of the cave is 22 519 m and  
the depth 665 m. The main morphological characteristic of the cave is a network of multiphase cave passages,  
some  of  them  with  very  large  cross-section  dimensions.  Estimated  cave  volume  is  1.3  million  m3.  The  
exploration  of  the  cave  was  conducted  by  the  members  of  The  Speleological  Committee  of  the  Croatian  
Mountaineering Association. From 2004 to 2012 there were 70 explorations with 181 cavers from 27 clubs from  
Croatia and Slovenia, France and Serbia. Cave map has 3106 survey stations with average distance of 8.5 m,  
average cross section 7.6 m and average inclination 30.6 degrees. Furthest Station is 2470 m form the entrance.  
Crnopac  massif is the  most southern part of the Velebit mountain range (part of Dinaric coastal mountainous  
karst, SW Croatia). The massif is built of thick carbonate deposits of upper Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous age.  
Speleogenesis of the caves in the Crnopac massif probably have lasted continuously from the beginning of the  
massif uplift (upper Miocene ?). The massif is situated between higher terrain of Gračac polje on the north and  
Zrmanja  River  valley  on  the  south  and  east.  In  such  conditions  polygenetic  multilevel  caves  have  developed  
inside the carbonate massif. Presently known caves are the remnants of various levels of paleodrainage systems  
that conducted waters from the higher terrain on the north to the base level springs on the south and south-east.  
Older phreatic and epiphreatic channels are frequently crossed by younger invasion vadose shafts, which provide  
entrances  to  the  most  of  explored  caves  and  also  connections  between  different  levels  inside  the  caves.  
Mechanical properties of the Oligocene to Lower Miocene carbonate breccias have significant role in the cave  
morphology. Low frequency of cracks and joints in these massive breccias enables preservation of underground  
passages and chambers of very large dimensions. Moreover, cave channels developed in breccias generally have  
well preserved phreatic and epiphreatic morphology, while collapsing processes are more expressed in channels  
developed in older carbonate rocks. Fluvial sediments are present in the majority of paeleophreatic channels, and  
sediment exploration in the future would greatly contribute to the understanding of cave genesis.  
Complex  speleogenesis  produced  a  polygenetic  multilevel  system  that  has  a  key  influence  to  present  cave  
microclimate and hydrology. The measurements of the cave microclimate, radon concentration and water quality  
parameters will help to understand important processes in the cave.  
  
  
    Cave surveys, the representation of underground karst landforms, and their possible use and misuse  
                                                                         * 
                                              Vincenzo Martimucci , Mario Parise**  
* Apulian Speleological Federation  
** CNR-IRPI, Bari, Italy, email: m.parise@ba.irpi.cnr.it  
  
One of the main goals of caving activity is to draw maps and sections of the explored caves, thus producing a  
valuable documentation that is of crucial importance to all those people that, for several reasons, will never visit  
the  cave.  Cave  maps  greatly  vary,  depending  upon  many  reasons,  including  but  not  limited  to  ability  of  
surveying team, graphic skills, availability of software, etc. Apart from these issues, reliability of the instruments  
used during the survey is of extreme importance, too. From identification of the cave entrance, to measurements  
of distance, angle, and azymuth, each survey may be affected by significant errors, that rarely can be appreciated  
or assessed only by looking at the cave map and sections. Especially when dealing with old surveys (given the  
rapid evolution of tools and instruments in the last years, we consider in the present article “old” also surveys of  
some 20 years ago), reliability can be very low.  
Nowadays, the use of modern technologies such as Global Positioning System (GPS) and tools (laser distance  
meter), combined  with availability of  software specifically dedicated to cave mapping  has brought to a  much  
higher level of precision, and reliability of the cartographic products delivered by many caving organizations.  
However, there is still an high number of “old” maps, and these are often used even by people and professionals  
outside the karst and caving world.  
Ideally, one should re-map with the today available tools all the known caves, or at least check the quality of the  
old  maps.  This  is  not  possible  in  the  short  time,  which  brings  to  some  interesting  questions:  how  should  the  
information contained in cave maps be read? Is there the possibility of mis-reading what is actually shown, and  
use it in wrong ways?  

  

----------------------- Page 70-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                              70  

We feel that transferring information about a cave from cavers to other people is not a simple matter, that too  
often is underestimated, which results in misuse of the information produced by cavers. To discuss this matter,  
we will present the following examples from Apulia, coming out from the experience of a project the Apulian  
Speleological Federation is leading in these years:  
- a comparison of cave maps, produced with the old traditional methods and the newly available methodologies;  
- data on reliability of the location of cave entrances;  
- mapping of underground karst landforms;  
- identification and interpretation of cave levels;  
- considerations about the overall reliability of cave maps.  
  
  
           Breakdown deposits: characteristics and their significance in the evolution of karst systems  
                                                                 Mario Parise   
** CNR-IRPI, Bari, Italy, email: m.parise@ba.irpi.cnr.it  
  
Breakdown deposits in caves are originated because of the effects of gravity-driven processes on rock masses  
affected by karst. Even though breakdown processes may occur during several stages of cave development, they  
are mostly active in the enlargement phase, as well as once water has left the cave, moving downward toward the  
phreatic base level. This results in removing the buoyant support, thus leaving unsupported the cave walls and  
ceiling.   
When the rock mass is heavily fractured, and/or interested by weathering processes, the usual evolution consists  
of  rock  failures  (that  can  be  discriminated  into  different  typologies)  and  production  of  breakdown  deposits.  
Occurrence  of  breakdown  may  result  in  enlargement  of  the  cave,  exposition  of  larger  rock  surfaces  to  
dissolution,  upward  stoping that creates large chambers or shafts, eventually reaching the  ground  surface and  
leading to formation of sinkholes.   
Breakdown  pavements  litter  the  floors  of  many  caves,  often  masking  the  real  base  of  the  karst  system.  They  
often  characterize  the  largest  chambers  or  caverns  within  karst  systems,  and  are  related  to  those  areas  where  
different  discontinuity  systems  or  karst  galleries  and  conduits  controlled  by  structures  meet.  Closing  any  
possibility of exploration, breakdown deposits may create an impassable physical barrier, not allowing further  
passages to cavers; on the other hand, sometimes it is exactly through the presence of breakdown deposits that a  
gallery comes in direct communication with a nearby chamber.  
Recognition of breakdown deposits in karst systems is therefore very important for several reasons, since they: i)  
characterize zones of weakness in the rock mass, likely more prone to karst processes; ii) can indicate possible  
direction of cave continuation; iii) are a crucial element to be considered in terms of instability processes within  
karst systems; and iv) are among the most common and largest deposits found in caves.  
This contribution intends to describe breakdown deposits, and highlight the relevance of their detailed analysis  
and mapping, combined to that of the rock failures producing them, aimed at reconstructing the different stages  
of evolution of karst systems.  
  
  
                       Some considerations on depressions, dolines, and similar karst landforms  
                                                    Mario Parise & Mariangela Pepe  
** CNR-IRPI, Bari, Italy, email: m.parise@ba.irpi.cnr.it  
  
Karst landscape is characterized by a limited number of distinctive features and landforms, which are originated  
through  the  process  of  solution  of  carbonate  rocks.  When  rocks  other  than  carbonates  are  present,  such  
landforms are often combined to others of different origin. Even in entirely karst territories, further processes  
(gravity-related, fluvial or marine activity, etc.) beside karst may be active.   
Among the most peculiar landforms of karst, dolines have a preminent role. The term doline, of Slavonic origin,  
means  literally  valley  but  actually  it  has  been  used  since  a  long  time  to  indicate  more  or  less  well  defined  
topographically depressed areas related to karst.  Apart from the long diatribe in preferring  the term doline or  
sinkhole, it is without any doubt that doline is used in very different situations to indicate significantly different  
forms. As a matter of fact, to precisely designate what one actually means it is necessary to add another word  
before it: thus, solution dolines, collapse dolines, and so on.  
However, it is important to note that the use of a correct terminology is of primary importance when producing  
maps and/or documents that  are addressed to people other than  karst scientists.  As regards land planning and  
management, for instance, dealing with a solution doline (that is, a very slight depression, with likely slow to  
extremely  slow  evolution)  is  very  different  than  dealing  with  a  collapse  sinkhole  (generally  characterized  by  
abrupt walls, presence of underground voids, and possible instability problems).  

  

----------------------- Page 71-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                      71  

Starting from the above considerations, the present contribute intends to describe some situations in karst areas  
of southern Italy in order to highlight the need to better discriminate among different types of depressions and  
dolines,  and  to  provide  some  insights  on  the  processes  that  produced  such  landforms,  and  their  likely  future  
evolution as well. To reach these aims, examples of karst geomorphological maps will be described, covering  
different sectors of southern Italy, and namely:  
1 – instability phenomena, from collapse dolines to slope movements s.s.;  
2 – collapse versus solution dolines;  
3 – distinction between dolines and depressions;  
4 – karst lakes, originated in different morphological settings, and used as hydric supply.  
  
  
                                                      Water quality of coal mine cave  
                                                             Khageshwar Singh Patel  
Pt.School of Studies in Chemistry, Ravishankar Shukla University, Amanaka, India, email:  
patelks_55@hotmail.com  
  
Several underground coal mines is in operation at Korba city (22° 21′ 0″ N, 82° 40′ 48″ E), central India. This  
groundwater  is  draining  out  as  runoff  water  and  being  a  major  culprit  to  pollute  the  surface  water.  A  huge  
amount (> 10000 MT per year) of coal is mined out to create artificial cave. They may tend to occur catastrophic  
hazards  i.e.  land  slide,  earth  quake,  fire,  etc.  in  this  region.  The  water  quality  i.e.  pH,  conductivity,  TDS,  
hardness, alkalinity and chemical content of fluoride, chloride, sulfate, nitrate, sodium, potassium, magnesium,  
calcium, etc. of the coal mine caves is discussed to understand the potential hazard.  
  
  
                         Frost weathering – the main factor for the development of shelter caves?  
                                                       Pauline Oberender*, Lucas Plan*  
  
* University of Bonn, Germany, email: paulob06@uni-bonn.de  
** Museum of Natural History of Vienna  
  
Compared to karstic caves originating from the chemical dissolution of water, there are only a few studies on the  
genesis  of  shelter  caves.  These  are  by  far  smaller  but  can  host  important  archaeological  or  paleontological  
findings. Some shelter caves can reach 100 m in length and they can make up a significant number of caves in an  
area. They occur in different kinds of rock but mainly in carbonates. Shelter caves are often described as a result  
of  frost  shattering  processes  in  literature.  However,  the  exact  development  of  the  caves  in  accordance  to  the  
weathering rates of frost shattering over time has not been determined yet. A precondition for the process to be  
effective is a well developed joint system as well as the availability of water. If frost shattering is assumed to be  
responsible for shelter cave genesis two questions arise: (1) Which process removes the material from the caves?  
(2) Can the effectiveness of the process be measured and what amount of time is needed for a cave to develop?   
In Lower Austria 34 % of all caves are shelter caves, occuring in different types of rocks and in various altitudes.  
Two of those caves, located in Lower Triassic dolomitic limestone at about 600 m a.s.l., were chosen as study  
sites. One is exposed to the north, having a length of 12 m and one to the south (10 m length) which allows for  
observing the influence of the local climate. For one winter-spring-season rock temperatures are being recorded  
in different depths, as well as air temperatures at the ceiling and at the ground of the caves on an hourly basis. To  
evaluate the amount of accumulating debris from ceiling and walls, a fine meshed net (4 mm) was installed and  
is  unloaded  monthly.  These  measurements  will  be  continued  until  the  end  of  May  2012.  To  evaluate  the  
thickness of the  sediment in  the cave and at the slope downhill of  the cave, trenches  were dug and electrical  
resistivity tomography was measured.   
At  the  moment  measurements  are  still  in  progress  and  only  first  results  can  be  reported.  Electric  resistivity  
tomography revealed that the sediment is up to 2 m thick. Diverse debris collected form the nets indicate that the  
process is still active. Future analyses of the temperature data will help to determine the reaction time of the rock  
to varying air temperatures and to estimate how long the rock was frozen. The results will be compared with the  
amount  of  debris  collected  in  the  net  in  order  to  identify  periods  of  higher  activity.  Knowledge  about  the  
sediment thickness in the cave serves as a basis for estimating the retreat rates for frost shattering of carbonate  
rock in shelter caves.  
  
  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 72-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                  72  

                                             Passage shape evolution in epiphreatic zone  
                                                      Matija Perne, Franci Gabrovšek  
Karst Research Institute ZRC SAZU, Postojna, email: matija.perne@zrc-sazu.si  
  
The cross-section of vadose passages is often interpreted to deduce some of the processes and conditions during  
their  evolution.  We  present  a  model  of  evolution  of  vadose  passages  derived  from  basic  principles  of  flow,  
dissolution and transport. Storm Water Management Model (EPA SWMM) is used to numerically calculate flow  
through  solving  Saint-Venant  equations.  Dissolution  of  soluble  walls  and  transport  of  dissolved  species  are  
coupled to the calculated flow. Starting from an initial geometry, the model determines the rates of rock removal  
at each point in the channel and propagates the solution in time to obtain the evolution of channel cross-section.  
We present the evolution of initially phreatic conduit which  evolves to vadose stage and discuss the resulting  
shapes of the passage under different hydrological conditions.  
  
                                                                             
                      From speleothems to glaciers: disentangling between karstic and glaciologic   
                                                               processes in caves  
                                                                  Aurel Persoiu  
                                                                             
University of Suceava, Universitatii 13 Suceava Romania, email: aurel.persoiu@gmail.com  
  
  
                                               Karst of the Yucatan peninsula (Mexico)  
                                                                Alena Petrvalská  
Institute of Geography, Faculty of Natural Sciences, P.J. Šafárik University, email: alena.petrvalska@upjs.sk  
  
There is an ongoing research in the region of the Yucatan Peninsula focused on water caves and cenotes. In the  
last years, many researchers from the Slovak and Czech Speleological Societies also work there. The whole karst  
area is developed in the Neogene coral and mussel limestones, which formed more than 1300 m heavy strata.  
The relief is plain with maximum altitude differences between 10-30 m; only in the south part of the peninsula  
we  can  find  heights.  There  are  no  rivers  or  flows  in  this  area,  all  the  water  flows  through  underground  karst  
water channels to the edge of the plateau (sea shoreline) and here mixed the fresh water with salt water. These  
karst water channels are almost horizontal with large cross-sections. There were found sinter forms and fossils of  
extinct  species,  so  at  least  one  evolution  phase  was  probably  under  terrestrial  conditions.  Many  cenotes  are  
formed on the karst surface (similar to collapsed dolines in the Central European karst areas), these originate by  
collapsing of very thin cave roofs. They have round perimeter and many present entrances to huge caves.  
The cavers from Czech and Slovak Speleological Societies organized many expeditions to map and discover new  
cave passages in the last years. In December 2011, they connected two long cave systems Tux Kupaxa Cave and  
K´oox Baal Cave, so the 4th longest underwater cave system in the world was created and the total length is now  
56 591 m.  
During the expedition in February 2012, we mapped and investigated 3 caves (with total length of about 2,5 km),  
which are interesting not only from speleological and carsological point of view, but also from the archeological  
point of view. We have also found relicts after the Maya culture there (walls, altar…).   
The future research opens possibilities and conditions for more detailed geomorphological research in this karst  
area.   
  
                                                 Karst and Cave Evolution in the Alps  
                                                                    Lucas Plan  
Museum of Natural History of Vienna, email: lukas.plan@univie.ac.at  
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                   Present-day dissolution rates in stream caves of Slovenia.  
                                                                 Mitja Prelovšek  
Karst Research Institute ZRC SAZU, Titov trg 2, 6230 Postojna, email: mitja.prelovsek@zrc-sazu.si  
  
Dissolution  is  a  process  that  is  responsible  for  cave  formation  and  one  of  the  most  important  during  later  
speleogenesis.  Although  we  know  this,  we  have  only  few  field  data  that  show  its  actual  rates.  Taking  into  
account this conclusion, we start to measure present-day dissolution rates in 2004 to find out (a) magnitude of  
present-day dissolution rates, (b) spatial and (c) temporal variability and (d) to highlight those factors that are  
influencing dissolution rates the most. Our research was carried out in stream caves of Dinaric karst usually in  
epiphreatic zone. The majority of measurements were done by using limestone tablets but at some locations also  

  

----------------------- Page 73-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                73  

micro(erosion)meter   was   used   to   compare   results   of   different   methodology.   The   biggest   advantage   of  
measurements with limestone tablets is their high precision (up to ±0.05 µm) and accuracy (on average ±0.2 µm;  
maximum observed error was ±0.4 µm).  
Generally, dissolution or flowstone deposition rates in epiphreatic zone are low, which corresponds to long-term  
evolution of caves. Along main underground streams in the epiphreatic zone, rates of several μm/a are common.  
Such rates are characteristic for caves influenced by concentrated autogenic recharge, diffuse autogenic recharge,  
even  allogenic  recharge,  where  the  catchment  area  is  composed  of  carbonate  rocks,  and  for  composed  
diffuse/concentrated autogenic-allogenic recharge. Caves with dissolution or flowstone deposition rates higher  
than 0.1 mm/a are extremely rare.  
One  of  the  biggest  surprise  was  detection  of  prevailing  low  flowstone  deposition  rates  in  some  regionally  
important caves (Postojna Cave, Planina  Cave, Škocjan Cave, Tkalca jama  Cave, Križna jama 2  Cave, but high  
flowstone deposition rates in Križna jama  Cave), which  can not explain actual dissolutional morphology of the  
caves. Discrepancy between morphology and present-day processes is definitely not related to low discharges  
since we were lucky to measure processes also during the very high discharges with high-recurrence interval. It  
points  out  that  the  direction  (dissolution-flowstone  deposition)  and  rates  of  processes  can  change  in  tens  of  
thousands of years according to change of hydrological situation in the aquifer or due to climate.  
  
  
                         Human alteration of karst landscape: the examples from Slovene karst  
                                                 Nataša Ravbar * & Gregor Kovačič**  
Karst Research Institute ZRC SAZU, Postojna, email: natasa.ravbar@zrc-sazu.si  
University of Primorska, Faculty of Humanities, Koper, Slovenia, email: gregor.kovacic@fhs.upr.si  
  
This contribution examines the national legislative framework on spatial planning in karst regions, and presents  
some cases of inappropriate management and human alteration of karst landscape in Slovenia. Unfortunately, in  
the  current  legislation,  the  standards  and  conditions  for  the  protection  of  karst  landscape  characteristics  (e.g.  
dolines)  are  loose  and  not  fully  elaborated.  Principally,  there  are  no  uniform  mechanisms  to  protect  specific  
relief forms or for the adequate protection of karst. To a large extent, the preservation of the characteristic karst  
landscape is left to local communities that most often lack the necessary financial and professional resources to  
appropriately direct land use, and those dealing with spatial planning and land use have insufficient knowledge  
regarding the complexity of karst and its vulnerability. In a selected area settlements Hrpelje-Kozina and Divača  
(Kras) changes in land use and its effect to deterioration of karst landscape has been analyzed and evaluated.  
These areas have been subjected to intensive urban, traffic and business development since the motorway had  
been  brought  to  their  vicinity  fifteen  years  ago.  Consequently,  new  residential  areas,  industrial  zones  and  
business parks have been set up in karst landscape, originally covered with numerous dolines. The unique karst  
relief with various types, shapes and dimensions of surface features is usually considered only as an obstacle for  
faster  local  spatial  development  (e.g.  building  of  industrial  zones,  traffic  infrastructure,  settlements,  etc.)  by  
decision makers, planners and construction engineers. Therefore, karst landscapes are extremely susceptible to  
human impact, which has to be considered in spatial planning in order to preserve its natural value.   
  
  
              Baseline physicochemical investigations on waters from three blue holes, San Salvador  
                                                               Island, Bahamas  
                                                         Jacqueline Marie Sampson  
University of South Florida, email: jmsampson@mail.usf.edu  
  
Measuring the physical and geochemical parameters in the water column of blue holes has the potential to help  
our understanding on various hydrological issues, geochemical processes, weathering of minerals within the host  
rock, biota, groundwater quality, and contamination. Physicochemical parameters have been studied in the water  
column  of  Inkwell,  Church,  and  Watling’s  Blue  Holes  (San  Salvador  Island,  Bahamas).  Cations,  anions,  and  
field parameters were collected from multiple depths at the three blue holes and compared to the average ocean  
concentrations  of  these  parameters  in  order  to  assess  the  freshwater  versus  saline  groundwater  responses  to  
evapotranspiration, tidal influences, and freshwater spring input. The salinity concentrations were found to vary  
at the surface of each blue hole; however, salinity concentrations became similar with respect to depth at each  
location. This indicates that processes are occurring at the surface at each location causing variation in salinity,  
chlorine  (Cl-),  potassium  (K+),  electric  conductivity  (EC),  and  total  dissolved  solids  (TDS)  concentrations.  
These  variations  are  likely  a  result  of  the  blue  holes  connectivity  to  seawater,  seasonality,  and  evaporation  
processes.  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 74-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                             74  

    The effect of different weather events on the water quality of some karstic lakes on the Aggtelek and  
                                             Slovak Karst region (Hungary-Slovakia)  
                                                 Andrea Samu*, Ilona Bárány Kevei*  
*Department of Climatology and Landscape Ecology, University of Szeged, Hungary, email:  
samu.andrea@geo.u-szeged.hu  
  
According to the monitoring results of some karstic lakes on the area of the Aggtelek and Slovak karst  
(Hungary-Slovakia) was proven that these shallow lakes are quite influenced by anthropogenic activity and the  
climate extremities. The aim of the study is to show the effects of the weather events on the water quality and  
quantity.  
Water quality and changes in the state of the karstic lakes was monitored between 2008-2010. We searched  
answer on the intensified eutrophication process which took part in the last decades in these lakes. In this process  
play role the various contamination sources but also the climate which shows bigger frequency in the extremities  
in the last few years. The aim of our study is to determine the effect of the climate on the water quality and  
quantity of the lakes with the use of drought indices.  
The amount of precipitation decreased after 1980 compared to  the previous years, and the number of drought  
periods was also higher than the number of wet periods.  
A  strong,  significant  correlation  was  found  between  the  water  quality  parameters  and  the  different  drought  
indices, which, depending on the lake’s state and position, affect them in different ways. The most connections  
occurred with weather events ruling during 6-12 months, these events affect the processes of all lakes.  
Since most water chemistry parameters are affected by extreme weather events, their increasing frequency could  
cause sudden extreme changes in water quality and quantity, which in the case of these shallow and unstable  
lakes may trigger irreversible changes.  
  
  
                Lakes on the Aggtelek and Slovak karst - some aspects of the changes in their state  
                                                                Andrea Samu  
Department of Climatology and Landscape Ecology, University of Szeged, Hungary, email:  
samu.andrea@geo.u-szeged.hu  
  
According to the monitoring results of some karstic lakes and springs on the area of the Aggtelek and Slovak  
karst (Hungary-Slovakia) was proven that these waters are quite influenced by anthropogenic activity and the  
climate extremities.  
The reasons of the typically higher nutrient content and advanced trophic stages are the specific point and diffuse  
pollution  sources  typical  for  the  narrow  environment.  The  quality  of  habitats  was  changed  by  the  variety  of  
human  use,  and  in  some  cases,  by  the  rehabilitation  works.  This,  together  with  the  climate  effects  cause  
significant instability in the water quality and threaten the cave ecosystems which are associated with some of  
the  lakes.  Currently,  as  a  number  of  protected  species  is  linked  to  these  habitats,  or  in  some  cases  complex  
hydrology systems are concerned, the Slovak and Hungarian authorities also seek to ensure greater protection to  
the catchment area. In addition, some rehabilitation projects were completed and are also in progress for lakes'  
rescue  –  their  effects  and  their  possible  outcomes  are  reviewed.  This  paper  aims  also  at  presenting  the  
characteristics of the patterns in the water quality of the lakes between 2008-2010, wetland condition assessment  
according  to  the  macro-vegetation,  and  several  approaches  to  assess  the  impact  of  the  weather  events  on  the  
water quality.  
  
  
                        Micrometeorology of Covadura cave (SE Spain) as global change proxy  
                                   *                          *                            *                                  ** 
                   Laura Sanna , Fernando Gàzquez , Jose Maria Calaforra , Angel Fernandez-Cortès                                 
* Department of Hydrogeology, University of Almeria  
** Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, MNCN-CSIC, email: speleokikers@tiscali.it  
  
It  is  well  known  that  human  activities  have  negative  effects  on  the  natural  environment,  such  as  the  current  
warming of the climate that, from a physical point of view, is characterized by two key parameters, temperature  
and precipitation. The  study of these variables  over time may help to predict the evolution  and causes  of global  
warming and to develop a protocol that minimizes its effects as far as possible.   
The  use  of  karst  cavities  as  "laboratories"  for  studying  underground  environmental  parameters  (temperature,  
relative humidity, CO2 concentration, etc.) is increasingly common in researches on climate change. This is due  
to  the   high  thermal  inertia  of   karst  systems  that  eliminates  the   high   frequency   meteorological   signals  
("background noise") that often distort the original records when making measurements at the surface.  

  

----------------------- Page 75-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                            75  

In this  sense, one of the main topics of the GLOCHARID Project is to focus on  Covadura  Cave System, a cave  
complex  in  the  gypsum  karst  of  Sorbas  (Almeria, South-East Spain).  This network of  underground passages  is  
developed within gypsum strata of Messinian age, with up to 7 levels of galleries connected by shafts, reaching a  
maximum depth of  120 metres.  This  cave  system  has several  entrances  that connect  underground and  external  
atmospheres, thus enabling a strong air flow.  
Temperature and  relative  humidity  in the cave  have been  monitored  from  September  2011  by 25  dataloggers  
distributed  in  all  cave  levels  at  different  depths  and  distances  from  the  entrances.  Data  acquisition  has  hour- 
frequency. Furthermore, there are similar sensors at the surface, in order to compare the underground record with  
the external one.  
The  preliminary  results  have  shown  that  the  relative  humidity  and  air  temperature  recorded  at  each  cave  
microclimatic  station  vary considerably  both  in  time and space. The trend in  the  relative humidity  reveals  an  
increase with the depth and the distance from the main entrances  of the system. Furthermore,  it was found that  
the uppermost cave conduits  (Level 1, 2 and  3) have less inertia to changes respect to the deeper levels  and are  
more  subject to  external weather variations with only a slight delay. Even  daily cycles have been  observed. As  
expected,  the atmosphere of  the deepest part of the cave system  has been more  stable  and remains  saturated  in  
water  vapour  (relative  humidity  of  100%),  except  when  external  relative  humidity  drastically  decreases  and  
temperature drops. This effect propagates from the surface across the galleries within hours.  
The air temperature  spatial pattern  is characterized by  a decreasing trend  from the entrance to the deepest parts  
of the cavity,  with some exceptions.  The behaviour of the  climatic series  obtained  in Level  5 is worth to note  
(only recorded during  3 months), which has a temperature  lower than the  deeper levels, behaving as a "cold air  
trap" capable  of keeping  inside  for a long  period  of time, masses of cold, dense  air  flowing through  the  other  
galleries. Furthermore, the temperature in  the deepest level  (Level  7)  is largely unaffected by external  climatic  
variables  and remains  almost unchanged, with values close to the average annual  of Sorbas (15 °C).  This level,  
where  the  high  frequency  fluctuations  are  minimized,  is  the  ideal  place  to  install  a  microclimatic  monitoring  
system  to  conduct  a  long-term  study  on  major  shifts  in  the  global  climate  system. Both  Level  7  and  5  show  
thermal inversion phenomena (cave air warmer than  outside in winter), which occurred since mid-November at  
the deepest level and since mid-December at Level  5. Finally, the areas where the cave temperature varies more  
quickly  are  located  at  the  interconnections  among  the  various  levels,  particularly  in  correspondence  of  the  
vertical shafts. Clear evidence is represented by the Level 6 where, despite its depth, cave atmosphere shows the  
influence of the strong airflow caused by differences between cave and surface temperature.  
According  to  these  preliminary  results,  it  seems  evident  that  the  effects  of  Global  Warming  will  affect  
irreversibly the stability of the deepest part of the cave system, where microclimatic variables have a high inertia  
and   are  altered  only  in  exceptional  circumstances,   generally   arid.  Taking  into  account  that  the  general  
observations point to a high frequency of  extreme events, including the  continued droughts  and the progressive  
increase  in  the  average  temperature  in  south-eastern  Iberia  up  to  +5.8  °C  in  2080  (IPCC,   1999),  cave  
micrometeorology  may  play  a key role  in monitoring and  controlling the effects  of climate change in  semiarid  
environments.  
  
  
                               The landforms of the karst mountains in the middle latitudes:   
                                        reflections, trends and problems of the research.  
                                                                  Ugo Sauro  
email: ugo.sauro@gmail.com  
  
  
           Some characteristics of groundwater dynamics in the upstream parts of the karst systems.  
                                                     Andrej Stroj & Mladen Kuhta  
Croatian geological survey, email: andrej.stroj@gmail.com  
  
Karst aquifers are generally highly heterogeneous and anisotropic medium composed of conduits, fractures and  
rock  matrix.  These  hydraulically  contrast  components  of  the  aquifer  are  in  constant  interaction  and  unsteady  
state. Continuous unsteady state of the aquifer prevents forming of common water table, which is representative  
for all aquifer components. Simultaneous groundwater monitoring in active conduits and surrounding fractured  
rocks provide probably the best possible insight of hydrogeological processes in karst system. Water level and  
temperature loggers were installed in a few caves and adjacent boreholes in the sinking zone of Lika and Gacka  
lost rivers, situated in Croatian Dinaric karst area.  Obtained data provide general characteristics of groundwater  
dynamics in the upstream part of the karst massif, which separate Lika and Gacka karst poljes from the Adriatic  
coast. Temperature data proves to be a good indicator of a water origin during variable hydrologic conditions,  
while water level dynamics data serve as an indicator of hydraulic properties of conduit and surrounding rocks,  
vertical distribution of high permeability horizons and water flow directions. Very pronounced heterogeneity of  

  

----------------------- Page 76-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                       76  

water level, as well as high level gradients was designated. High water level gradients in conduit systems are  
probably  enabled  by  prevailing  influence  of  vadose  flows,  especially  during  the  low  water  conditions.  Water  
levels  in  the  caves  during  dry  periods  are  fixed  by  downstream  overflow  position  in  the  conduit  systems.  
Overflow occurrences result in creation of numerous hydraulic discontinuities in the conduit network. During  
high water conditions, conduit flow often transfers from vadose to phreatic, causing better hydraulic integration  
of the system. Therefore function of the hydraulic discontinuities is time-variant and dependant on hydrologic  
conditions. Described phenomena result in a great variability of underground water flow characteristics, not only  
considering different components of aquifer (i.e. conduits, fractures, matrix), but also in adjacent parts of conduit  
systems.   
  
                                                                                
     Unified Database of Speleological Objects as part of Nature Conservancy Information System of the  
                                                                   Czech republic  
                                                          Olga Suldovska &Ivan Balak  
  
Nature Conservation Agency of the Czech Republic, email: olga.suldovska@nature.cz  
  
  
                                        Karren or not: rock surface textures in coastal karst  
                                        Danko Taboroši*, Miklos Kazmer**, Blaž Miklavič***  
*Island Research & Education Initiative, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, email: taborosi@gmail.com  
**Department of Palaeontology, Eötvös University, Budapest, Hungary  
**Mississippi State University, USA / University of Guam, USA  
  
Limestone surface textures in coastal areas tend to exhibit a gradation of forms that are often morphologically  
similar  but  genetically  contrastive.  They  include  dissolutional  sculpturing,  haloclastic  and  biocorrosional  
features, physical scars of bioabrasion, and other textures. Often, all of these are subsumed under the  general  
name of karren. This is problematic because the genetic origin of many small-scale facets of coastal limestone  
may have little or nothing in common with classical karren, which is traditionally limited to features made by  
dissolution and should exclude products of other processes. This distinction may be difficult to make because of  
often   extraordinary   morphological   similarity   between   polygenetic   features,   but   is   important   for   correct  
paleoenvironmental interpretation.   
We have examined hundreds of  limestone textures found in coastal karsts worldwide and attempted to identify  
those that are most likely to have multiple origins and cause uncertainty among field workers. We recognized  
several recurring morphotypes that include both karren and non-karren variants. Textures of irregular pits and  
residual points and ridges between them are characteristic of eogenetic karren that forms through biochemical  
corrosion  of  diagenetically-immature  rocks  in  supratidal  zone;  however,  they  also  commonly  arise  from  
bioabrasional attack by limpets, whose round homing scars overprint each other and leave behind mechanically  
produced   microtopography   in   intertidal   zone   of   various   substrates,   including   many   telogenetic   rocks.  
Exceptionally  intricate  honeycomb-textures  can  be  a  result  of  salt-weathering  in  wave-splash  areas;  similar  
morphologies   can   also   be   produced   in   subtidal   rocks   by   endolithic   sponges.   Systems   of   small-scale  
interconnected cavities and tunnels permeating rock surface layers are typical products of mixing  corrosion in  
coastal springs and caves; matching labyrinths can also be made in live coralgal rock by certain chitons. Flat- 
floored coastal pans are quintessential products of biochemical dissolution by microbially-modified wave splash;  
nevertheless,  they  can  also  develop  by  mechanical  erosion  of  grazing  echinoderms.  Assemblages  of  round- 
floored  pits  are  the  most  common  coastal  karren  at  higher  latitudes;  comparable  textures  also  form  at  most  
lower-latitude coasts as remnants of boreholes produced by bivalves.  
Karst field workers should be aware of the manifold origins of similar rock textures. Comparing and contrasting  
pairs  or  sets  of  comparable  morphologies  should  help  with  correct  identification  of  genetic  origin  and  allow  
more accurate interpretation of field observations.  
The  caves  from  Dealul  Popii  (Rodnei  Mountains,  N  Romania):  mineralogy,  morphology  and  speleogenetic  
implications  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                                                                                

  

----------------------- Page 77-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                       77  

GEOLOGICAL SETTINGS OF THE MAŁA W MUŁOWEJ CAVE, TATRA MTS (POLAND)  
                                                            Jacek Szczygieł  
Department of Fundamental Geology, Faculty of Earth Sciences, University of Silesia  
  
Mała w Mułowej Cave is located in the West Tatra Mts. in the Czerwone Wierchy Massif. Entrance is situated   
1757 m asl in the Middle Triassic limestone and dolomites belong to Ździary Unit, part of Czerwone Wierchy  
Nappe. Mała w Mułowej Cave is 555m depth and 3863m length. The cave has two main conduit which separate  
at a depth 60m. First conduit  is a vertical type and contain the biggest chamber in Tatra Mts. with dimensions  
85x35x90.m. Second conduit is a aven type too, but only to 300m depth, further corridors run 800m in a straight  
line towards the WNW to a depth of 555m.  
Since 2002 new discoveries have been made in the Mala w Miłowej Cave. Bac-Moszaszwili & Nowicki (2006)  
described  geology  of  the  Cave  relied  on  other  explorers  verbal  informations.  Later  measurmets  done  by  
Recielski were interpreted by Grodzicki (2008).  
Fieldworks, included measurements of the geological structures (fracture, bedding and fault planes, tectoglyphs)  
and  morphological  observations  enable  to  the  fine  genetic  classification  of  individual  corridors.  Also  Rock  
samples were collected for stratygraphy recognition. All collected data are display as structural plans of caves  
and geological cross-sections. Furthermore the structural analysis has been made.  
The  Mała  w  Mułowej  Cave  up  to  300m  depth  developed  in  the  Middle  Triassic  banding  limestone  and  
dolomites. Corridors system at vertical part of the cave, was determined by inverted, horizontal brachysyncline.  
Large cubature parts as the Fakro Chamber, the Geriawitów Pitch, the Czesanka Pitch were formed in the hinge  
zone  which  was  under  the  biggest  stress  and  thus  was  the  most  susceptible  to  karstification.  The  Collaps  
character  of  the  Fakro  Chamber  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  near  the  core  was  the  biggest  compression  
results of  which  must have been a number of discontinuities and  minor folds. The Czesanka Pitch developed  
near the crest where was the biggest tension which explain why it were formed on loosened bedding planes.  
About 300m under the cave entrance passages were formed mainly at the contact between the autochtonous High  
Tatric  sedimentary  cover  and  the  Ździary  unit.  First  represents  marly  shale  of  the  Zabijak  formation  and  
limestones of the Wysoka Turnia formation, second The Middle Triassic limestone and dolomites and the Early  
Triassic limestone with shale interbeds. Below, the main factor determining the course of the cave is the tectonic  
contact and related fractures. The corridors were developed in carbonates  ensued karstification and also in the  
shale.  Flowing  water  is  easier  to  mechanically  erode  fragile  shale  than  rinse  out  carbonates.  Some  parts  of  
passages  recede  of  the  contact  between  carbonates  and  shale  i.e.  Meander  Ebola,  Meander  TPKC,  Meander  
Dwudziestolecia. Probably it is a result of related fault transverse to contact.  
Research have shown that the Mała w Mułowej Cave developed in the syncline of the Middle Triassic rocks,  not  
in  the  inverted  rocks  series  from  the  Triassic  to  the  Cretaceous  as  in  Bac-Moszaszwili  &  Nowicki  (2006).  
Besides,  research  indicated  that  the  cave  corridors  do  not  pass  to  Organy  unit,  but  whole  of  them  are  in  the  
Ździary unit and its contact with the autochtonous High Tatric sedimentary cover.  
  
                                                                        
 The caves from Dealul Popii (Rodnei Mountains, N Romania): mineralogy, morphology and speleogenetic  
                                                              implications  
                                                 Tudor Tămaş* **, Iuliana Vişan*  
*“Babes-Bolyai” University, Dept. of Geology, email: tudor.tamas@ubbcluj.ro                                     
**“E. Racoviţă” Institute of Speleology, Cluj-Napoca, Romania  
  
Dealul  Popii  is  a  small  isolated  karst  area  situated  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Rodnei  Mountains  (Eastern  
Carpathians), which hosts nine cavities developed in Devonian - Lower Carboniferous crystalline limestones and  
dolomites with quartz and mica intercalations. A detailed mineralogical study was carried out on samples from  
these caves, revealing an association consiting of carbonates (calcite, aragonite, smithsonite), sulfates (jarosite,  
gypsum), oxides (goethite, hematite, rancieite, todorokite) and quartz.  
Baia  lui  Schneider  (Schneider’s  Mine,  800  m  long,  38  m  deep),  the  longest  cave  in  the  area,  is  renowned  in  
Romania for its aragonite speleothems, whereas Speranţei (Hope) Cave, 74 m long, was supposed to represent its  
upper level. Previous studies on Baia lui Schneider (as well as its name, and local legends) suggest that some of  
its  passages  have  been  mined  at  least  since  the  XVIIIth  century;  due  to  its  large  entrance  and  main  passage,  
vandalism of the XXth century is also evident. Speranţei Cave is a small labyrinthic cavity with passages rarely  
passing  1  m  in  width  or  height.  It  was  initially  considered  to  have  been  formed  by  infiltration  water,  but  its  
morphology and archeological findings raised questions concerning its true genesis.   
Chemical analyzes on samples from both cavities confirm the local legends concerning mining works in these  
cavities. Their mineralogy, as well as other morphological and archeological findings indicate that the some of  
the cavities from Dealul Popii were initially hydrothermal karst voids, partly or completely filled, and the mining  
works followed closely the karst passage directions.  

  

----------------------- Page 78-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                              78  

                                             Map of karst rock outcrops in Macedonia  
                                                              Marjan Temovski  
Email: temovski_m@yahoo.com  
  
Extension of karst rock outcrops in Macedonia is given by Andonovski (1981) as 2440 km2, which is 9.5% of  
Macedonia’s  total  area,  or  by  Kolčakovski  &  Boškovska  (2007)  as  2724  km2  (10.6%).  This  data  is  usually  
accompanied with a large scale map of general extension of karst rock outcrops (Kolčakovski, 2001), which is  
highly generalized and inaccurate. Different map, but with similar quality is also given by Kekić (1980). Both of  
the  values  about  karst  rock  outcrops  in  Macedonia  are  based  upon  the  basic  geological  map  of  Macedonia,  
published in 1 : 100 000 scale. The low precision of the karst rock extension maps, demanded creation of a new  
accurate digital map and data using GIS methods. We present the methodology used to produce the data and the  
map, as well as the results which can be easily combined with other data (such as faults, caves, karst springs etc.)  
and can serve as a base for further analyses of karst terrains in Macedonia.  
  
  
       Cover-collapse sinkholes in the Franconian Alb - Germany – selected examples and conditions of  
                                                                   formation  
                           Martin Trappe, Tobias Heckmann, Sarina Mehlhorn, Helmut Miedaner,   
                                                   Kathrin Umstädter, Michael Becht  
University of Eichstaett, Institute of Geography, email: martin.trappe@ku-eichstaett.de  
  
Recent   events   of   cover-collapse   sinkhole   formation,   the   geomorphological,   geological   and   hydrological  
conditions of selected sinkholes and the spatial and temporal occurrences of such landforms were studied in the  
Franconian Alb, a karst area located in southeastern Germany. The study area consists of karstified limestones  
and dolomites of Jurassic Age. It is partly covered by Cretaceous and Miocene deposits and a clayey to loamy  
overburden.  The  thickness  of  the  loamy  cover  ranges  from  a  few  decimetres  up  to  ten  meters.  Sinkholes  are  
widely distributed in the area, to some extent they were formed by cover-collapse processes.  
In  order  to  prepare  a  geohazard  map,  historical  records  from  different  archives  (public  and  governmental  
archives,  municipalities, counties,  water  management agencies, newspapers, local population)  were used for a  
compilation of sinkholes which resulted from collapses. The frequency of cover-collapse sinkhole events differs  
in areas with agricultural or forestal use. Farmers often backfill these surficial cavities immediately after their  
formation, before these objects can be registered officially. Therefore a documentation of such collapse events  
may  be  restricted  in  terms  of  detailed  statistical  analyses.  Nevertheless  seasonal  clusters  of  collapses  can  be  
observed with a distinct focus on the first months each year.  
Recent  collapses show close relations to climatic conditions. During winter or spring the majority of collapse  
events are associated with snow melt or heavy rainfall resulting in an increase of the soil moisture and a decrease  
of shear strength within the loamy cover. Consequently, loose material overlaying cavities can be washed down,  
or the sediment itself moves downward. For single events, the antecedent climatic development (precipitation,  
thickness  of  snow  cover,  air  temperature,  soil  temperature)  was  analysed  for  identification  of  the  triggering  
factors.   
Also saisonal or episodic flooding of dry valleys create new collapse structures acting later as ponors. In this  
context,  small-scale  surficial  karst  depressions  without  outlet  (underlain  by  thick  loamy  deposits)  show  an  
efficient drainage via a few temporary active ponors and connected subsurface pipes. These ponors are affected  
by  frequent  morphological  changes  due  to  the  power  of  the  inflowing  water,  but  mostly  they  are  blocked  by  
loamy material.  
Besides the climatic or hydrologic relations, the formation of cover-collapse sinkholes is influenced by human  
activities. Collapses within soils are often caused by the mechanical stress following/during farming activities or  
they are located near motorways, roads and close to buildings where the infiltration was disturbed.  
Selected cover-collapse sinkholes were studied in detail with respect to their geomorphological and geological  
characteristics  in  order  to  document  cavities  and  the  subsurface  structure  of  the  sinkholes.  Additionally,  the  
physical properties (grain size, moisture content, shear strength) of the collapsed sediments were analysed within  
the  accessible  parts  of  the  collapse  sinkholes.  Different  sediments  could  be  separated:  Only  little  differences  
were  indicated  for  still  slow-sliding  sediments  (high  water  content  and  low  shear  strength)  and  accumulated  
older collapse material (slightly increased shear strength). In contrast lower moisture contents and an increased  
shear  strength  were  observed  for  cover  deposits  resting  above  karstified  limestones  or older  fillings  observed  
within cracks which were not affected by the collapse processes. The deviant water contents and shear strength  
data of the slide mass point to the conditions before the collapse event happened.  
  
  
  

  

----------------------- Page 79-----------------------

   th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                            79  

                             Recent karst of Natural Park “Lena Pillars” (Yakutiya, Russia)  
                                                              Elena Trofimova  
Institute of Geography, Russian Academy of Sceinces, email: e.trofimova1@gmail.com  
  
Natural  Park  “Lena  Pillars”  is  located  in  the  latitudinal  part  of  the  valley  of  great  Siberian  River  Lena.  
Orographically region explored belongs to Prilensko’e Plateau raised at 300-600 m a.s.l., dissected by the valleys  
of Lena and Boutama Rivers. Climate of the territory is Sub-arctic extreme continental and dry: average annual  
temperature of the air is  –9,8°C at the annual temperature amplitudes to 98°C.  Average annual precipitations  
doesn’t  exceed  249  mm.  There  is  the  area  of  continuous  permafrost  up  to  300  -500  m  thickness.  Lower  
Cambrian limestones and dolomites with a thickness 400-500 m outcrop represent the karst rocks.  
In spite of the insignificant quantity of the precipitations, falling on the territory of NP Lena Pillars, recent karst  
is widespread here. Generally, the permafrost blocks the quick infiltration of precipitations, that is the reason of  
the  accumulation  of  the  water  is  realized  on  the  surface  of  karst  massifs.  Moreover,  on  the  one  hand,  the  
additional receipt of the water is supplied by the processes of condensation, occurred both from the air because  
of considerable amplitudes of daily fluctuations of air temperatures, reaching 12,8°C, and in consequence of the  
big gradients (to 7,8°C per 1 m) between earth temperature and lower situated perennially cryotic rocks (Fig. 3).  
By the observations on the condensermeter, average value of condensating water reaches 80 mm for the warm  
season on the territory of Central Yakutiya.On the other hand, according to L. Jakucs (1977), the solubility of  
CO2 in the water decreases with the increase of temperature of the solution: at temperature 0°C the coefficient of  
absorbing of CO2 is 1,713, at temperature 10°C –  1,194, at temperature 20°C –  0,878, at temperature 30°C –  
only  0,665.  Thus,  the  cold  waters  of  permafrost’s  regions,  saturated  by  CO2,  are  characterized  by  the  
considerable aggressivity in respect to karstifying rocks.  
More  than  that,  the  infiltration  of  summer  precipitations  along  the  deep  fissures  of  carbonate  rocks,  the  
condensation, as well as the considerable snow accumulation, have the warming impact on the cryolithozone,  
increasing her temperature till 3-4°C and condition the formation of supra- and intra-permafrost taliks.   
Therefore  the  development  of  karst  relief  in  the  regions  with  permafrost  is  in  need  of  in  some  times  less  of  
precipitations as compared with the ones where the permafrost is absent.  
The manifestations of recent karst are represented by the following formes: karren, sinkholes, disappearances of  
the rivers, karst springs, dry valleys, small caves, niches, etc.  
Type of the karst, developing in conditions of permafrost, has the specific scientific name: ground frozen karst.  
Karst of Natural Park “Lena Pillars” is the obvious example of such type of the karst.  
  
  
           Hypogenic caves in Sicily: a preliminary study of morphological and depositional features  
                                                               Marco Vattano  
Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra e del Mare, University of Palermo, email: marco.vattano@unipa.it  
  
A  preliminary  study  was  carried  out  in  two  hypogenic  cave  systems  in  Sicily  in  order  to  define  their  
morphological and depositional features, and to understand the speleogenetic mechanisms responsible for their  
origin and evolution. These are the Monte Inici karst system and the Acqua Fitusa cave.  
The first is located in northwestern Sicily, along the southeastern side of Mt. Inici. It is composed of two caves,  
the  Eremita  cave  and  the  Cocci  Abyss,  formed  in  Lower  Jurassic  limestones  and  dolomitic  limestones  (Inici  
Fm.),  and  Middle-Upper  Jurassic  reddish-gray  limestones  with  ammonites  (Buccheri  Fm.).  The  caves  are  3D  
phreatic systems, reaching a total length of over 2 km, and a depth of about 300 m. These caves are characterized  
by large galleries connected by deep shafts, and morphologies linked to condensation-corrosion processes, such  
as mega-scallops and big cupolas. Different types of chemical deposits, among which gypsum, have been   
observed, whereas alluvial deposits are lacking. The air temperature, measured in December 2011, is 15.5-18.0  
°C in the Cocci Abyss and 17.6-21.0°C in the Eremita cave. The Monte Inici karst system appears to be linked to  
the thermal  water  forming the Gorga (T = 49 °C) and the Terme Segestane (T = 45 °C) hot  springs,  located  
eastward and at lower altitude in respect to the cave systems. An important role in the evolution and widening of  
the subterranean voids is played by air flow.  
The Acqua Fitusa cave is located in central Sicily, along the  northeastern  side of Mt. La Montagnola. It is a  
subhorizontal  cave,  about  700  m  long  and  25  m  deep,  formed  in  Upper  Cretaceous  calcareous  breccia  with  
shallow  water  fragments  (Rudist  breccias  member  of  Crisanti  Fm.).  The  cave  represents  a  good  example  of  
inactive sulfuric acid cave formed close to the piezometric surface level. Actually the H2S-rich spring, with a  
temperature of ~25°C, lies northward and at lower altitude respect to the cave. Condensation-corrosion processes  
are  responsible  for  the  origin  of  different  small  and  large  size  morphologies,  i.e.,  condensation  tables,  wall  
niches, ceiling cupolas, megascallops, weathered walls, boxwork, replacement pockets, etc. Gypsum crystals and  
crusts have been surveyed at different heights.  
  

  

----------------------- Page 80-----------------------

    th 
20   International Karstological School “Classical Karst”, Postojna, Slovenia, 2012                                                                    80  

  
                                Antalya, Karstic Area, Water Resurces, Sinkholes, Protection  
                                                               Mustafa Yıldırım &  
General Management of Water and WastewaterASAT - Administration of Antalya  
  
  
                                                 Sustainable management of karst areas  
                                                                   Irawati Yuniat  
Ministry of Home affairs, Jakarta, Indonesia, email: yai_ira@yahoo.com  
  
The  Indonesian  archipelago  contains  approximately  15.5  million  hectares  of  karst  topography  ranging  from  
Sumatra to Papua. The distribution is close to 20% of the total territory of Indonesia.  
Karst  region  is  a  unique  area.  The  area  has  a  landscape  of  steep  slopes,  basins,  caves,  irregular  protruding  
limestone  rocks,  an  interconnected  system  of  underground  streams,  forest  soil  and  composition  of  different  
species at each height. Karst area is a natural resource that is not renewable and it is a highly sensitive area for all  
forms  of  environmental  change.  The  region  is  dominated  by  karst  limestone  (dissolution  of  carbonate  rocks)  
which has a dynamic ecosystem and important reservation of water.  
Along with the rapid development, the various interested parties utilize this area in order to improve economic  
welfare. To date in Indonesia, karst areas are still considered by most people and even by miners and geologist  
only as a natural resource that has economic value. Karst is mined for cement, building materials, tiles (marble),  
jewelry  and  various  other  industries.  Dolomite  and  calcite  (CaCO3  which  has  undergone  a  process  of  
crystallization) are also mined for various industries. In addition, the phosphate contained in sediments in some  
caves inhabited by bats and swiftlets are also mined for production of organic fertilizer.  
The impact of conflicts of interest in utilizing today's karst region is linked to an increased  demand for cement  
by industrial activities. It is feared that the management and utilizations that are not based on the knowledge of  
the dynamic system in karst areas can affect the sustainability of resources especially water resources  
  

  
