----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012, 65–75                                                                           Articles 

 ARTICLES 

LATEST RESEARCH ON KARST WATERS IN SLOVENIA 
AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 

AUTHORS 
Greg or Kovačič 
 University of  Primorska, Faculty of  Humanities Kop er, Dep artment of  Geog raphy, Titov trg 5, SI – 6000 Kop er, 
Slovenia 
g reg or.kovacic@f hs.up r.si 

Nataša Ravbar, Metka Petrič, Janj a Kog ovšek 
Scientif ic Research Centre of  the Slovenian Academy of  Sciences and Arts, Karst Research Institute, Titov trg 2, 
SI – 6230 Postoj na, Slovenia 
natasa.ravbar@zrc-sazu.si, p etric@zrc-sazu.si, kog ovsek@zrc-sazu.si 

 UDC: 911.2:551.444(497.4) 
COBISS:  1.02 

ABSTRACT 
Latest research on karst waters in Slovenia and their sig nif icance 
In this p ap er an overview on recent research on karst waters in Slovenia is p resented. In recent y ears a g reat 
emp hasis was g iven to the investig ation of  water f low and transp ort in karst aquif ers and questions reg ard- 
ing the p rotection of  karst water. In p ap er, the results of  a series of  studies, such as tracer tests, GIS methods, 
hy drolog ical  time series  analysis  are  discussed,  as  well  as  their  contribution  to  the scientif ic knowledg e. 
The results of  the studies show that only continuous research of  karst waters with the use of  diff erent inves- 
tig ation  techniques  is a g uarantee f or eff icient p rotection  of  karst  water,  which  is  becoming strateg ically 
imp ortant natural resource. 

KEY  WORDS 
karst, karst aquif er, tracer test, time series analysis, water sources, vulnerability, protection of  karst water, Slovenia 

IZ VLEČEK 
Novej še študij e voda na krasu in nj ihov p omen 
V p risp evku j e p redstavlj en p reg led raziskav kraških voda v Slovenij i v zadnj ih nekaj  letih. V tem obdobj u 
izstop aj o p reučevanj e toka in transp orta snovi v kraških vodonosnikih ter vp rašanj a p ovezana z varovanj em 
kraških voda. V članku so p redstavlj eni rezultati raziskav, ki zaj emaj o sledilne p oizkuse, up orabo GIS-ov 
in analize hidroloških časovnih vrst. Rezultati p redstavlj enih raziskav kažej o, da j e zg olj  zvezno p reučevanj e 
kraških voda z up orabo različnih raziskovalnih tehnik zag otovilo za učinkovito varovanj e kraške p odtalnice, 
ki p ostaj a strateško p omembna naravna dobrina. 

KLJ UČNE BESEDE 
kras, kraški  vodonosnik, sledilni p oizkus,  analiza  časovnih  vrst,  vodni  viri,  ranlj ivost,  varovanj e kraške 
p odtalnice, Slovenij a 

The article was submitted f or p ublication on June  16, 2011. 

                                                                                                                      65 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Gregor Kovačič, Nataša Ravbar, Metka Petrič, Janja Kogovšek                       Latest research on karst waters  … 

1  Introduction 

     In Slovenia karst areas mostly consist of thick carbonate rock sequences of Mesozoic age forming 
large karst massifs and plateaus that are intersected by lower karst areas, poljes and valleys. Karst areas 
cover about 44% of the state  (Gams 2003) and contain large amounts of quality groundwater. Half of 
the country’s needs for the drinking water supply are abstracted from karst aquifers. These areas are, 
however, very permeable and enable immediate infiltration of water into the system. In the underground 
a three dimensional flow net of underground conduits and voids is developed (White 2002; Ford and 
Williams 2007). Due to some other specific characteristics (absence of protective layers, concentrated 
recharge, high flow velocities through underground channels, absence of organisms that usually take 
nutrients on the surface, etc.), karst aquifers are extremely vulnerable to pollution. 
     Considering both, the importance of karst aquifers and their susceptibility to pollution, many stud- 
ies focused on topics such as assessments of vulnerability, investigations of water flow and transport, 
as well as the protection of water sources. Studies included different field and other investigation tech- 
niques,  such  as tracer tests,  GIS methods, hydrological time  series  analysis,  etc.  In this paper  recent 
research achievements in Slovenia, performed mainly by the associates of the Karst Research Institute 
of Scientific Research Centre of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts and associates of Faculty 
of Humanities Koper University of Primorska are presented. 

2  Water flow and transport of soluble substances in the Unica river basin 

     For efficient protection of karst waters against pollution it is essential to understand and consid- 
er the characteristics of water flow and transport of soluble substances in the underground and processes 
of their exchange with surface waters. The tracer tests were proved as one of the most suitable meth- 
ods for such studies. Tracing with natural tracers involves detailed monitoring of natural parameters 
of karst waters in longer periods. In tracing with artificial tracers different substances are injected into 
the water  system  and their  appearance  is  observed  at  selected points within the  system  (e.g., water 
caves, springs). In recent years, tracer tests were applied in several research projects on Slovene karst. 
Beside Rižana springs catchment area, the recharge area of the Malenščica (regionally important drink- 
ing water source) and Unica springs at the rim of the Planina polje has been most intensively studied 
(Fig.  1). 
     The study area is located in SW Slovenia. The springs are recharged by three hydrologically con- 
nected parts. The central part is the karst massif of Javorniki and Snežnik. At the western side it borders 
the Pivka river valley and at the eastern and northern side a string of karst poljes  (the biggest among 
them is the Cerknica polje). In the Javorniki-Snežnik part, the underground flow is dominant, and in 
other two parts surface streams are present also. Surface streams are mainly recharged by karst waters, 
and after a certain distance of surface flow they sink again. To complement the already existing knowl- 
edge about the relations between these contribution areas  (Gams  1965; Habič  1987; Kogovšek  1998; 
1999; 2001a; 2001b), a monitoring net was installed in 2007 (3 rain-gauges and 9 data loggers for record- 
ing discharge, temperature – T, and electrical conductivity – EC). Additionally, two multi-tracer tests 
with artificial tracers were carried out. 
     High oscillations of water temperature at the springs indicate a significant share of secondary recharge 
from the surface water bodies  (Fig. 2). By comparison of the occurrence of the peaks  (maximum) or 
saddles (minimum) of the T curves of the Kotliči and Malenščica springs, the flow velocity in the karst 
system between them was estimated to 145–215 m/h (Kogovšek and Petrič 2010b). Similar values were 
calculated as a result of five tracer tests performed previously in this area. The T and EC curves of the 
Unica spring show an important influence of the recharge from the Pivka sinking stream, which is not 
characteristic for the Malenščica spring. In all springs the extreme T values are detected during high 

66 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012                                                                                    Articles 

                                                                                                                 HUN 
                                                                                             AUT 

                                                                   e 
                                                                   j 
                                                                  l 
                                                                  o 
                                                                 p 
                                                                a  
                                                               n                                SLO 
                                                              i 
                                                              n 
                                                             a                     ITA 
                                                            l 
                                                            P 
                                                                                                            CRO 

                                                           Malenščica 
                                          Unica 

                                               Planina Cave 
                 e 
                 v 
                 a 
               C 
               a  
               n 
              j 
              o 
              t 
             s 
             o 
            P 
                                                              Tkalca Cave 
                                                 J 
                                                  a 
                                                   v                     Kotliči 
                                                    o 
                                                    r 
                                                     n 
                                                      i 
                                                      k 
                                                       i 
                                                         - 
                                                         S 
                                                         n 
                                                          e 
                       Postojna                            ž 
                                                            n 
                                                            i 
                                                             k 
                                                                                                               Cerknica 
                                                                                                               polje 
            Pivka                                                                          Mala 

                                                                                         Karlovica 
                                                                                           Cave 

                                 karst aquifer                             test site with selected trickles 

                                 fissured aquifer                          spring 

                                 porous aquifer                            tracer injection point 

                                 very low permeable rocks                  data logger 

                                 cave                                      main and secondary water connection 

                                 surface stream 

                                                              2 km           N 
                                                                                                Cartography: Metka Petrič 

Fig ure 1: Hy drog eolog ical map of  the p art of  the  Unica River catchment area. 

waters as a reflection of a dominant recharge from the surface water bodies, while during low waters 
the recharge is slower and the retention time of water in the karst underground longer. At such con- 
ditions the share of primary recharge from the Javorniki-Snežnik karst aquifer is larger. 
     Artificial tracers were used in May and November 2008 to prove the main groundwater flow from 
the  Mala  Karlovica  Cave  at  the  Cerknica  polje  to  the  Kotliči  spring  and  further  on  toward  the 
Malenščica and Unica springs. The results are presented in Figs. 1 and 3 (Gabrovšek et al. 2010). During 
the second tracer test, the tracer was also injected into an oil collector which collects drainage water 
from the highway Ljubljana–Postojna to provide us with the characteristics of the contaminant flow 
from the karst surface. 
     Outflow from the collector infiltrates into the vadose zone (upper, unsaturated part of the aquifer). 
In the period without rainfall the flow towards the observed springs was slow and tracer was appear- 
ing in very low concentrations. Only the intensive rain pushed it more efficiently out of the system. At 
given hydrological conditions, the main direction of flow was toward the Unica spring and only low 
concentrations of tracer were recorded at the Malenščica spring. 

                                                                                                                       67 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

Gregor Kovačič, Nataša Ravbar, Metka Petrič, Janja Kogovšek                          Latest research on karst waters  … 

      25 
 )    20 
  m   15 
  m 
 (    10 
  f 
   e 
 I     5 
       0 
                                                                   Unica                Malenščica 
     1.0                                                           Pivka                Kotliči 
                                                                   Cerknica Lake 

  x 
  a 
  m  0.8 
 H 
 / 
 H 
     
 r   0.6 
 o 
  x 
  a 
  m 
 Q    0.4 
 / 
 Q 

     0.2 

     0.0 

      12             Unica              Malenščica 

                     Pivka              Kotliči 
      10             Cerknica Lake 

       8 
 ) 
 C 
 ° 
 ( 
       6 
    
 T 

       4 

       2 

       0 

     550 
                           Unica           Malenščica 
                           Pivka           Kotliči 
     500 

 ) 
 m   450 
 c 
 / 
 S 
 m 
 (   400 
     
     
 C 
 E 
     350 

     300 

     250 
      1/1/ 08        16/1/08        31/1/08         15/2/08         1/3/08         16/3/08         31/3/08        15/4/08 

Fig ure 2: Eff ective inf iltration and discharg es or water levels  (p resented relatively to the maximum 
value f or the two hy drolog ical y ears),  T and EC at selected monitoring p oints. 

     Percolation through the vadose zone is significantly slower than groundwater flow through karst 
conduits and it depends on various factors. These were studied by the monitoring of precipitation and 
discharge of selected trickles in the Postojna cave (Fig. 1) over successive hydrological years. It was estab- 
lished that the dynamics of percolation through the vadose zone is directly related to the quantity and 

68 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012                                                                                    Articles 

       14                                                                                                        20 
                                                                  C_Kotliči                 C_Malenščica 

   )                                                              C_Rak branch              C_Pivka branch 
   3   12 
   m                                                              C_Unica                   Q_Malenščica 
   /                                                                                                              16 
   g 
   m                                                              Q_Unica                   Time of injection 
   (   10                                                                                                            ) 
   C                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                      / 
                                                                                                                     3 
   e 
   n                                                                                                              12  m 
   i    8                                                                                                            (  
   n 
   a                                                                                                                  Q 
   r                                                                                                                     
   u                                                                                                                  e  
     
   f                                                                                                                  g 
   o    6                                                                                                             r 
                                                                                                                      a 
   n                                                                                                               8 h 
   o                                                                                                                  c 
   i                                                                                                                  s 
   t                                                                                                                  i 
   a                                                                                                                  D 
   r    4 
   t 
   n 
   e 
   c                                                                                                              4 
   n 
   o    2 
   C 

        0                                                                                                         0 

       10 
    ) 
     m 
     m  5 
    ( 
        
    P 
        0 
               20.5.08       21.5.08       22.5.08        23.5.08       24.5.08        25.5.08       26.5.08 

                                                            Date 

      0.6 
  ) 
  3 
   m 
  /   0.5             Malenščica           Unica 
   g 
   m 
  ( 
     
      0.4             Rak branch           Pivka branch 
   e 
   n 
  i 
   n  0.3 
   a 
   r 
   u 
     
  f   0.2 
   o 
     
   . 
   c 
   n  0.1 
   o 
  C 
      0.0 

   ) 
    s 
   / 
   3   60 
    m 
   ( 
       
   Q                     Q_Malenščica          Q_Unica 
       40 
       
    e 
    g 
    r 
    a  20 
   h 
    c 
    s 
   i 
   D    0 

  )    50 
   m 
   m 
  (    25 
  P 

        0 
       18.11.08          23.11.08          28.11.08           3.12.08            8.12.08          13.12.08 
                                                         Date 

Fig ure 3:  Uranine breakthroug h curves, discharg es and p recip itation f or tracer tests conducted  (af ter 
Gabrovšek et al. 2010). 

                                                                                                                       69 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

Gregor Kovačič, Nataša Ravbar, Metka Petrič, Janja Kogovšek                       Latest research on karst waters  … 

intensity of precipitation. The study also showed that continuous percolation occurs only with good 
saturation of soil and vadose zone (Kogovšek 2010). 
     The calculations of the annual volumes in three consecutive hydrological years show substantial- 
ly different ratios between the annual quantity of water that infiltrates the vadose zone and the quantity 
of water that flows through it and supplies the deeper parts of the aquifer. This indicates that the process 
of recharging and discharging the vadose zone occurs in a longer period of several successive hydrolog- 
ical years. This was proven also by the results of isotopic analyses of oxygen that reflected residence-times 
from several months to one year and more  (Kogovšek 2010). Therefore also the transfer of contami- 
nants through the vadose zone is directly related to the dynamics of infiltrated precipitation. It is less 
intense in dry periods when discharges are minimal, and the most intense during the flood waves that 
follow longer dry periods. Artificial tracers additionally proved different retention times of infiltrat- 
ed precipitation and contaminants in the variously permeable parts of the vadose zone (Kogovšek and 
Šebela 2004)  and that  even thin layer  of  soil  and  sediments  on the  surface  are  an important filter in 
the transfer of soluble substances (Kogovšek 2010). 

3  Hydrological time series analysis as a tool for the study of karst aquifers: 
    example of the Unica river basin 

     A monitoring net installed in the catchment of the Unica and Malenščica springs was also used for 
a detailed statistical analysis of the daily and hourly hydrological time series. Data were acquired and 
measured in hydrological years  1975 and 2008. Study comprised an univariate  (rx  – correlation coef- 
ficient) and bivariate correlation (r       – cross-correlation coefficient) and spectral analysis of discharges, 
                                         xy 
precipitation and the physical-chemical parameters of the Malenščica spring as well as other springs 
in its catchment (Kovačič 2010). The results confirmed the current knowledge and revealed some new 
information about the hydrogeological functioning of the Unica and Malenščica springs. The results 
bring also important methodological novelties. 
     The study has shown that the size of a catchment area can influence the memory effect of indi- 
vidual karst springs; typically, the memory effect of larger karst aquifers (e.g. Unica, Malenščica, Pivka, 
etc.) is greater and vice versa. In comparison with larger systems, the response of smaller karst springs 
to precipitation events is faster and more intense; however the duration of their pulse is shorter. The 
study has shown that in the karst aquifers with quick responses to precipitation events (fast and simul- 
taneous recharge) via ponors the EC data sets can provide valuable information about hydrogeological 
behaviour of karst aquifers. On the other hand, the applicability of T time series is rather limited, because 
the T of water is not a conservative tracer and the interpretation of these time series is delicate in karst 
systems. Methodologically important is that the results of the cross-correlation analysis (r                  ) of hourly 
                                                                                                            xy 
EC values between ponors and springs were in line with the results  (underground tracer velocities) 
of the tracer test conducted in May 2008 (Gabrovšek et al. 20 10; Kovačič 20 10), which shows the use- 
fulness of EC time series analyses as an alternative method to water tracing between ponors and related 
springs. 
     A comparative analysis of the time series analysis performed for the Malenščica and Unica springs 
in the successive hydrological years  1997–2002 reveals that the selection of the hydrological year can 
have strong effects on the results (e.g. different decorrelation lags, correlation and cross-correlation coef- 
ficients, etc). In this regard, in order to obtain a more general image of the functioning of a karst system 
in absolute terms, it is important to consider longer hydrological data sets. 
     Furthermore, not all karst aquifers characterized by a higher memory effect should be considered 
as poorly karstified. In this regard, caution needs to be used when classifying karst aquifers into groups 
only on the basis of the results of a time series analysis. It is essential that the results of time series analy- 
sis must be interpreted together with the results of other methods used in karst hydrology (Kovačič 2010). 

70 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012                                                                    Articles 

       Measuring site 

       Rain gauge 
  0.50     Maximum r (k) in HY 2008                                  a 
                                                                    c 
                 xy                                                i 
                                                                   n 
                                                                 U 
  (1)     Lag in hours at max r  (k) 
                         xy 

       Watercourse 

                           Unica 
                          (Planina Cave)                 Malenščica 
                                                            0 
                                                             .7 
                                                               0 
                                      )            0             ( 
                                                                 0 
                                                    . 
                                     6              7             ) 
                                    2                               0 
                                   (                 8 
                                      
                                  7                                  .9 
                                 5                    (        0       6 
                                 .                     –                  
                                               0        1       .7      ( 
                               0                                         0 
                             )                  .8       3        1       ) 
                            0                            )         (        0 
                            (                    8                  0        . 
                          0                               0         )        8 
                         9                        (        .9                 5 
                          .                        0                 0          ( 
                        0                          )         4        .9        4 
                       )                                                         9 
                      1                              0        (         6         ) 
                     (                                         0           
                       
                                                     .9        )         ( 
                    4                                                     0 
                   9                                  2                   ) 
                 0.                                              0 
                                                                 .          0 
                                                       (          5 
                                                        –          3        .4 
                                                         4                    0 
                                                          6         ( 
                                                          )          – 
                                                                     1 
                           )                                          9 
                          7                                            ) 
                         3 
                        ( 
                       9  
                      0 
                     0.                                                               0.89 (2) 
                                                                                Rak 
                                                                                      0.91 (4) 
                                          Rak (Tkalca jama Cave) 

  Postojna                                                                Kotliči        Rak 

                                                                                     (Zelške jame 
            Pivka (Postojna Cave)                                                    Cave) 

             a 
            k                     0             2             4   km 
            v 
            i 
           P 
                                                                                  Cartography: Gregor Kovačič 

Fig ure 4: Cross-correlation coeff icients f or the hourly discharg e  (black),  T  (blue) and EC  (g reen) time 
series in the hy drolog ical y ear 2008  (af ter Kovačič 2010). 

4  Drinking water sources and their protection 

    Generally, karst water sources quality and quantity are satisfactory, but they may be organically pol- 
luted  or  threatened  by  human  activities.  Due  to  inappropriately  built  roads  and  dumping  sites  the 
protection against chemical contamination is usually not assured. 
    Dumping is a serious threat to karst groundwater, due to the washing out of waste substances by 
precipitation and fast percolation of wastewater into the underground. This is explicitly uttered in case 
of  landfills  located  on karst  areas with very  high  intrinsic vulnerability  (Zwahlen  2004;  Ravbar  and 
Kovačič 2006). A well-planned, long-term monitoring of negative influences on groundwater quality 
in their impact areas is therefore necessary to efficiently define and implement the protection measures. 
Additional to basic hydrogeological mapping, the tracer tests are a very useful method for selecting rep- 
resentative monitoring points and preparing a monitoring plan. In recent years, such approach was used 
for several landfills on Slovene karst (Petrič and Šebela 2005; Kogovšek and Petrič 2006; 2007; 2010a). 
    The tracer tests were carried out at the Mala Gora, Sežana and Mozelj landfills in the period 2004–2006. 
By tracer tests the main groundwater flow connections were defined and for each of them the maxi- 
mal (regarding the first appearance of tracer) and dominant apparent flow velocities (regarding the first 
peak of the breakthrough curve) were calculated. Additionally, the recovery of injected tracers was assessed. 

                                                                                                      71 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

Gregor Kovačič, Nataša Ravbar, Metka Petrič, Janja Kogovšek                        Latest research on karst waters  … 

The springs with the main underground water connections should be selected as the monitoring points. 
High apparent velocities of flow toward the main  springs and large  shares of recovered tracers indi- 
cate very high vulnerability and a serious danger of pollution with harmful substances from the landfill. 
To increase the possibility of detecting the sources of pollution, it is sensible to adjust the time and fre- 
quency of sampling to hydrological conditions. 
     Twenty years long monitoring of pollutant transport through the vadose zone confirmed that the 
leaching even of minor contamination from the surface may take several decades before the original 
conditions are restored (Kogovšek 1997; 2010). This knowledge is the basis for the protection of springs, 
which can be influenced by different activities on karst surface (e.g., landfills, military training areas, 
petrochemical depot, roads and highways, railways, agriculture, petrol stations, illegal waste disposal 
dumps, etc.) Similarly, the water quality at karst springs can change a lot during different hydrologi- 
cal conditions. Abundant precipitation that follows dry periods flushes accumulated pollution through 
the recharge areas of karst springs, leading to the most intense transfer of contaminants (Kogovšek 2001b). 
     Numerous socio-economic processes increase the drinking water demand and thus enhance its uti- 
lization. The attitude towards water is extremely careless and wasteful, as it has been confirmed by the 
detailed research on individual’s behavior towards drinking water (Veljanovski and Ravbar 2005). The 
study showed that an average inhabitant in SW Slovenia uses 130–150 L/day, the average monthly con- 
                                                    3                                                     3 
sumption of water in households was  12 m  . The biggest quantities of water (i.e.,  1.4 m /month) were 
                                                                                 3 
used for splashing. For hygienic purposes, a household used 2.6 m /month and for washing the dish- 
es and laundry 2.2 m3/month. Unfortunately, drinking water is in addition used for cleaning cars and 
streets, and for irrigation. 
     The study also showed (Veljanovski and Ravbar 2005) show that 60% of the asked thinks that the 
water consumption in their household is not big. Furthermore, the prices of water do not crucially impact 
the individual’s attitude towards water. Even if the price of the water would rise for a quarter, 66% of 
the asked would not change their consumption attitude. However, two thirds of the asked is willing to 
pay more, if the protection of water sources would be higher. 
     Despite very high importance of karst water sources, their protection is frequently insufficient (Ravbar 
and Kovačič 2006). Due to very high susceptibility of karst aquifers to contamination, their water sources 
require appropriate managing. Unfortunately, in the acts of Slovene legislation, the special character- 
istics of water flow within karst regions are not very seriously taken into consideration in determining 
the criteria for karst water sources protection. In contrast, in some other countries (e.g., Ireland, Switzerland), 
the  concept  of groundwater vulnerability mapping has been  successfully used for protection zoning 
and assessment of contamination risk is increasingly important in land use planning. European guide- 
lines for making such assessments (Daly et al. 2002) were elaborated. 
     The recently proposed Slovene approach (Ravbar and Goldscheider 2007) follows these guidelines 
most comprehensively. The method includes the assessment of vulnerability and degree of hazard. These 
two  assessments  form  the  basis  for  calculating  the  contamination  risk  to  groundwater  or  water 
sources. The final result of the vulnerability assessment can be transformed into the water protection 
zones. 
     The Slovene approach ranks among extremely sophisticated methods because its application does 
require a large amount of data, time, financial, and technical sources. It is the only one to offer the pos- 
sibility of assessing the importance of groundwater or water sources on a basis of which it is possible 
to predict potential damage and elaborate a priority list of rehabilitation measures. Validity tests on the 
acquired results showed that compared with simpler methods the use of such a method is quite rea- 
sonable because it provides more reliable and less subjective results (Ravbar and Goldscheider 2009). 

Fig ure 5: An examp le of  vulnerability map f or a local drinking water source in SW Slovenia.  The map 
rep resents characteristics of  g roundwater f low in the saturated zone of  the karst aquif er  (af ter Ravbar 
and Goldscheider 2009).  p 

72 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                        G 
                                                                                                                                           Legend                                       e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        o 
                                                                                                                                                                                       g 
                                                                                                                                                            F 
                                                                                                                                                                                        r 
                                                                                                                                                stream 
                                                                                                                                                                                        a 
                                                                                                                                                                                        f 
                                                                                                                                                road                                    s 
                                                                                                                                                                                        k 
                                                             Knežak 
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                        v 
                                                                                                                                                settlement 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        s 
                                                                                                                                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                          Vulnerability degree                          n 
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                                        k 
                                                                                                                                                 high                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                         8 
                                                                                                                                                                                         4 
                                                                                                                                                                                        - 
                                                                                                                                                                                         1 
                                                                                                                                                 medium 
                                                                                                                                                                                        , 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                         2 
                                                                                                                                                                                         0 
                                                                                                                                                 low 
                                                                                                                                                                0      250     500 
                                                                                                                                                                                Meters   1 
                                                                                                                                          Cartography : Nataša Ravbar                    2 

                           Podst e nj še k 
                              s prings 
                        ! 
                        ! 
                        ! 
                           ! 

                                                     Šembije 

                                                                                                                                                                                        A 
                                                                                                                                                                                        r 
                                                                                                                                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                                        c 
7                                                                                                                                                                                       l 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
3                                                                                                                                                                                       s 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

Gregor Kovačič, Nataša Ravbar, Metka Petrič, Janja Kogovšek              Latest research on karst waters  … 

5  Conclusion 

    Karst  springs  are becoming  economically more  and more  important  due to  its  abundance  (high 
flow rate springs up to some tens of m3/s) and relatively high water quality not only in Slovenia, but 
also worldwide. However, karst aquifers pose many specific engineering and environmental problems, 
related to the presence of underground conduits and voids and the specifics of groundwater flow. The 
position of most of the underground water flow paths is often unknown, which makes the character- 
ization of karst aquifers extremely difficult. 
    Studying the special character of karst therefore requires particular investigation approaches and 
techniques  (e.g., speleological investigations, tracer tests, etc.; Drew and Goldscheider 2007). In this 
paper the newest achievements in this respect have been presented that are valuable contributions to 
further understanding of karst aquifers and their behaviour. The newest findings on the characteris- 
tics of water flow and transport of soluble substances, storage capacities etc. are important and should 
be utilized in further research and considered when monitoring karst water quality, implementing ground- 
water protection measures and optimizing future water exploitation. 

6  References 

Daly, D., Dassargues, A., Drew, D., Dunne, S., Goldscheider, N., Neale, N., Popescu, C., Zwahlen, F. 2002: 
    Main concepts of the European Approach for (karst) groundwater vulnerability assessment and map- 
    ping. Hydrogeology Journal  10-2. Hannover. DOI:  10.1007/s10040-001-0185-1 
Drew, D., Goldscheider, N. 2007: Combined use of methods. Methods in Karst Hydrogeology. London. 
Ford, D. C., Williams, P. W. 2007: Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology. Chichester. 
Gabrovšek, F., Kogovšek, J., Kovačič, G., Petrič, M., Ravbar, N., Turk, J. 2010: Recent results of tracer 
    tests in the catchment of the Unica River (SW Slovenia). Acta Carsologica 39-1. Ljubljana. 
Gams, I.  1965: Aperçu  sur l’hydrologie du karst  slovène et  sur  ses comunications  souterraines. Naše 
    jame 7,  1-2. Ljubljana. 
Gams, I. 2003: Kras v Sloveniji v prostoru in času. Ljubljana. 
Habič, P. 1987: Raziskave kraških izvirov v Malnih pri Planini in zaledja vodnih virov v občini Postojna. 
    Report, Karst Research Institute SRC SASA. Postojna. 
Kogovšek,  J.  1997:  Pollution  transport  in  the vadose  zone.  Karst  Waters  &  Environmental  Impacts: 
    Proceedings. Rotterdam. 
Kogovšek, J. 1998: Basic physico-chemical karst water properties on Notranjsko. Acta Carsologica 27-2. 
    Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek,  J.  1999:  New  knowledge  about  the  underground  water  drainage  in  the  Northern  part  of 
    Javorniki Mountains (High Karst). Acta Carsologica 28-1. Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek, J. 2001a: Monitoring the Malenščica water pulse by several parameters in November  1997. 
    Acta Carsologica 30-1. Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek, J. 2001b: How the Malenščica karst spring, Slovenia is feed – Results by environment and 
    artificial tracers. New Approaches Characterizing Groundwater Flow: Proceedings of the 31 International 
    Association of Hydrogeologists Congress. Munich. 
Kogovšek, J. 2010: Characteristics of Percolation Through Karst Vadose Zone. Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek, J.,  Petrič, M. 2004: Advantages  of longer-term tracing  – three  case  studies from  Slovenia. 
    Environmental Geology 47. New York. DOI:  10.1007/s00254-004-1135-8 
Kogovšek, J., Petrič, M. 2006: Tracer test on the Mala gora landfill near Ribnica in south-eastern Slovenia. 
    Acta Carsologica 35-2. Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek, J.,  Petrič, M.  2007:  Directions  and  dynamics  of flow  and transport  of  contaminants from 
    the landfill near Sežana (SW Slovenia). Acta Carsologica 36-3. Ljubljana. 

74 

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

Geografski vestnik 84-1, 2012                                                                         Articles 

Kogovšek, J., Petrič, M. 2010a: Tracer tests as a tool for planning the monitoring of negative impacts 
    of the Mozelj landfill (SE Slovenia) on karst waters. Acta Carsologica 39-2. Ljubljana. 
Kogovšek, J., Petrič, M. 2010b: Water temperature as a natural tracer – a case study of the Malenščica 
    karst spring (SW Slovenia). Geologia Croatica 63-2. Zagreb. DOI:  104 154/gc.2010.14 
Kogovšek, J., Šebela, S. 2004: Water tracing through the vadose zone above Postojnska Jama, Slovenia. 
    Environmental Geology 45. New York. DOI:  10.1007/s00254-003-0958-z $ 
Kovačič, G. 2010: Hydrogeological study of the Malenščica karst spring (SW Slovenia) by means of a time 
    series analysis. Acta Carsologica 39-2. Ljubljana. 
Petrič, M., Šebela, S. 2005: Hydrogeological research as a basis for the preparation of the plan of mon- 
    itoring groundwater contamination – a case study of the Stara vas landfill near Postojna (SW Slovenia). 
    Acta Carsologica 34-2. Ljubljana. 
Ravbar, N., Goldscheider, N. 2007: Proposed methodology of vulnerability and contamination risk map- 
    ping for the protection of karst aquifers in Slovenia. Acta Carsologica 36-3. Ljubljana. 
Ravbar, N., Goldscheider, N. 2009: Comparative application of four methods of groundwater vulner- 
    ability  mapping  in  a  Slovene  karst  catchment.  Hydrogeology  Journal  17-3.  Hannover.  DOI: 
    10.1007/s10040-008-0368-0 
Ravbar, N., Kovačič, G. 2006: Karst water management in Slovenia in the frame of vulnerability map- 
    ping. Acta Carsologica 35-2. Ljubljana. 
Veljanovski, T., Ravbar, N. 2005: Socio-cultural determinants of drinking water consumption and the 
    relation  to  it  in  south-western  Slovene  households.  Kras: Water  and  Life  in  a  Rocky  Landscape. 
    Ljubljana. 
White, W.B. 2002: Karst hydrology: recent developments and open questions. Engineering Geology 65-2. 
    Amsterdam. DOI:10.1016/S0013-7952(01)00116-8 
Zwahlen, F. 2004: COST Action 620, Vulnerability and Risk Mapping for the Protection of Carbonate 
    (Karstic) Aquifers. Final Report COST Action 620. Brussels, Luxembourg. 

                                                                                                             75 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

        76 
