LIVING WITH KARST 
A Fragile Foundation 
AGI ENVIRONMENTAL AWARENESS SERIES 
Publishing Partners 
AGI gratefully acknowledges the following organizations’ support for the Living with Karst booklet and poster. To order, contact AGI at www.agiweb.org or (703) 379-2480. 
National Speleological 
Society (with support from the National Speleological Foundation and the Richmond Area Speleological Society) 
American Cave Conservation 
Association (with support from the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation and a Section 319(h) Nonpoint Source Grant from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency through the Kentucky Division of Water) 
Illinois Basin Consortium (Illinois, Indiana and Kentucky State Geological Surveys) 
National Park Service 
U.S. Bureau of Land 
Management 
USDA Forest Service 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
U.S. Geological Survey 
A Fragile Foundation George Veni 
Harvey DuChene 
Nicholas C. Crawford 
Christopher G. Groves 
George N. Huppert 
Ernst H. Kastning 
Rick Olson 
Betty J. Wheeler 
American Geological Institute 
in cooperation with 
National Speleological Society and American Cave Conservation Association, Illinois Basin Consortium National Park Service, U.S. Bureau of Land Management, USDA Forest Service U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Geological Survey 
AGI Environmental Awareness Series, 4 
With a Foreword by Philip E. LaMoreaux 
2 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
George Veni is a hydrogeologist and the owner of George Veni and Associates in San Antonio, TX. He has studied karst internationally for 25 years, serves as an adjunct professor at The University of 
Ernst H. Kastning is a professor of geology at Texas and Western Kentucky University, and chairs 
Radford University in Radford, VA. As a hydrogeolo- the Texas Speleological Survey and the National 
gist and geomorphologist, he has been actively Speleological Society’s Section of Cave Geology 
studying karst processes and cavern development for and Geography 
over 30 years in geographically diverse settings with an emphasis on structural control of groundwater Harvey R. DuChene, a petroleum geologist 
flow and landform development. residing in Englewood, CO, has been studying caves throughout the world for over 35 years; he is 
George Huppert is professor and chair of the particularly interested in sulfuric acid karst systems 
Department of Geography and Earth Sciences at the such as the Guadalupe Mountains of New Mexico 
University of Wisconsin at La Crosse. He has been and west Texas. 
active in researching karst management and conservation problems for over 30 years. He is also Nicholas Crawford, a professor in the 
a life founding member and Vice President for Department of Geography and Geology and 
Conservation of the American Cave Conservation Director of the Center for Cave and Karst Studies 
Association. at Western Kentucky University, has written over 200 articles and technical reports dealing with 
Rickard A. Olson has served as the ecologist groundwater contamination of carbonate aquifers. 
at Mammoth Cave National Park for the past seven years, and has conducted cave-related research on Christopher G. Groves is an associate professor 
a variety of topics for the past 25 years. Most of his and director of the Hoffman Environmental Research 
research efforts have been motivated by cave and Institute at Western Kentucky University. His current 
karst conservation needs. work involves development of geochemical models to understand carbon cycling within karst landscape 
Betty Wheeler, a hydrogeologist in the and aquifer systems. The Institute, hoffman.wku.edu, 
Drinking Water Protection Section of the Minnesota is working on a variety of cooperative karst-related 
Department of Health in St. Paul, has been studying research and educational programs. 
karst groundwater processes for 17 years. She served as the book review editor for the Journal of Cave and Karst Studies for more than 10 years, and she is currently conducting susceptibility assessments of noncommunity public-water-supply wells throughout Minnesota. Design: De Atley Design Printing: CLB Printing Company 
Copyright © 2001 by American Geological Institute All rights reserved. 
ISBN 0-922152-58-6 
4 
F O R E W O R D 
Karst regions, areas underlain by limestone, dolomite, marble, gypsum, and salt, constitute about 25% of the land surface of the world. They are areas of abundant resources including water supplies, limestone quarries, minerals, oil, and natural gas. Many karst terrains make beautiful housing sites for urban development. Several major cities are underlain in part by karst, for example, St. Louis, MO; Nashville, TN; Birmingham, AL; Austin, TX; and others. However, since people have settled on karst areas, many problems have developed; for example, insufficient and easily contaminated water supplies, poor surface water drainage, and catastrophic collapse and subsidence features. By experience we have learned that each karst area is complex, and that special types of investigation are needed to help us bet- ter understand and live in them. In addition, urban development in these areas requires special sets of rules and regulations to minimize potential problems from present and future development. 
The American Geological Institute produces the Environmental Awareness Series in cooperation with its Member Societies and others to provide a non-technical framework for a better understanding of environmental geoscience. This booklet was prepared under the sponsorship of the AGI Environmental Geoscience Advisory Committee (EGAC) with the support of the AGI Foundation. Publishing partners that have supported development of this booklet include: The American Cave Conservation Association, the Geological surveys in the states of Kentucky, Indiana, and Illinois (Illinois Basin Consortium), National Park Service, National Speleological Society, U.S. Bureau of Land Management, USDA Forest Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the U. S. Geological Survey. 
Since its creation in 1993, the EGAC has assisted AGI by identifying projects and activities that will help the Institute achieve the following goals: increase public awareness and understanding of environmental issues and the controls of Earth systems on the environment; communicate societal needs 
for better management of Earth resources, protection from natural hazards, and 
assessment of risks associated with human impacts on the environment; promote appropriate science in public policy through improved communication within 
and beyond the geoscience community related to environmental 
policy issues and proposed legislation; increase dissemination 
of information related to environmental programs, research, 
and professional activities in the geoscience community. 
This booklet describes ways to live safely, comfort- ably, and productively in karst areas, and illustrates 
that through use of improved science and technology, environmental concerns associated with karst can be 
better assessed and significantly resolved. 
Philip E. LaMoreaux Chair, AGI Environmental Geoscience Advisory Committee, 1993- 
P R E F A C E 
Karst areas are among the world’s most diverse, fascinating, resource-rich, yet problematic terrains. They contain the largest springs and most productive groundwater supplies on Earth. They provide unique subsurface habitat to rare animals, and their caves preserve fragile prehistoric material for millennia. They are also the landscapes most vulnerable to environmental impacts. Their groundwater is the most easily polluted. Water in their wells and springs can dramatically and rapidly fluctuate in response to surface events. Sinkholes located miles away from rivers can flood homes and businesses. Following storms, droughts, and changes in land use, new sinkholes can form suddenly, collapsing to swallow buildings, roads, and pastures. 
The unique attributes of karst areas present challenges. In many cases, understanding the complex hydrologies of karst aquifers still requires specialists for accurate assessments. Unlike other terrains where most processes occur and can be observed at the surface, many critical processes in karst occur underground, requiring monitoring of groundwater flow and exploration and study of caves. Rather than being mere geologic curiosities, caves are now recognized as subsurface extensions of karst landscapes, serving vital roles in the evolution of the landscapes, and in defining the environmental resources and problems that exist in those areas. 
This booklet unravels some of the complexities and provides easy to understand, sound practical guidance for living in karst areas. Major topics include 
+ Describing what karst is and how it “works.” + Identifying the resources and uses of karst areas from prehistoric to modern times. + Outlining the problems that can occur in karst areas and their causes. + Providing guidelines and solutions for preventing or helping overcome problems. + Presenting sources of additional information for further research and assistance. 
Karst areas offer important resources, with much of their wealth hidden underground. Careful use can produce many economic and scientific benefits. Sound management of karst areas requires the conscientious participation of citizens including homeowners, planners, government officials, develop- ers, farmers, ranchers, and other land-use decision makers. It’s up to you to manage your karst areas wisely. We hope this booklet helps. 
We greatly appreciate the assistance we received from individuals and organizations in preparing this booklet. Several reviews helped craft the manuscript and ensure that the information was correct and up-to-date. Numerous photographs, in addition to those provided by the authors, were kindly donated for use. Our special thanks go to the organizations named on the inside cover who supported the publication and to the American Geological Institute for producing it. 
George Veni and Harvey DuChene, editors May, 2001 
5 
6 
Sinkhole plain, typical of many well-developed karst landscapes. 
F 
or a landscape that makes up over a fifth 
+ Challenges to water-supply development; of the United States, “karst” is a word that is 
+ Challenges to mine dewatering and foreign to most Americans. Major karst areas 
excavation. occur in 20 states and numerous smaller karst regions occur throughout the nation (Fig. 1). Karst describes landscapes characterized by caves, sinkholes, underground streams, and other features formed by the slow dissolving, rather than mechanical eroding, of bedrock. As populations have grown and expanded into karst areas, people have discovered the problems of living on those terrains, such as sinkhole collapse, sinkhole flooding, and easi- ly polluted groundwater that rapidly moves contaminants to wells and springs. With the help of science and technology, residents and 
The financial impacts of these problems are substantial. As an example, the repair costs of five large dam sites in karst settings were in excess of $140 million. According to the U.S. National Research Council report, Mitigating Losses from Land Subsidence in the United States (1991), six states have individu- ally sustained at least $10 million in damages resulting from sinkholes. As a result, awareness programs for catastrophic subsidence areas have been developed, as well as insurance programs applicable to sinkhole problems. 
communities are developing solutions to the problems of living with karst. 
How Science and Technology Can Help 
What the Environmental Concerns Are Karst regions require special care to prevent contamination of vulnerable groundwater supplies and to avoid building in geologically hazardous areas. Living in karst environments 
Complicated geologic processes increase the problems of living in karst regions. As our understanding of karst systems has improved, so has our ability to prevent many land-use problems and to remediate those that do occur. Science and technology can 
may result in 
+ Provide information about karst aquifer 
+ Urban pollution of groundwater by sewage, runoff containing petrochemicals derived from paved areas, domestic and industrial chemicals, and trash; + Rural groundwater pollution from sewage, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, dead live- stock, and trash; + Destabilization of the delicate equilibrium 
between surface and underground compo- nents of karst resulting in alteration of drainage patterns and increasing incidents of catastrophic sinkhole collapse, particular- ly in areas of unplanned urban growth; + Construction problems, particularly the 
clearing and stabilization of land for build- ings and roads; 
K A R S T 
Karst is 
landforms 
and 
landscapes 
formed 
systems so that residents can better protect 
primarily groundwater supplies from pollution; + Supply information on geological hazards 
through the such as areas with the potential for collapse due to shallow cave systems, thereby helping 
dissolving 
planners avoid building in unstable areas; + Provide the means to map the subsurface 
of rock. 
hydrology and geology to identify areas where productive water wells may be located and to identify potential karst problems; + Provide information for planners, developers, 
land management officials, and the general public about the special problems of living in karst environments; and + Provide solutions for environmental problems 
when they do occur. 
7 
8 
Idaho, highly productive pseudokarst aquifer 
WA 
MT 
ID 
WY 
NV 
NE UT 
CO 
Hawaii, world’s longest and deepest lava tube 
ND 
OR 
SD California & Oregon, best developed marble karst in U.S. 
Oklahoma, CA longest U.S. 
KS gypsum cave 
AZ 
OK 
New Mexico, very large unusual 
NM 
caves formed by sulfuric acid 
TX 
Texas, world’s Alaska, caves containing impor- 
AK 
largest flowing artesian well tant paleontological and archeological evidence of dry land connection to Asia during Ice Age 
HI 
ME 
MN 
New York, glacial sediments 
VT preserved in caves and sinkholes 
NY 
NH 
WI 
MA MI 
CT 
RI 
IA 
PA 
NJ 
IL IN 
OH 
MD DC 
DE 
Kentucky, world’s longest cave WV 
MO 
VA 
KY 
Tennessee, state NC 
with most caves 
TN 
SC AR 
GA 
Missouri & Arkansas, rare endangered MS 
AL 
blind cave fish 
LA 
Florida, most productive U.S. Aquifer 
FL 
Carbonate Rocks (limestone, dolomite, marble) 
Exposed 
Buried (under 10 to 200 ft. [3 to 60 m] of non-carbonates) 
Fig. 1. This map is a general representation of U.S. karst and pseudokarst areas. While based on the best available informa- tion, the scale does not allow detailed and precise representation 
Evaporite Rocks (gypsum, halite) 
of the areas. Local geologic maps and field examination should 
Pseudokarst 
Exposed 
Buried (under 10 to 200 ft. [3 to 60 m] of non-evaporites) 
be used where exact information is needed. Karst features and hydrology vary from place to place. Some areas are highly 
Volcanic cavernous, and others are not. Although most karst is exposed 
Unconsolidated material at the land surface, some is buried under layers of sediment and rock, and still affects surface activities. 
9 
10 
Tourist 
trails 
through 
large 
karst 
pinnacles 
in Lunan 
Stone 
Forest, 
China. 
L 
andforms produced primarily through 
occurring acid that is very common in the dissolving of rock, such as limestone, 
groundwater. This acid is created when water dolomite, marble, gypsum, and salt, are 
falling through the atmosphere takes on a collectively known as karst. Features of karst 
small amount of carbon dioxide. As the slight- landscapes include sinkholes, caves, large 
ly acidic rainwater passes through soil, the springs, dry valleys and sinking streams. These 
water absorbs additional carbon dioxide and landscapes are characterized by efficient flow 
becomes more acidic. Acidic water readily of groundwater through conduits that become 
dissolves calcite, the principal mineral in larger as the bedrock dissolves. In karst 
limestone and marble, and an important areas, water commonly drains rapidly into 
mineral in dolomite. the subsurface at zones of recharge and then 
Acidic groundwater moving through frac- through a network of fractures, partings, and 
tures and other spaces within the rock gradu- caves, emerges at the surface in zones of 
ally alters small openings creating large pas- discharge at springs, seeps, and wells. 
sages and networks of interconnected con- The appearance of karst varies from 
duits. Solution sinkholes form by dissolving the place to place, with different features having 
bedrock at the surface downward as surface greater or lesser prominence according to 
water is captured and diverted underground local hydrogeologic factors. Even ancient or 
(Fig. 2). Most flow and enlargement take “paleokarst” that is buried under other rocks 
place at or just below the water table, the and sediments and is not exposed at the sur- 
level below which the ground is saturated with face can have an effect on surface land use. 
water. The circulation of water and bedrock Several false or “pseudokarst” areas also 
dissolution are greatest there because frac- occur, especially in the western United States 
tures are connected and most open, whereas (Fig.1). These regions contain karst-like fea- 
underground spaces tend to become tures which have developed in poorly soluble rocks. Although formed by different processes, pseudokarst areas are often simi- lar to karst areas in how they are used and affected by human activi- ties. 
How Karst Forms Karst forms as water dissolves soluble bedrock. Although water alone can dissolve 
progressively salt and gypsum, limestone, dolomite, and 
narrower and smaller with depth. Where these marble are less soluble and require acidic 
openings are dissolved large enough to allow water. Carbonic acid is a mild, naturally 
human entry, they are called “caves.” 
11 Fig. 2. This 
solution sinkhole 
holds water 
above the water 
table. Although 
most sinkholes 
drain rapidly, 
some like this 
one, have 
natural plugs 
and may hold 
water for many 
years. 
Fig. 3. (Right) Horizontal cave passages form below the water table, and they usually have a smooth, rounded to elliptical shape. The water table has since dropped below this Mexican cave, and recent floods washed in the boulders. 
Most caves form at or just below the water table, and consequently cave passages are generally horizontal. In cross section, these cave passages are elliptical tubes usual- ly developed in soluble beds of rock (Fig. 3). In contrast, passages formed above the water table are canyon-like corridors that have been formed by dissolution and physical erosion as water cut down through the rock. Cross sections of cave passages formed above the water table are narrow and tall, and pits are common (Fig. 4). 
Caves above the water table are tributaries to caves below the water table. Over time, small channels and conduits merge to form large cave passages in the downstream direction. In a mature cave system, an underground branching, tree-like drainage network develops that resembles surface stream systems (Fig. 5). The flow of water is concentrated in large conduits and typically emerges at a few springs with high rates of discharge. At this stage, the karst groundwater system 
Flow 
Fig. 4. (Above) Vertical cave pas- sages, like this one, typically form above the water table, usual- ly along fractures, and they efficiently chan- nel water that enters caves down to the aquifers below. 
Fig. 5. (Below) Flow patterns for underground water in karst commonly have a branching shape. Small branches, which begin by capturing surface water from sinkholes and fractures, gain in size and water volume as they flow downstream, merge, and even- tually discharge at springs. 
Fig. 6. (Left) This split-level cave in Mexico formed by water first flowing through the dry upper passage, which was abandoned as the water table dropped and groundwater cut a new route through the lower passage to reach the 12 
current water table. 
Fig. 8. (Right) The sharp edges along the walls and the tell-tale angular rocks on the floor are evidence that this passage formed by the collapse of a deeper passage. 
Fig. 7. (Right) A “speleothem” is a mineral deposit formed in caves by precipitation from mineral-rich water. Common examples are sta- lactites hanging from the ceiling, stalagmites growing up from the floor, and columns where the two join. Natural Bridge Caverns is a show cave in Texas. 
is a coherent part of the hydrologic cycle. Water passes downward from the surface, through this efficient system of natural “pipes” and emerges elsewhere at the surface as seeps and springs. 
Because springs usually discharge into valleys that are continually deepened by surface streams, water tables gradually fall and springs migrate to lower elevations. Consequently, newer cave passages form at lower elevations, while previously formed upper-level passages and rooms are drained (Fig. 6). These caves are relatively dry except for dripping water and an occasional stream making its way from the surface to the water table. Water dripping or flowing into passages may deposit calcite speleothems, such as sta- lactites, stalagmites, and columns (Fig. 7). Ceilings of rooms and passages collapse when passages become too wide to support the bedrock overlying them (Fig. 8). The danger of collapse increases when water is drained from the cave and its buoyant force is not present to help support ceilings. Some collapse sinkholes develop where collapse of the cave roof reaches the surface of the Earth (Fig. 9). More commonly, they develop when soil collapses after deeper soils wash into underlying caves. 
Fig. 9. (Below) On rare occa- sions, a collapsing cave room or passage may extend high enough that a collapse sinkhole forms in bedrock on the surface. 
13 
14 
Fig. 11. The fractures and pits in this limestone have become larger as the surrounding rock dissolved by solution. 
Fig. 10. When it rains, this New York swallet “swallows” all of the water that flows down the creek bed. 
blanket the bedrock and retard erosion, in karst, the continual removal of material into the subsurface allows high, sustained rates of erosion. Many karst areas, especially in the western United States where soil production is slow, are covered with only thin or patchy soils. 
Hydrologic Characteristics Karst features may or may not be easily rec- ognizable on the surface, but areas where the surface bedrock is limestone or gypsum have a high probability of karst development. Karst areas commonly lack surface water and have numerous stream beds that are dry except during periods of high runoff. These regions have internal drainage; streams flow into the closed depressions called sinkholes where there is no surface outlet. A typical sinkhole is bowl shaped, with one or more low spots along its bottom. In some cases a swallow hole, or swallet, may be present at the bottom of the sinkhole where surface water flows Unlike other landscapes, groundwater 
underground into fractures or caves (Fig. 10). recharge into karst aquifers carries substantial 
Water may also enter a karst aquifer along amounts of dissolved and suspended earth 
streams that flow over karst areas and disap- materials underground. First, the water con- 
pear from the surface. A stream of this type is tains ions that are produced naturally as the 
known as a sinking stream and in some cases rock is dissolved. Second, water conveys parti- 
it may lose water along a substantial part of cles that range in size from submicroscopic 
its length. In the subsurface, the storage and clay particles to boulders. Great volumes of 
flow of groundwater is controlled by the sediment are transported underground in 
porosity and permeability of the rock. karst areas, sometimes resulting in openings becoming clogged. The mechanical and 
Porosity and Permeability chemical removal of material in karst occurs 
All rock contains pore spaces. Porosity is the throughout the zone between the land surface 
percentage of the bulk volume of a rock that and the bedrock. Unlike other terrains, where 
is occupied by pores (Fig. 11). weathering forms a soil that may thickly 
Runoff 
Recharge Recharge 
Non-Karst Rock 
Confining Impermeable Rock 
Artesian Spring 
Fault 
15 
Transpiration 
Evaporation from surface water 
For example, a porosity of 20% means that bedrock is 80% solid material (rock) and 20% open spaces (pores or fractures). Voids in the bedrock are the openings where groundwater can be stored. Where voids are connected, they also provide the paths for groundwater flow.Permeability is a measure of how well groundwater flows or migrates through an aquifer. A rock may be porous, but unless those pores are connected, permeability will be low. Generally speaking, the permeability of rocks in well-developed karst areas is very high when networks of fractures have been enlarged and connected by solution (Fig.12). 
In most limestones, the primary porosity and permeability, or hydrologic characteristics created as the rock formed, are generally low. However in karst areas, large cavernous porosities and high permeability are common. These hydrologic characteristics, including fractures and openings enlarged by solution, are almost always secondary or tertiary fea- tures that were created or enhanced after the rock was formed. 
Precipitation 
Gravity Spring 
Deep Groundwater 
Hydrologically abandoned Sinkhole upper-level Sinkhole cave passage 
Recharge Fractures Dripwater 
Speleothems 
Aquifer Water Table 
Water-filled Sediment cave passages 
The Hydrologic Cycle The source of groundwater for all aquifers is 
Fig. 12. The 
precipitation. When rain falls, plants and soil 
bedrock surface 
absorb some of the rain water, some of it 
in karst terrains 
drains into streams, some evaporates, and 
is often highly 
the remainder moves downward into aquifers 
fissured and per- 
recharging them (Fig. 13). Groundwater 
meable. In areas 
moves through the hydrologic cycle as part of 
lacking soil, this 
a dynamic flow system from recharge areas to 
surface can be 
discharge areas that flow into streams, lakes, 
directly viewed 
wetlands, or the oceans. Streams that flow 
and is called 
during periods of little rainfall are fed by 
karst pavement 
groundwater. 
(Fig. 52). 
Fig. 13. The hydrologic cycle in karst areas. 
O 
nce sufficient 
permeability is 
established 
through the 
bedrock, water 
circulates freely 
from places of 
recharge to areas 
of discharge. 
16 
The Karst Aquifer An aquifer is a zone within the ground that serves as a reservoir of water and that can transmit the water to springs or wells. Karst aquifers are unique because the water exists and flows within fractures or other openings that have been enlarged by natural dissolution processes. However, water flow in karst aquifers is commonly localized within con- duits, with little or no flow in the adjacent rock. This situation means that successful wells must intersect one or more voids where the water is flowing. In a karst region, drilling for water may be a hit-or-miss endeavor; in contrast to drilling in porous media aquifers where flow conditions are more uniform and the probability of finding adequate water is higher. 
Vadose and Phreatic Zones The area between the surface of the land and the water table, which is called the vadose zone, contains air within the pore spaces or fractures. In the vadose zone, groundwater migrates downward from the surface to the phreatic zone, in which pore spaces are filled with water. The boundary between the vadose and phreatic zones is the water table (Fig. 14). The vertical position of the water table fluctu- ates in response to storms or seasonal changes in weather, being lower during dry times and higher during wetter periods. In non-karst aquifers, the vadose and phreatic zones are called the unsaturated and saturat- ed zones. The use of those terms in regard to karst aquifers is not recommended, because chemical saturation of the water with dissolved minerals is a critical factor in aquifer flow and development. 
Karst aquifers may contain perched water, which is groundwater that is temporarily pooled or flowing in the vadose zone. 
Although perched water generally occurs in relatively small volumes, it can provide water to wells and springs. 
Groundwater Recharge and Discharge The process of adding water to an aquifer is known as recharge. Where surface water enters an aquifer at specific spots, such as sinkholes and swallets, discrete recharge occurs. When water infiltrates into underlying bedrock through small fractures or granular material over a wide area, the recharge process is referred to as diffuse recharge. Where water comes to the surface at specific springs (Fig. 15) or wells, it is known as dis- crete discharge, but where water flows out of the ground over a larger area, such as a series of small springs or seeps, the discharge is diffuse. While recharge and discharge vary in magnitude in all aquifers, they vary the most in karst aquifers by allowing the greatest rates of water flow. Large springs tend to be most commonly reported. Thus, those states with the greatest number of recorded springs, including more than 3,000 each in Alabama, Kentucky, Missouri, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia, also have significantly large karst areas. 
Once sufficient permeability is established through the bedrock, water circulates freely from places of recharge to areas of dis- charge. In karst areas where the water table is near the surface, such as Florida’s Suwannee River basin, declines in the water table can change springs into recharge sites, and rises in the water table can convert sinkholes into springs. Features that sometimes discharge water and other times recharge water are known as estavelles. 
In areas where groundwater in karst flows through open conduits, the aquifers 
Fig. 14. The surface of 
this cave stream marks 
the water table of this 
karst aquifer. The area 
above the water table 
is called the “vadose 
zone” and the area 
below, where all voids 
are filled with water, is 
the “phreatic zone.” 
respond very quickly to surface events such as storms and stream flooding. This response is typically many times greater and faster than would occur in non-karst aquifers. Therefore, interactions between surface and groundwater processes are greatly enhanced in karst. 
It is important to know that even in the absence of surface streams, a karst region is a zone of drainage into the aquifer; the entire area can be a recharge zone. Surface water over the whole area, not just within sinkholes, carries sediment and pollutants into the subsurface. Removal of vegetation from surrounding areas through farming, forestry, or urbanization may significantly change drainage conditions leading to alteration of the aquifer by clogging of openings, ponding, and flooding, as well as contamination of groundwater resources. As the world’s popu- lation grows and continues expanding onto karst areas, people are discovering the prob- lems of living on karst. Potential problems and environmental concerns include sinkhole flooding, sinkhole collapse, and easily pollut- 
Fig. 15. Some springs ed groundwater supplies, where contaminants 
rise from streambeds move rapidly to wells and springs. The follow- 
while others pour out ing chapters discuss assets of karst as well as some of the challenging aspects of living in karst areas. 
of bedrock. Blanchard 
Springs Caverns, 
Arkansas. 
17 
18 
Karst 
areas are 
rich in 
water and 
mineral 
resources 
and they 
provide 
unique 
habitats 
and 
spectacular 
scenery. 
K 
arst areas are among the most varied of Earth’s landscapes with a wide array of sur- face and subsurface terrains and resources. Some of their features are unique to karst, and others tend be most abundant in karst regions. The following sections describe the most frequently used or encountered karst resources. 
Water Resources Without a doubt, water is the most commonly used resource in karst areas. Although the lack of surface water is commonly characteris- tic of karst areas, they also contain some of the largest water-producing wells and springs in the world. Until the development of well- drilling technologies, communities generally were located along the margins of karst areas, downstream from large springs that provided water for drinking, agriculture, and other uses. 
Historical accounts describe the vital role of karst groundwater for communities as far back as pre-Biblical times in Europe and the Middle East. Assyrian King Salmanassar III recognized the importance of karst springs as early as 852 B.C., as recorded in the descrip- tion of his study of the cave spring at the head of the Tigris River. For centuries throughout the world, water has been channeled from springs toward towns and fields, or collected from caves and sinkholes in vessels (Fig.16) or by hand or wind-powered pumps. These methods are still used in parts of the world where drilling technology is not affordable or practical. 
Water-well drilling has allowed more people to move into karst areas. However, water yield from karst aquifers can range from zero to abundant, depending on the number of fractures and voids penetrated by a well 
bore and the amount of water they carry. The world’s largest flowing artesian well intersected a cave passage in Texas’ Edwards Aquifer estimated to be 8 ft (2.4 m) high, and tapped water under such pressure that it shot a 3-ft (1 m) diameter, 30 ft (9 m) high fountain into the air and flowed at a rate of 35,000 gallons/minute (2.2 cubic meters/second) (Fig. 17). 
The cavernous nature of karst aquifers allows considerable volumes of water to be stored underground. This is especially valuable in arid climates where evaporation is high. In some parts of the world, cave streams are large enough to economically merit damming to store water for direct usage, mechanical water-wheel power, hydroelectric power, and to limit downstream flooding. The Floridan Aquifer in Florida yields over 250 million gallons/day (947,500 m3/day) to wells, and Figeh Spring, in Syria, which is the 3rd largest spring in the world, on average discharges 63,200 gallons/ minute (4.0 m3/sec) and supplies the entire city of Damascus with water. 
Fig. 16. Until recently, many Maya of Mexico and Central America would walk long dis- tances each day to a nearby cave, then climb down inside to retrieve water, as shown in this 1844 drawing by Frederick Catherwood. 
Fig. 17. Before it was capped, the record-setting “Catfish Farm Well” shot water 30 ft (9 m) into the air from the Edward Aquifer in Texas. 
19 
20 
Fig. 18. (Above) Ice speleothems are present year- round in this Swiss cave. 
Fig. 20. (Right) Cinnabar and other hydrothermally deposited minerals in a cave intersect- ed by a mine. 
Earth History Karst plays an important role in increasing our understanding of the history of past cli- mates and environments on Earth. Sediments and speleothem or mineral deposits in caves are among the richest sources of paleoclimate information, providing detailed records of fluctuations in regional temperature, 
atmospheric gases, rainfall, ice ages, sea-level changes, and plants and animals that once inhabited the areas during the past several hundred thousand years. 
Mineral Resources Prehistoric peoples found shelter and mineral resources in caves. It is well-documented that they mined caves for flint (also known as chert) to make stone tools and for sulfate min- erals and clays for medicines and paint pig- ment. In Europe, a soft speleothem known as moonmilk was used as a poultice, an antacid, to induce mother’s milk, and to remedy other medical woes. Prior to refrigeration, cold caves were mined for ice (Fig. 18), and in the early 1800s, the beer brewing industry of St. Louis, Missouri, was based on the availability of caves as places of cold storage. In the United States during the Revolutionary War, War of 1812, and Civil War, over 250 caves were mined for saltpeter, which was used in the production of gunpow- der (Fig. 19). Like saltpeter, phosphate-rich bat guano deposits used to enrich agricultural soils are mined in caves. Bat guano was the most highly rated fertilizer of the 19th and early 20th centuries until it was supplanted by cheaper and more easily obtained chemical fertilizers. 
The most common mineral resource extracted from karst areas is the quarried rock itself. Limestone, dolomite, marble, gypsum, travertine, and salt are all mined in large quantities throughout the world. Quarry oper- ators prefer mining non-cavernous rock, but in many areas this is not available and many caves are lost. Unfortunately, sometimes the 
Fig. 19. Vats used in the 1800s to leach saltpeter for gunpowder. Mammoth Cave, Mammoth Cave National Park, KY. 
exotic mineral deposits called speleothems are also mined from caves, despite such collecting being an illegal activity in many states. The removal of speleothems results in the loss of thousands of years of information on Earth’s history and the vandalism of beau- tiful natural landscapes. 
Karst areas, including ancient or pale- okarst, may contain large reserves of lead, zinc, aluminum, oil, natural gas, and other valuable commodities. Paleokarst is karst terrain that has been buried beneath younger sediments. Significant economic ore deposits accumulate in the large voids in paleokarst rocks, especially where mineral-bearing ther- mal or sulfide-rich solutions have modified the bedrock. In some areas, lead and zinc deposits are common, forming large econom- ically valuable mineral deposits like those in Arkansas and Missouri (Fig. 20). Many oil and gas fields throughout the world tap highly porous and permeable paleokarst reservoirs where tremendous volumes of petroleum are naturally stored. Abundant deposits of aluminum occur in laterite soils composed of the insoluble residue derived from limestone that has been dissolved in humid climates. 
Ecology Many species of bats, including those that form some of the world’s largest colonies, roost in caves (Fig. 21). Nectar feeding bats are important polli- nators, and a number of economically and ecologically important plants might not survive without them. Insectivorous bats make up the largest known colonies of mammals in the world. Populations from some of these colonies may 
eat nearly a million pounds (454,000 kg) of insects per night, including moths, mosqui- toes, beetles, and related agricultural pests. Fruit-eating bats eat ripe fruit on the branch, scatter the seeds, and thereby contribute to the propagation of trees. In Pacific islands, the regenreation of at least 40% of tree species are known to depend on bats, and in western Africa, bats carry 90-98% of the seeds that initiate reforestation of cleared lands. 
Because caves lack sunlight, they create highly specialized ecosystems that have evolved for survival in low-energy and light- less environments. Troglobites are animals that are adapted to living their entire lives underground. They have no eyes, often lack pigment, and have elongated legs and antennae. Some have specialized organs that detect smell and movement to help them navigate in a totally dark environment and find food. Fish, salamanders, spiders, beetles, crabs, and many other animals have evolved such species (Fig. 22). Since cave habitats are 
Fig. 21. Mexican free-tailed bats flying out from Bracken Cave, Texas, at night to feed. Each spring, about 20 million pregnant bats migrate to this maternity colony from Mexico. On average, each gives birth to one pup and by the fall the population swells to 40 mil- lion — the largest bat population and greatest known concentra- tion of mammals in the world. During a typical night, they will eat roughly 1,000,000 pounds (454,000 kg) of insects, including many agricultural pests. 
Fig. 22. (Left) These blind shrimp-like animals, which live in many karst aquifers, are an exam- ple of a troglobite species. These animals have adapted to their food-poor, lightless environ- ment by loss of sight and lack of pigmentation. 
21 
Fig. 23. (Left) The study of microbes in biologically extreme cave environments is teaching scientists how and where to search for life on Mars and other planets. 
Fig. 24. (Right) Thirteen hundred year old Mayan hieroglyphic paint- ings preserved in a Guatemalan cave. 
Fig. 25. A tourist enjoying the splendors of Bailong Dong (White Dragon Cave), a show cave in China. 
22 
far less complex than those on the surface, biologists study these animals for insights into evolution and ecosystem development. An extreme example of an isolated karst ecosys- tem is in Movile Cave, Romania. Geologic evidence indicates that the cave was blocked- off from the surface for an estimated 5 million years until a hand-dug well accidentally created an entrance in 1986. This cave has a distinct ecosystem based on sulfur bacteria that are the base of a food chain that supports 33 invertebrate species known only from that site. 
Microbial organisms in caves have only recently been studied, but they are important contributors to biological and geological processes in karst environments. Microbes accelerate dissolution by increasing the rate of limestone erosion in some circumstances. In other cases, they may contribute to the deposition of speleothems. Changes in the number and types of certain bacteria are indicators that have been used to trace groundwater flow paths and to identify pollu- tion sources. Several cave microbes are promising candidates for cancer medicines, and others may be useful for bioremediation of toxic wastes spilled into the environment. Certain sulfur-based microorganisms are being studied as possible analogs for life in outer space (Fig. 23). 
Archaeology and Culture From early times in human development, caves have served, first as shelters, and later, as resource reservoirs and religious sites. Many of the world’s greatest archaeological sites have been found in caves, where fragile materials that would easily be destroyed in other settings have been preserved. Caves 
were reliable sources of water when other sources went dry, and minerals and clays were mined for both practical and ceremonial use. Generations of habitation resulted in deep accumulations of bones, ash, food scraps, burials, wastes, and other materials. The archaeological importance of caves stems not only from the volume of cultural material, but also from the degree of preservation. Fragile and ephemeral items such as footprints, woven items of clothing and delicate paintings are examples of these rare artifacts (Fig. 24). 
Recreation Karst areas provide three main types of recreational settings: show or commercial caves, wild caves, and scenic areas. For many people, their only exposure to the karst envi- ronment occurs when they visit show caves. There, they can view delicate and grand min- eral displays, vaulted chambers, hidden rivers, and other underground wonders (Fig. 25). Some of the world’s most outstanding caves are open to the public in the United States. Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, is the world’s longest cave with over 355 miles (572 km) mapped. Carlsbad Caverns, New Mexico, which like Mammoth Cave, is a U.S. national park, contains some of the world’s largest rooms and passages. Caverns of Sonora, a privately owned cave in Texas, is international- ly recognized as one of the world’s most beautiful show caves. 
“Wild” caves remain in their natural state, and they are located throughout the country on public and private land. For most people, a visit to a wild cave is a one-time adventure, but for thousands of “cavers” worldwide, it is a regular pastime. Caving is a sport that con- tributes to science, because many cavers cre- ate detailed maps as they explore and note features that may be of scientific importance. 
The above-ground portions of karst areas form some of the most unusual landscapes in the world, epitomized by the impressive Tower Karst region of southeast China (Fig. 26). Other exceptionally scenic karst regions occur in, but are not limited to, Brazil, Croatia, Cuba, France, Malaysia, Slovenia, Thailand, the United States, and Vietnam. Recreational activities in scenic karst areas include car touring, boating, hiking, fishing, camping, swimming, backpacking, nature watching, photography, and, of course, exploring wild and show caves. 
Fig. 26. The spectacular tower karst along the Li River in China. 
23 
24 
Sinkhole collapse in Winter Park, Florida. 
W 
hen karst landscapes are sites of 
across. This event, along with an additional urban development, their particular structural 
10 fatalities and a great deal of property and hydrological characteristics must be 
damage from sinkhole collapse during the understood. The occurrence of cavities in the 
1960s and 1970s, caused the government of rock and the soil requires special engineering 
South Africa to establish an intensive research considerations to provide stable foundations 
program addressing the problems and mech- for the construction of roads and buildings. 
anisms of sinkhole collapse. Collapses in the Because groundwater moves very rapidly in 
“dolomite land” areas of the country result karst regions, pollutants can be spread long 
from water entering the ground from failed distances in a short period of time. Adequate 
water and sewer systems, poorly designed supplies of drinking water may be difficult 
drainage, and ground vibrations. In one study to locate and are at risk of contamination. 
in suburban Pretoria, it was determined that Sinkhole collapse, drainage problems, and 
96% of nearly 400 sinkholes were induced by groundwater contamination are engineering 
human activities. Rapid lowering of the area’s and environmental concerns associated with 
water table by dewatering deep gold mines development on karst terrains. 
caused a loss of buoyant support and resulted in especially large collapses. Sinkhole Collapse 
Sinkhole collapses occur naturally; Although collapse of cave passages within 
they also may be induced by human activities solid limestone bedrock is part of the normal 
(Fig. 27). Natural sinkholes and induced process of landscape development in karst 
sinkholes can generally be separated on the areas, it is a very rare event over human time 
basis of physical characteristics, frequency scales. Most observed collapses occur in soils 
and density of occurrence, and environmental and sediments overlying the bedrock. In some 
setting. Induced sinkholes generally develop karst areas, such sinkhole collapses reach 
much faster than natural sinkholes, although spectacular proportions and cause consider- 
all collapse sinkholes require some dissolution able damage. For example, many catastroph- 
of the underlying bedrock. ic sinkhole collapses, such as the one on the opposite page have occurred within the relatively young, soil-covered karst of north- central Florida. This sinkhole developed in Winter Park, Florida, in 1981. Within a few days it had grown to over 330 ft (100 m) long by 300 ft (90 m) wide, swallowing cars, buildings, trees, a road, and part of a swimming pool. 
Probably the most catastrophic sink- hole event in recorded history occurred in December 1962, in West Driefontein, South Africa. Twenty-nine lives were lost by the sud- den disappearance of a building into a huge collapse that measured over 180 ft (55 m) 
25 Fig. 27. 
Catastrophic 
sinkhole 
collapses have 
occurred in karst 
areas around 
the world and 
have proven 
costly in both 
dollars and 
lives. 
Regolith arches 
Sediment Natural washed Cave Passage 
Drain Drainage Well 
down from regolith 
Limestone 
Regolith Cave 
Steel I-Beam Concrete Pipe 
Sinkhole collapse — sequence of events 
Fig. 28. (Above) (a) In the layer of unconsolidated rock material, or regolith, arches form at a drainage well below a retention basin and at a natural drain under a building. (b) During a flood, collapse occurs at the drainage well. (c) The collapse is excavated to bedrock and filled with rocks (large at the bottom and smaller toward the top) to allow drainage into the well yet block sediment flow. In this example, that remediation is not adequate. (d) Water and sediment begin to flow to the natural drain, enlarging that regolith arch and forming a horizontal regolith cave. (e) Surface collapse occurs in three places due to collapse of the regolith arch over the natural drain and collapse of the regolith cave. (f) The collapses are exca- vated to bedrock under the building and a concrete slab poured over the natural drain in the bedrock. Steel I-beams are installed to support a new steel reinforced building foundation. The excavation is then filled with compacted soil, the retention basin is graded over, and a concrete pipe laid to direct storm-water runoff to a stream, storm sewer, or another retention basin. 
26 
Fig. 30. Sinkhole collapse com- monly results where the casings of drainage wells are not properly sealed to the bedrock. 
Urbanization increases the risk of induced sinkhole collapse. The risk of collapse may increase because of 1) land-use changes, stream bed diversions, and impoundments that locally increase the downward movement of water into bedrock openings beneath the soil, and 2) greater frequency and magnitude of water-table fluctuations caused by urban groundwater withdrawal and injection. 
Induced sinkhole collapses typically form by the collapse of the regolith, a general term for the layer of unconsolidated material near the surface of the land, including soil, sedi- ment, and loose rocks (Fig. 28). Collapses are especially catastrophic when the soils and sediments are at least 20-30 ft (6-9 m) thick. These collapses result from soil washing into an underlying cave system, leaving voids in the unconsolidated material above the bedrock. In some cases, collapses occur as slow subsidence of the land surface over periods of weeks to years, rather than sudden collapses that occur over periods of minutes to days. 
In areas where the water table is normally above the soil-bedrock contact, soil collapses occur when the water table drops below the soil zone, either during droughts or due to high pumping rates (Fig. 29). These collapses are caused by loss of buoyant support above the voids, or by upward propagation as saturated soil falls or washes downward. Eventually, the surface subsides gradually or abruptly collapses. Soil collapses also occur in situations where the water table is below the soil-bedrock contact. Construction and land- use changes that concentrate surface runoff in drains and impoundments will locally increase the downward movement of water. The rapidly moving water causes soil to be washed into holes in the bedrock, leaving voids behind. 
Increasing the load on these voids by con- struction or by accumulation of impounded water can initiate collapse. Collapses can also be caused by water leaking from drainage wells, pipelines, septic tanks, and drainage ditches (Fig. 30). 
Although many sinkholes collapse with little or no advance warning, other collapses can be recognized by features at the land sur- face that indicate their development. Some of the more common features include 
+ Circular and linear 
cracks in soil, asphalt, and con- crete paving and floors; + Depressions in soil or pavement that commonly result in the ponding of water; + Slumping, sagging, or tilting of trees, roads, rails, fences, pipes, poles, sign boards, and other vertical or horizontal structures; + Downward movement of small-diameter vertical structures such as poles or posts; + Fractures in foundations and walls, 
often accompanied by jammed doors and windows; + Small conical holes that appear in the ground over a relatively short period of time; + Sudden muddying of water in a well that 
has been producing clear water; or + Sudden draining of a pond or creek. 
Fig. 29. Water well drilling near this Florida home triggered a sinkhole col- lapse beneath both the drill rig and the house. 
27 
28 
Fig. 31. A sinkhole plain, typical of many well developed karst land- scapes. 
Drainage Problems Most of the rain that falls in a karst area drains into the ground rather than flowing to a surface stream. Sinkholes may provide drains where water enters the underground flow system (Fig. 31). Cave entrances may also serve as drains. In many cases, the drains may be buried under the soil. In undisturbed karst areas, the capacity of a sinkhole drain is more or less in balance with the long-term climate and it can drain the water produced by most storms. Water backs up only during large storms when input exceeds outflow (Fig. 32). 
Problems occur when the landscape is altered by urban development. Erosion is a common side effect of construction, transport- ing soil to the lowest part of the sinkhole where it clogs the drain. Thereafter, smaller, more frequent storms are capable of flooding the sinkhole. Impermeable ground covers such as roads, parking lots, and buildings increase the rate at which water collects and flows on the surface, flooding homes and businesses in the sinkhole (Fig. 33). Some flood-prone areas are miles from the nearest 
surface stream or flood- 
plain, 
and property owners may not realize that they are at risk until a flood occurs. 
Storm-water drainage systems can be constructed to direct runoff away from urban centers. Where sinkholes are common, the shape of the landscape complicates construc- tion of these systems. Storm-water sewers are expensive to build where soils are thin and simple gravity drainage isn’t possible without extensive trenching and/or zig-zagging the sewers around sinkholes. 
One moderately effective solution is the installation of storm-water drainage wells, sometimes called “drywells.” The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency classifies these drainage wells as Class V, group 5 injection wells. They are constructed in sink- hole bottoms, ditches, and storm-water reten- tion structures where water collects after heavy rains. Drainage wells may be constructed by drilling, or by placing a pipe into a hole made by a backhoe. At some locations, the effec- tiveness of a drainage well can be enhanced by modifications to cave entrances, sinkhole drains, and sinkhole collapses (Fig. 34). A drainage well will function as intended if it intersects at least one unclogged crevice of sufficient size to direct storm-water into the subsurface.Unfortunately, water directed into drainage wells is similar to water flowing directly into caves and 
most sinkholes, because it bypasses natural filtration and goes directly into the aquifer (Fig. 35). Runoff water should be sent to drainage wells only after incorporating Best Management Practices (page 37) to reduce the introduction of refuse and contaminants into groundwater (Fig. 36). In some commercial and industrial areas, storm-water runoff may be diverted into 
Fig. 33. (Left) A shopping center parking lot built in a Kentucky sinkhole floods parked cars. 
Fig. 35. (Below) Unfiltered storm-water runoff from an urban area floods into a normally dry cave entrance. 
Fig. 36. (Below) This sinkhole has been modified to drain storm-water runoff. Two drainage wells have been drilled into the floor of the sinkhole. Rocks and hemispher- ical metal grates provide some filtration of sediments and organic debris. 
drainage Fig. 34. (Left) This cave entrance has been modified to accept drainage and prevent clogging from debris to minimize flooding of an urban Kentucky neighborhood. 
Fig. 32. 
(Below) 
A rural roadway 
covered by 
sinkhole 
floodwaters. 
29 
Fig. 38. (Below) During normal flow in a shallow karst aquifer, (a), water is captured from sinkholes and fractures and moves down- stream. A collapse in the cave passage restricts the flow, but not significantly. When flooding occurs, (b), the collapse acts like a leaky dam, allowing the normal flow to pass but holding back most water, raising the water table to flood Sinkholes 2 and 3. Sinkhole 1 is above the water table, but holds water due to a con- striction that prevents rapid flow down into the cave stream. When a drainage well is placed in Sinkhole 1 to breach the constriction and relieve sinkhole flooding, (c), more water reaches the flooding cave system so the water Fig. 37. (Above) A 
large sinkhole collapse 
table and flood levels in Sinkholes 2 and 3 rise even higher. At such times, buildings that would normally be above flood levels might get flood- 
around a poorly 
ed. The same result occurs when Sinkhole 1 does not have a constriction, but receives more installed drainage well. 
water as impervious material from urbanization covers the surrounding area. Drainage well-induced sinkhole flooding 
Sinkhole 
1 2 3 4 5 
Constriction 
normal flow 
Cave Stream 
Raised Water Table 
natural flood flow 
Collapsed Sinkhole Flooded BuildingsDrainage Well 
enhanced flood flow 
Fig. 39. Sewage, 
fuels, and other 
chemicals leave a 
black stain on the 
floor of this Kentucky 
cave stream. 
30 
sanitary sewers, or pretreated on site before being disposed into drainage wells. Even if good quality recharge can be maintained, the increased flooding could harm rare or endan- gered ecosystems within the aquifer. 
Induced sinkhole collapse is a potentially severe problem associated with poor drainage well installation (Fig. 37). The casings of many old wells only extend through the soil and rest on uneven bedrock surfaces. This situation allows water to flow out from the gaps between the casings and bedrock to saturate the surrounding soil each time the well fills with water. When the water level drops below the gap, saturated soil flows into the well, leaving a void in the soil that expands upward to the surface. Extending and sealing the casings of wells into the bedrock can alleviate this problem. 
Drainage wells, while meant to relieve sinkhole flooding, can cause other sinkholes to flood. Sinkholes can flood from the bottom, as water rises upward through the drain. When the capacity of the underground drainage system is exceeded, it causes any excess water in the ground to flow up into a sinkhole. This type of flooding is sometimes made worse by urban development in the headwaters of a karst drainage system and the injection of storm water into drainage wells (Fig. 38). 
Groundwater Contamination 
Urban and Industrial Contamination is common in karst aquifers beneath urban areas with high population densities. Pollutants include septic tank efflu- ent, runoff that contains metals, oil and grease, solid trash and wastes, and accidental or intentional dumping of chemical wastes by industrial facilities and homeowners. Karst aquifers in the United States have been 
Fig. 41. Runoff 
into this sink- 
hole is polluted 
by livestock 
manure. 
contaminated by toxic metals, polychlorinated byphenols (PCBs), radioactive chemicals, organic solvents, and many other pollutants (Fig. 39). Although these contaminants are common in any developed area, it is the ease with which they can enter karst aquifers and the rapid rates at which they can be spread that makes karst groundwater especially vulnerable. 
Accidental spills and intentional dumping of waste rapidly contaminate karst aquifers because chemicals travel easily through the soil and limestone bedrock. Spills along roads and railroads, leaking oil and gas wells, pipelines, and especially underground storage tanks have harmed many karst aquifers (Fig. 40). Gasoline has been the cause of some notable contamination problems in Hick’s Cave, Kentucky, and Howard’s Waterfall Cave in Georgia, where one person lost his life when the flame from a carbide miner’s lamp ignited gasoline fumes. In the mid-1980s, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency declared a “Health Advisory” for Bowling Green, Kentucky, when gasoline fumes from leaking underground storage tanks collected in the Lost River Cave System beneath the town. With time, the fumes rose into homes and schools where they posed serious health and safety problems. Eventually the source of the leak was cut off, and the underground river was able to flush the explosive material from the system. 
In karst areas, landfills present special challenges. Throughout the world, landfills leak into karst aquifers and cause severe con- tamination problems with greater frequency, 
speed, and severity than in non-karst aquifers, even with modern pollution prevention meth- ods. Part of the problem is the ease with which contaminants move through karst. Another important problem is how soils can wash into underlying voids below landfills, causing collapses that can breach liners meant to hold landfill waste in place. 
Rural and Agricultural In rural and agricultural areas, karst aquifers are subject to environmental degradation from a variety of sources including chemical fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides, along with their breakdown products. Levels of these contaminants are high following seasonal application periods, and increase during storms. Elevated concentrations of pathogens can also be flushed through soils into aquifers beneath animal pastures and feedlots (Fig. 41). Bacterial concentrations within karst aquifers in these areas can increase thou- sands of times as a result of such flushing. Well and spring waters in karst are commonly contaminated, yet in rural areas there may not be an alternative water supply. Municipal water treatment and distribution facilities 
Fig. 40. A railroad 
runs through a 
sinkhole plain. 
Leaks and spills 
along transporta- 
tion and pipeline 
corridors have 
introduced signifi- 
cant contaminants 
into karst aquifers. 
31 
32 
Fig. 42. Soils eroded 
from a housing develop- 
ment run unfiltered into 
a karst aquifer. 
Fig. 43. Mining 
in and near karst 
aquifers poses 
threats of contami- 
nation from 
sediments and 
toxic metals, and 
destroys caves 
and any resources 
they contain. 
are not available in sparsely populated karst landscapes, especially in developing areas of the world. 
Another problem in karst regions is the transport of sediment into the aquifer by flow- ing water, making soil and other sediment washed from rural and urban land use and mining operations a significant contaminant (Fig. 42-43). Sediments can also impact the flow of groundwater by filling in conduits and modifying underground drainage. Programs to minimize soil loss are critically important for many karst areas. The impact of herbicides associated with no-till farming practices on groundwater quality should also be carefully evaluated. 
A common practice in many rural land- scapes is the dumping of household refuse, construction materials, and dead livestock into sinkholes. Karst aquifers have been found to contain automobile tires, car parts (Fig. 44), and in one underground river in Kentucky, a park bench and refrigerator. The amount of contamination that enters an aquifer is related to the volume and types of materials that are dumped into the sinkholes. Common harmful 
products include bacteria from dead animals; used motor oil and antifreeze; and “empty” herbicide, solvent, and paint containers (Fig. 45). These sub- stances readily enter the aquifer and rapidly travel to nearby water wells and springs. Few people would throw a dead cow into a sinkhole if they realized that the water flowing over the carcass might be coming out of their kitchen faucet a few days later. 
Sewage Disposal Ideally, a rigorously maintained sewage treatment system is best for communities located on karst, including suburban and rural subdivisions. This solution is not always financially or practically possible, especially when dealing with isolated rural home or farm sites where individual septic systems are the norm. Properly designed, constructed, and, most importantly, maintained small septic systems can and have been successfully installed on karst. However, this is commonly not the case. Most karst areas have thin, rocky soils that are inadequate to reduce bacteria levels effectively. Older systems may leak from years of use without repair, or be overloaded from initially poor design or later changes to the household. Owners of failing systems often state that they have had mini- mal or no problems even though they have provided no maintenance! These systems can contribute significant pollutants to the ground- water. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has noted that the failure of septic systems is a major source of karst ground- water pollution. 
Residential sewage disposal systems generally consist of a septic tank designed and constructed to hold raw sewage, separate solids from liquids, digest organic matter through anaerobic bacterial action, and allow clarified effluent to discharge to a buried soil absorption system. After effluent leaves the septic tank, it flows through a series of buried perforated pipes and is discharged into the soil. Here, pathogens are removed by microbial plant and animal life, filtration, chemical decomposition, and bonding within the soil. Septic tank effluent must be fully puri- fied before it passes to the water table and becomes drinkable water. In non-karst areas, effluent continues to be processed after it 
leaves the soil as it slowly flows through the small pores and fine cracks of the aquifer. The slow movement of the efflu- ent provides time for pathogenic bacteria and other microbial organisms to die. 
Fecal coliform bacteria are organisms that live in the intestines of humans and warm-blooded animals. They have a lim- ited life span after leaving the body so that even one colony of these bacteria indicates that water has recently been in contact with human or animal waste. Bacteria levels in wells, cave streams, and springs in karst areas may increase by thousands of times during storms. These high levels are caused when runoff from fields and septic-tank leach fields rapidly percolates through thin soils and into the bedrock. In areas where soils are too thin to effectively reduce bacteria levels, associat- ed shallow karst aquifers should be consid- ered unsuitable water sources. Shallow aquifers can contaminate deeper aquifers by leakage along natural fractures and conduits and through poorly designed or maintained wells. Municipal water treatment facilities should be developed in urban, residential, business, and industrial areas. Significant advances in sewage and septic system tech- nology have recently been made and should be examined for their potential use. 
Fig. 44. 
This Texas 
cave was 
used was a 
rural dump 
and is filled 
with car 
parts and 
other trash. 
Fig. 45. 
Household 
trash fills 
the sinkhole 
leading into 
a cave in 
West 
Virginia. 
33 
34 
Fig. 46. 
(Right) 
Endangered 
Kentucky 
Cave 
Shrimp. 
T 
Fig. 47. Volunteers 
hauling trash out of 
a large sinkhole that 
had been used as a 
garbage dump for 
many years. 
he landscape near Mammoth Cave National Park in central Kentucky is characterized by sinkholes, 
underground drainage via a karst aquifer, and intimately connected ecosystems above and below ground. 
A portion of the park lies within the Pike Spring Groundwater Basin, with groundwater and cave passages 
freely crossing the park boundary. Aquatic cave life in this basin includes blind fish, crayfish, and the largest 
known population of the Kentucky Cave Shrimp, which is on the federal Endangered Species List (Fig. 46). 
Mammoth Cave, with more than 355 mi (572 km) of charted passages, supports diverse ecosystems and is 
connected with and ultimately drained by the Green River (facing page). 
Over the past two centuries in this rural area, residents have dumped refuse into sinkholes on their pro- 
perties. Until recently, trash pickup and sanitary landfills were unavailable, and sinkholes were seen as con- 
venient dump sites. This misplaced waste has washed into the underlying caves over time, and trash has been 
reported by survey teams near the park under Hamilton Valley in the Salts Cave section of Mammoth Cave. 
In an effort to mitigate the environmental hazards of trash-filled sinkholes, a volunteer cooperative project 
called Don’t Mess With Mammoth Days was organized in the mid-1990s. The Cave Research Foundation, 
Mammoth Cave National Park, and Hart County Solid Waste have been the primary organizers, with crucial 
assistance from the National Speleological Society, and the American Cave Conservation Association. 
On the first field day, which was held in March 1996, more than 30 volunteers removed tangles of wire, 
sheet metal, broken glass, appliances, and automobile parts that had been discarded in sinkholes (Fig. 47). 
Seven truckloads of rubbish and recyclable metal were removed, and remedial work was performed on gullies 
to stop erosion. Subsequently, participation in Don’t Mess With Mammoth Days events has varied from 25 to 
45 volunteers, with similar impressive outcomes. To date, approximately 150 tons of 
rubbish, and 30 tons of recyclable metals have been recovered from dumps 
within the Pike Spring Basin. Although much of this waste is non-toxic, many 
agricultural chemical containers with residual product have been recovered 
as well. Ecologically, sinkholes funnel food into caves, and when they are 
clogged with trash, the organic matter needed by wildlife such as the Kentucky 
Cave Shrimp cannot get into the caves. 
How long will it take to clean up Pike Spring Basin? Nobody knows. We need to learn how 
many dumps exist, and how many landowners within the basin would welcome the clean-up 
effort. Changing the way people dispose of solid waste will take time, because proper disposal 
of trash also costs money. Dumping trash into sinkholes may not cost money today, but the 
costs in terms of groundwater pollution, loss of ecosystems, and risks to public health are far 
greater. Cooperative efforts like Don’t Mess With Mammoth Days provide a much-needed 
service, help clean up the environment, and educate by example. In the long term, education 
is the best tool for cleaning up and maintaining karst environments. 
35 
Karst watershed protection is of special 
concern to residents of San Antonio,Texas. 36 
Fig. 48. 
As San Antonio, T 
basin other he proper terrain. is more management Management important on of planning karst a groundwater 
than must any 
far as purchasing aquifer 
Texas, grows, it is 
purchasing and 
preserving unde- 
veloped sensitive 
karst areas to 
protect its ground- 
consider all of the natural resources found 
areas for 
water supply. 
within the basin, as well as interactions with 
permanent adjacent areas. In this way, the quality of 
protection. land, water, and subterranean environments 
In May and resources will be maintained. 
2000, the citizens of San Antonio, Texas, The following guidelines provide a 
voted for a 1/8 cent sales tax increase to template for avoiding and solving problems 
raise $65 million over four years for the encountered by people who live in karst 
purchase of critical portions of the Edwards environments. 
Aquifer as well as other important watershed and biological areas (Fig. 48). Where com- Best Management Practices 
munities are located within extensive karst The goal of Best Management Practices 
areas and prohibition of development in (BMPs) is to conserve natural resources, 
karst is not feasible, regulations may be need- including prevention of soil erosion and mini- 
ed to satisfactorily protect karst resources, mizing the amount of contaminants that reach 
particularly as related to the location of land- the groundwater system. BMPs cover a wide 
fills, underground storage tanks, oil and gas range of topics such as irrigation water recov- 
wells and pipelines, and facilities that manu- ery, land reclamation, nutrient management, 
facture and/or store hazardous materials. and the sealing of abandoned wells. Many 
Protection of stream watersheds is vital BMPs are mandated by federal, state, county 
to protecting biological and water quality. and other regulatory agencies, but not all are 
Studies examining the relationship of stream specific to karst and thus may not adequately 
water quality to impervious cover, such as address karst issues. In some karst areas, best 
roads, buildings, and parking lots, show management will require exceeding the man- 
increased degradation when impervious cover dated BMPs with more effective actions. 
exceeds 15% of the watershed area. Since the extent of impervious cover is a measure of Urban, Industrial, 
urban impact that can be correlated to pollu- and Road Development 
tant-load levels in urban runoff, aquifer water- Industrial and urban developments commonly 
quality ordinances in Austin and San Antonio, produce a greater variety and toxicity of 
Texas, require that the percentage of impervi- contaminants than do rural areas. Communi- 
ous cover be kept low in growing urban ties located along the margins of karst areas 
areas. Other land-management measures should limit development in karst and 
that can help protect watersheds include encourage development in other directions. Some cities near karst regions have gone as 
+ Identifying and studying highly vulnerable karst features, such as caves, sinkholes, 
37 
38 
Fig. 49. A road being 
built over and seal- 
ing a cave runs the 
risk of collapse and 
problems with water 
quality and quantity. 
Fig. 50. Possible contaminants at higher elevations cannot directly 
reach the well because of the casing, but the well draws water from 
a cave stream that is exceptionally vulnerable to contamination. 
and fractures enlarged by solution, prior to development. Construction may then be planned to avoid the features and preserve natural drainage into them (Fig. 49). These areas could be developed into educational neighborhood parks that increase the value of adjoining land and of the overall devel- opments. It is important to remember that protection of these features alone will not protect karst aquifers. + Leaving low traffic roads without curbs so 
that contaminants in the runoff will be dilut- ed over broad areas and filtered through vegetated areas and soils. + Channeling curbed runoff from major roads into storm-water sedimentation and filtration basins with hazardous materials traps. Vegetated wetland basins are the most effective at removing contaminants from the water. For such basins to be effective, they must be properly maintained and the filter material changed regularly. Runoff that may enter caves or sinkholes should either be diverted or treated through filtration systems. In 1993, the Indiana Department of Transportation established landmark guide- lines for the planning, design, construction, and maintenance of roads in karst areas. + Minimizing the use of pesticides, fertilizers, 
and de-icing salts on roads and urban landscapes on karst. Plants native to the area and tolerant to local pests, diseases, and climatic conditions can be grown to reduce the need for chemical support and treatment. + Monitoring the groundwater quality 
of springs and wells to determine the effectiveness of the groundwater protection measures enacted. Wells are important to a monitoring plan, but not nearly as impor- tant as nearby springs that drain the area. Contaminants in karst aquifers can easily 
flow past and be missed by monitoring wells, giving a false sense of security. Springs, however, capture essentially all flow (and contaminants) within their drainage basins. Sampling during high flows after storms is a good time to deter- mine if significant levels of contaminants are present in the aquifer. 
Water Supplies 
Wells As a general rule, wells should be placed where there is little or no surface drainage toward the well site. They should be located away from, and at a higher elevation than, any nearby source of contamination. Wells should be constructed to prevent contaminat- ed water from the surface or upper level aquifers from leaking into the drinking-water aquifer. Where necessary, casing should be installed through any contaminated zone and into the productive aquifer to protect the drinking water supply from contamination. The spacing between the casing in a well and the wall of the borehole should be cemented to prevent leakage and downward migration of contaminated water (Fig. 50). 
Wells should be tested for coliform bacteria and nitrates at least once a year, more often in areas of thin soil cover, and especially following storms when bacteria are most likely to be washed into the aquifer. County extension agents, community and county health agencies, water well contractors or private laboratories can provide informa- tion and assistance for well testing. 
When a well is no longer used it should be disconnected from existing water systems, kept clean and, if possible, its casing should be removed. The well bore should be sealed with clean rock and a sand-cement grout to produce a continuous plug from the bottom 
of the well to the surface. When all abandon- ment procedures are complete, the well should be permanently capped. These actions are designed to prevent surface water from migrating down the well bore and polluting the aquifer. 
Water well requirements vary from state to state, so it is necessary to check with the regulatory agency in your area for minimum setback distances for wellhead protection and other regulations. As an example, Minnesota requires that 
+ Wells must be located at least 75 ft (23 m) 
from cesspools, leaching pits, and dry wells, and 100 ft (30 m) or more from below- ground manure storage areas (i.e., manure lagoons), and large petroleum tanks which are protected with a containment dike, etc. They must be a minimum 150 ft (46 m) from a chemical preparation or storage area, large unprotected petroleum tanks, wastewater treatment pond or wastewater treatment plant, and they must be at least 50 ft (15 m) from septic tanks, subsurface sewage disposal fields, graves, livestock yards and buildings, and manure storage piles. + Wells with casings less than 50 ft (15 m) 
deep and penetrating less than 10 ft (3 m) of clay or shale must be at least 150 ft (46 m) from cesspools, leaching pits, and dry wells, and at least 100 ft (30 m) from a subsurface sewage disposal field or manure storage pile. 
Regulators and well owners must under- stand that although such guidelines are help- ful, commonly, they are not written for karst areas. General guidelines cannot assure pro- tection from contamination given how easily pollutants can flow long distances through 
39 
40 
Fig. 51. Water 
flowed abundantly 
and forcefully from 
the first wells 
drilled into Texas’ 
Edwards Aquifer 
in 1897. Now, 
with large water 
withdrawals from 
the aquifer, water 
discharge is 
restricted. 
karst aquifers. Where greater assurance against pollution is needed, a detailed, site-specific hydrogeologic study, possibly to include a dye tracing test, pumping test, and test drilling may be necessary. 
Groundwater Mining While water quality issues receive most atten- tion in the management of karst aquifers, water quantity can pose equally significant problems in arid and semi-arid climates. The large and open conduits that make karst aquifers so prone to contamination also allow massive volumes of water to be pumped out by wells (Fig. 51). If average water withdrawal exceeds the average recharge of the aquifer, the groundwater is being mined, meaning it 
is removed without being fully replenished. Long-term continuation of such practices is not sustainable. Springs will run dry, as will wells. Some wells can be deepened, with increased energy costs of raising water greater distances to the surface. Taken to the extreme, the aquifer would no longer yield useful quan- tities of water and would be abandoned. 
Several methods can be used to prevent groundwater mining 
+ Develop a groundwater budget for the 
aquifer to determine its sustainable yield. + Monitor major spring flows as rough esti- mates of balanced water use; extended periods or low or no flow may indicate overuse of the aquifer. + Apply water conservation and water reuse 
measures. + Consider enhancing recharge into the 
aquifer through dams and diversion of uncontaminated surface water into sink- holes; enhanced recharge will tend to quickly flow out of the aquifer and should only be considered for karst aquifers with high storage and relatively low velocities. + Develop limits for the amount of water that can be withdrawn from the aquifer. Set the limits so that the water used, whether dis- charged from wells or springs, does not exceed average aquifer recharge. To meet these limits may require limiting community growth within the aquifer’s region. Florida has developed legislation and regulations that require strict adherence to defining the impact of groundwater withdrawals on surface water, shallow aquifers, and the Floridan Aquifer. The regulations require the development of a “regional impact statement” and an application for a “con- sumptive use permit” based upon detailed surface water and groundwater studies. 
Fig. 52. Establishing non-pollut- 
Septic and Sewage Systems 
ing septic systems is difficult in Standard septic systems should not be placed 
karst due to thin or absent soils, near sinkholes, caves, springs, fractured 
such as this karst pavement in bedrock, crevices, bedding planes, or areas 
Great Britain, or soils underlain of thin soil cover. There should be a minimum of 3 ft (0.9 m) of aerated soil (i.e., soils that show no mottling) below the bottom of drain 
by such highly dissolved 
limestone that promote soil 
field trenches. Less than that amount could 
collapses and rapid movement 
result in pathogens reaching the groundwater 
of contaminants into aquifers. 
system (Fig. 52). Soils underlying these septic systems should have percolation rates between 1 and 60 minutes/inch (0.4 to 24 minutes/cm). If the minimum parameters cannot be met, a mound system is the next preference. Other possible systems would include a designed active wetland or other experimental system with frequent groundwa- ter monitoring results to check water treatment efficacy. 
Continued maintenance is critical to the proper performance of a septic system. Maintenance is probably the most ignored BMP of operating a home septic system. Unfortunately, if the drainage does not back- up into the house it is assumed that the sys- tem is operating properly. The holding tank needs to be pumped at regular intervals (depending on the size of the tank and the number of people served) or sewage will clog the system, and untreated waste may discharge into the karst. This can happen without noticeable effects in the house. If the septic tank has not been pumped for several years and the system appears to be operating properly, suspect a leak from the tank into the karst aquifer. 
Good septic-system operating practices include 
+ Having the system inspected regularly and pumped annually if possible, but at least every three years. 
(continued on page 44) 
41 
42 
Fig. 53. (Left) Hidden River Cave today, in the town of Horse Cave, Kentucky. 
(Above) Historic Water Works at Hidden River Cave — the cave provided the town with drinking water from around 1900-1930. By the 1930s the water had become too con- taminated for use. 
T 
he largest spring in Kentucky is fed by water flowing through Hidden River Cave, and the best-known entrance to the cave is located in the city of Horse Cave (Fig. 53). Beginning in 1887 the cave served as an important water supply and attraction for the city. Tours and boat rides were offered in the cave for 27 years. However, in 1931 an oil refinery began dumping its wastes into a sinkhole that drained into the cave stream. About the same time, residential sewage began to be disposed directly into the ground. By the early 1930s, the cave was abandoned as a water supply and in 1943 the cave was closed to the public due to the stench that rose from its waters out of the entrance and up to the city streets. 
Eventually, water from a spring 20 miles (32 km) away was tapped for the community, and a sewage treatment plant was built in 1964. Unfortunately, the treatment plant increased pollution of the aquifer, by gathering all of the city’s wastes, providing only a low level of treatment, and discharging the treated wastes into a sinkhole. Toxic heavy metals escaped treat- ment at the plant, and increased agricultural and urban runoff bypassed the plant and flowed directly into the cave. 
In 1989, a new regional waste-water plant was built that treated the effluent to a higher standard and discharged the treated water into the Green River and away from the karst. As a result, the aquifer is slowly recovering; rare species thought lost have begun to repopulate the cave from refuges in small, unpol- luted areas. Hidden River Cave is again open to the public, and it now houses the American Cave and Karst Center and Museum. Hidden River Cave is a model that shows both how severe sewage and general groundwater contamination prob- lems can become in karst terrains, and the methods to solve those problems. 
Historic entrance of Hidden River Cave taken around 1940 before the cave became heavily polluted. 
(Below) Karst Exhibit at American Cave Museum. 
(Left) Trickling Filter at old Horse Cave Sewage Treatment Plant. The poorly treated effluent was discharged into caves and sinkholes upstream from the city of Horse Cave. 
43 
44 
Fig. 54. 
Some sinkhole 
ponds in Bowling 
Green, Kentucky, 
are used in inno- 
vative ways to 
capture and treat 
urban runoff for 
non-potable uses. 
+ Avoid putting excess water through the 
system; + Repairing or replacing malfunctioning 
systems quickly; + Never pumping out of an inspection riser. 
(Report any contractor who pumps from an inspection port to the state licensing or health board); + Putting only sewage into the system. Do not put hazardous material in the system and never put any chemical down your drain that you would not drink (e.g., paints, thinners, solvents, oils, etc.); + Protecting the land over the septic tank 
and leach field. Do not build over it. Do not allow any vehicles, including garden tractors, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, etc., to drive across it. Plant lawn or native grasses and other ground covers to reduce soil erosion; + Avoiding septic tank additives. Additives 
can destroy the biomat, which is formed by bacteria that naturally treat and purify the wastewater; and + Using a reputable, licensed, and bonded 
septic-system contractor. If your state does not license such contractors, compare the education and apprenticeship credentials among different contractors, and 
request 
information from a county extension agent or a community or county health agency, on county- and state-level septic pumping stan- dards. At a minimum, choose a contractor who is bonded. 
Sewage systems can be effective at mini- mizing impacts to karst aquifers if they are properly built and maintained. If not, their large flows of effluent can easily pollute major sections of aquifers. Sewer lines should be inspected regularly. In areas where sinkhole collapse is common, annual inspections and/or closely-spaced flow meters are needed to detect loss of effluent; double-walled pipelines with leak detectors in the outer pipe may be warranted in some cases. Wherever possible, sewage treatment facilities should be located off karst areas. If the treated waste- water cannot be released away from the karst, it should be treated to as near drinking-water quality standards as possible before release, especially if the aquifer is used as a potable water supply. 
Sinkhole Flooding and Collapse An effective way of dealing with sinkhole flooding in the hard-rock karst areas of the mid-continental U.S. is by building storm water retention basins. These are constructed depressions where runoff from streets, parking lots and other impermeable areas is stored until it can slowly drain through the soil. Retention basins alleviate local flood- ing problems and provide a means of filtering storm water through the soil, thus protecting the karst system from silt, trash, and some pollutants. Basins designed and maintained to filter sediments and pollutants are known as sedimentation and filtration basins. 
Bowling Green, Kentucky, a city of over 50,000 residents, is built almost entirely on a sinkhole plain (Fig. 54). Building codes there require flood easements below a line 12 inch- es (30 cm) above the standing water level produced by a 100-year storm of 3 hours duration where there is effectively no drainage through a sinkhole. The area below this line has been defined as a “sinkhole flood plain.” Storm-water retention basins are required to accommodate drainage produced by changes in land-use accompanying develop- ment. Although the city has been successful in reducing flood losses, the numerous storm water retention basins have taken valuable urban land out of production and are expen- sive for developers to build and maintain. Land uses that affect the hydrologic system, such as filling of sinkholes with debris, are illegal in some areas. 
Sinkhole Collapse The most important tool in preventing and repairing sinkhole collapse is site-specific knowledge of the karst system, as well as an understanding of how karst processes affect engineered structures through time (Fig. 55). Sinkhole collapse is difficult to predict even in well-studied karst regions. Dangerous areas such as the floors of large karst valleys may be easily recognized, but buried sinkholes and fracture trends are harder to detect. When combined with large withdrawal of groundwa- ter and a dropping water table, these areas have the greatest potential for collapse. The seemingly random nature of collapse events dictates that a special knowledge of karst is needed to guide urban and suburban development in these areas. 
A variety of approaches can help avoid sinkhole collapse problems associated with urban development of karst areas. 
+ Karst areas should be mapped thor- oughly to help identi- fy buried sinkholes and fracture trends. Geophysical meth- ods, aerial photogra- phy, and digitally enhanced multi-spectral scanning can identify hidden soil drainage patterns, stressed vegetation, and moisture anomalies in soils over sinkholes. + Sinkhole collapses are commonly “repaired” by dumping any available material into the hole. This technique usually diverts water to other locations and promotes collapse. Mitigate by excavating collapses to the bedrock drain, then refilling the dug hole with material graded upward from coarse rocks to finer sediments to allow natural flow through the bedrock drain without the loss of sediments that cause collapse. If a storm-water drainage well is needed, its casing should extend into and be tightly sealed along the bedrock. + In large sinkholes, use bridges, pilings, pads of rock, concrete, special textiles, paved ditches, curbs, grouting, flumes, overflow channels, or a combination of methods to provide support for roads and other structures. + Large buildings should not be built above 
domes in caves. In areas where caves have collapsed in the past, a test-drilling program is needed prior to construction to avoid building on unstable bedrock. + In less severe cases and in rural areas, place fences around sinkholes to keep animals out and discourage dumping. Construct berms to divert polluted runoff, and establish natural vegetation buffer zones to help filter pollutants and sediment. 
Fig. 55. 
A small sink- 
hole collapse 
has formed 
around a poor- 
ly installed 
drainage well. 
45 
46 
Fig. 56. Animal wastes are stored 
on a concrete pad until they can 
be applied onto fields when plants 
will most readily take up nutrients, 
breakdown bacteria, and reduce 
the contaminants washed down 
into the aquifer. This process also 
saves farmers money on commer- 
cial fertilizers. 
Fig. 57. 
Livestock can be 
well-maintained in 
karst pastures by 
following best 
management 
practices. 
Agriculture 
An important objec- 
tive in managing 
agricultural lands 
in karst regions is to keep polluted surface water out of the ground- water system. 
Some methods to help achieve this goal are 
+ “No till” cultiva- tion, where plant residue is kept on the surface of the soil to absorb water and reduce erosion. + Contour tillage, which slows runoff and increases soil infiltration. + Reseeding cleared areas as quickly as possible to reduce erosion. + Using fertilizers wisely and only in necessary 
amounts. + Minimizing the use of pesticides, and using 
less toxic and biodegradable types. + Not dumping waste material into sinkholes. + Creating a long-term plan for living on karst by conducting a whole-farm and /or house- hold evaluation of all land uses, including application or disposal of nutrients, 
pesticides, and hazardous materials as well as maintenance of the groundwater system. 
Livestock Production An important part of the Best Management Practices concept is recognition of the social and economic needs of the landowners and farmers whose land use practices directly impact the health of the aquifer. In karst regions, a general goal of livestock manage- ment is to keep runoff and livestock away from waterways, sinkholes, springs, crevices, and caves. On demonstration farms in the Midwestern United States, specially construct- ed cattle feedlots have been built where solid cattle waste is stored on a concrete stack pad (Fig. 56), with liquid waste channeled into a lined lagoon. The solid and liquid wastes are applied to fields during active phases of the growing cycle so that the plant uptake of the nutrients in these substances is maximized. 
Some guidelines for keeping effluent from pastures and feedlots out of karst aquifers are 
+ Maintaining a herd size within the carrying capacity of the soil and water resources. + Resting heavily grazed fields (Fig. 57). + Using movable paddock-style pasturing 
when possible. + Surrounding waterways, caves, springs, 
crevices, and sinkholes with strips of vegetation and fences. + Frequently moving salt licks and watering 
tanks to reduce soil compaction and mini- 
mize the concentration of waste products. + Constructing sealed manure-holding tanks 
that are well maintained and regularly inspected. + Cleaning abandoned manure storage sites and basins, and applying residual manure and stained soils to cropland. + Using downspouts, gutters, berms, and 
storm water culverts to divert runoff away from farm buildings, feedlots and manure storage areas. 
Timber Harvesting Some methods of timber harvesting remove much of the vegetation from an area and can cause significant soil erosion unless mitigating steps are taken. In karst areas, soils and plant debris can be washed into sinkholes and caves resulting in pollution of groundwater (Fig. 58). Some suggestions for a timber harvest plan in karst areas are 
+ Locating roads, skid trails, and work areas 
away from places where storm water enters the groundwater system. + Maintaining an unharvested buffer zone around streams, springs, sinkholes, and caves (Fig. 59). + Using bridges or culverts where roads and 
skid trails cross streams to minimize erosion and turbidity. + Stabilizing cut areas quickly to prevent erosion. Slopes should be seeded and protected. + Leaving some waste wood on the land to 
help stabilize it further, and to return nutri- ents to the soil as the waste decays. + Not dumping waste cuttings into sinkholes 
or cave entrances because the debris reduces water quality, hinders drainage, and damages the habitat of cave species. + Using selective harvesting rather than 
clear-cutting techniques when feasible. 
timber 
Fig. 58. Timber harvest 
debris clogs this 
Canadian sinkhole, 
resulting in flooding 
and less water to 
replenish the aquifer. 
Fig. 59. This 
Canadian sink- 
hole is in a 
forested area, 
but with an 
appropriate 
buffer area to 
allow unrestrict- 
ed clean water 
to enter the 
aquifer. 
47 
48 
Because karst areas are extremely vulnerable to environmental impacts, laws and regulations that are effective in other terrains may not be as effective in karst settings. Human development and exploitation of karst aquifers can trigger catastrophic events and result in numerous legal actions that go beyond property boundaries. Few laws provide direct, significant levels of protection for karst and caves, yet substantial indirect protection may exist depending on local rules and jurisdictions. With increased awareness of the ways cave protection also protects groundwater and other resources, many existing statutes are likely to be strengthened. The following section gives examples of laws and regulations that can apply to development and use of karst areas. For a more thorough consideration of laws that may be of some benefit in the protection of karst, the reader should refer to the 1997 article in Environmental Geology by LaMoreaux and others (facing page). 
Caves and Karst The Federal Cave Resources Protection Act of 1988 directed the secretaries of the interior and agriculture to inventory and list significant caves on federal lands, and provides a basis for protecting caves. Public Law 101-578, enacted in 1990, directed the Secretary of the Interior to work through the National Park Service to establish and administer a cave research program and to prepare a proposal for Congress that examined the feasibility of a centralized national cave research institute. The Lechuguilla Cave Protection Act, passed in 1993, recognized the international significance of the scientific and environmental values of the cave. In 1998, Congress passed the National Cave and Karst Research Institute Act that mandated the National Park Service to establish and operate the institute. 
Puerto Rico, the Cherokee Nation, and 22 U.S. states have cave protection statutes in effect. Typically, they focus on protecting speleothems and placing gates on caves. Some include prohibitions against dumping trash or hazardous materials into caves, and protection for cave fauna and archeo- logical and historic materials. A number of states have laws protecting paleontological, archaeologi- cal and historic sites, and some of these include specific mention of caves. Even without the mention of caves as such in these laws they are likely protected by being significant sites. In addition, caves may be protected as critical habitat under the provisions of some state endangered species acts. Unfortunately, in many states violation of these laws are considered misdemeanors or low-level felonies and the penalties are often slight. State cave-protection laws commonly apply on state land only, and damage can be done in a privately owned cave if the landowner gives permission. More information on state cave and karst protection laws can be found in Huppert’s 1995 article on the topic (facing page). 
Aquifers The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) aim to protect non-karst and karst aquifers. SDWA sets drinking water standards that are used to protect groundwater, to include provisions for sole-source aquifers and wellhead protection. RCRA gives the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency authority to set up programs to prevent hazardous