Introduction to the Dinaric Karst 
Investing in your future Operation part financed by the European Union Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance 
REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA GOVERNMENT OFFICE FOR LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT AND REGIONAL POLICY 
ALNI CENTER 
ISKOVAL 
ZNANSTVENI 
VENORAZOS 
SLOVENSKE AKADEHDE ZUMOST IN VMETITOSTI 
NI CENTER 
SKOVALNI 
ZNANSTVE 
VENORAZIS 
SLOVENSKE AKADENDE ZNANOSTI IN UNETHIOSTI 
Editors / Uredniki: 
Language review / Jezikovni pregled: 
Photos / Fotografije: 
Cartography / Kartografija: 
Design and graphic art / Oblikovanje in grafična ureditev: 
Published by / Izdal in založil: 
Represented by / Zanj: 
Printed by / Tisk: 
Printrun / Naklada: 
Andrej Mihevc, Mitja Prelovšek, Nadja Zupan Hajna (Eds.) INTRODUCTION TO THE DINARIC KARST 
Andrej Mihevc, Mitja Prelovšek, Nadja Zupan Hajna 
Carolyn L. Ramsey 
Authors of chapters, if not otherwise mentioned 
Mitja Prelovšek 
Mitja Prelovšek 
Inštitut za raziskovanje krasa ZRC SAZU, Postojna / 
Karst Research Institute at ZRC SAZU, Postojna 
Tadej Slabe 
Collegium Graphicum d.o.o., Ljubljana 
300 copies / izvodov 
Postojna, junij 2010 
The publication was published within the Karst Underground Protection project which is financially supported by the Slovenia- Croatia Operational Programme 2007-2013. 
Knjiga je bila izdana v okviru projekta Karst Undergorund Protection financiranega iz Operativnega programa IPA Slovenija- Hrvaška 2007-2013. 
CIP - Kataložni zapis o publikaciji Narodna in univerzitetna knjižnica, Ljubljana 
911:551.44 
INTRODUCTION to the Dinaric Karst / edited by Andrej Mihevc, Mitja Prelovšek, Nadja Zupan Hajna ; [photos authors of chapters ; cartography Mitja Prelovšek]. - Postojna : Inštitut za raziskovanje krasa ZRC SAZU = Karst Research Institute at ZRC SAZU, 2010 
ISBN 978-961-254-198-9 
1. Mihevc, Andrej, 1952- 
251366400 
Introduction to the Dinaric Karst 
Edited by: 
Andrej Mihevc Mitja Prelovšek Nadja Zupan Hajna 
Postojna, junij 2010 
Geographical Position and General Overview 
(Andrej Mihevc, Mitja Prelovšek) 
Short History of Research 
(Andrej Kranjc) 
Geology 
(Nadja Zupan Hajna) 
Climate 
(Mitja Prelovšek) 
Hydrology 
(Mitja Prelovšek) 
Geomorphology 
(Andrej Mihevc) 
Land Use 
(Nadja Zupan Hajna, Andrej Mihevc, Mitja Prelovšek) 
Case Studies from the Dinaric Karst of Slovenia 
(Andrej Mihevc, Nadja Zupan Hajna, Mitja Prelovšek) 
Kras 
Ljubljanica River System 
Karst of Dolenjska and Kolpa 
Contac Karst of Matarsko podolje 
Caves 
Unroofed Caves and Surface Denudation 
Use of Karst and its Protection 
References 
Contents 
6914202530444967 
6 
Andrej Mihevc, Mitja Prelovšek 
The Dinaric karst is the major morphologi- cal type of landscape of the Dinarsko gorovje (Dinaric mountains), extending over approxi- mately 60,000 km2 and forming the largest continuous karst landscape in Europe. 
The Dinarsko gorovje are positioned be- tween the Panonian Basin in the northeast and the Adriatic Sea in the southwest, cover- ing an area over 650 km in length and over 150 km wide (Fig. 1). In the north, they border the Alps along the rivers Soča, Idrijca and Dolejns- ko podolje (Dolenjska lowland). The inner side of the mountains is delimited by the river Sava valley. The eastern border of the mountains is 
Fig. 1: Delimitafion of the Dinaric karst toward northeast after Roglić (1965) and after Gams (1974). 
Geographical Position and General Overview 
in the Kolubara and Morava river basins, the edge of the Kosovo basin and the Prokletije mountains. The transition to the Alps in the northwest and the Albanian mountains toward the southeast is not very distinctive. 
The Dinarsko gorovje are separated into different natural belts. All have a common direction (northwest-southeast; the Dinaric direction), which is the direction of most of the relief features. The main geomorphologic differences of the mountains are defined by differences in lithology. Inland non-carbonate rocks on which fluvial relief has developed pre- vail. The main parts of the mountains, central 
and outer belts, are formed mostly of Meso- zoic and Tertiary rocks, mostly limestone and dolomite. Here the highest relief is found and karst landscapes prevail. Closer to the coast, relief is generally lower; there are also several narrow belts of Eocene flysch between the limestones. They are expressed as belts of low- er relief and have important control over the underground discharge of the main karst belt. The highest elevations occur in the central belt of the Dinarsko gorovje. Here displaced separated units of higher relief occur, including karst plateaus like Snežnik (1,796 m), Risnjak (1,528 m), Velika and Mala Kapela, Plješivica (1,657 m), Velebit (1,758 m), Dinara (1,913 m), Vitorog (1,907 m), Vran, Čvrsnica (2,228 m), Prenj (2,155 m), Bjelašnica (2,067 m), Jaho- rina, Lelija, Maglič, Durmitor (2,522 m), Tara, Njegoš (1,721 m), Orjen (1,895 m), and Lovčen (1,749 m). These high plateaus, which are all elongated in the Dinaric direction, are separat- ed by lower plateaus and levelled surfaces on limestone or deep trough valleys flowing from non-carbonate rocks. 
During the cold stages of Pleistocene the snow line in the Dinaric Mountains was at about 1,100 m, so glaciation affected the high- er parts. Glaciation partially blocked or inter- rupted karst drainage and slightly modified the karst features. Mostly glaciers developed on plateaus in rugged karst terrain full of closed depressions. Glaciated karst plateaus were smoothed slightly and small moraines were developed. In most cases, glaciers ended in closed depressions with karst outflows. 
Characteristic forms associated with the karst mountains are large levelled surfaces, plateaus and intramontane depressions in which karst poljes have developed. There are no fluvial rivers valleys; only in some places are some dry valleys preserved. Smaller relief fea- tures are uvalas, dolines, dry valleys, collapsed 
dolines, and caves. Because of the pure lime- stone that prevails, only thin non-continuous soil cover developed on the karst. Even though in most of the area there is enough precipita- tion, the thin soils and karst cannot keep it on the surface, so in general aridity is the prob- lem, especially on the southern side of the mountains closer to Mediterranean Sea. 
On both edges, where non-karstic rocks are in contact with the main karst belt, insu- lated karst areas are developed. There are also areas of karst in dolomite, forming fluviokarst. There are areas of contact karst with sinks and ponors. On the edges of the karst, there are also large springs. 
The Dinaric karst is very rich with cave fauna, with many endemic species of animals. The reasons for this are a long, uninterrupt- ed evolution and the age of the karst. Some of the animals, like Proteus anguinus (Fig. 3) and Marifugia cavafica can be found on all ex- treme sides of the Dinaric karst, proving simi- lar and simultaneous evolution of the whole Dinaric karst. 
Modest natural resources are the reason for the low human population. Traditionally this was the area of pasture, transhumance, and later, forestry. The natural vegetation in the area was forest. Wood was used for fire- wood, charcoal, for shipbuilding and for con- struction. In the lower areas, along the coast and on the Kras, the forests completely disap- peared (Fig. 2). Inland, because of a more hu- mid climate and different land use, the forests remained. 
There are two reasons for the reforestation of the area: numerous protective regulations and reforestation attempts. More important is the change in the economy in the past century. There is no longer such enormous pressure on the land. 
7 
Fig. 2: Coastal part of Dinaric karst experienced severe deforestafion which started already in the Neolithoc period (photo: A. Mihevc). 
8Fig. 3: Mountainous Dinaric karst - Popovo polje in Herzegovina (photo: M. Mihevc). 
Dinaric karst is the landscape where the sciences of karstology and speleology took their origin and started to develop thus con- tributing several karstological terms to in- ternational karst terminology. In the antiq- uity already some of karst phenomena were mentioned from the Dinaric karst, but here are considered published sources mostly from the 16th century on, when the modern karst research started. In those times Dinaric karst belonged to different states. Adequate sources were used and and it was a difficult task yet not completely achieved but it pres- ents a relatively new approach. For the older period some Venetian and Turkish works are included. Emphasized are Austrian and Austro- Hungarian researchers working in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as Serbian researchers. The contribution which can be no more than an unpretentious overview mentions early philosopher N. Gučetić discussing karst phe- nomena, and travellers through the Balkans like B. Hacquet, B. Kuripečič, E. Čelebija, and A. Fortis, and also well-known geomorpholo- gists and speleologists A. Penck, E.-A. Martel, J. Cvijić, A. Melik, and J. Roglić. 
Pre-scientific phase Karst phenomena or better phenomena which we are called nowadays as karst ones are relatively often mentioned by ancient Greek and Roman authors. The groundwater and its connection with the sea are noted by Homer, Thales of Millet, Anaxagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Lucretius, and Seneca. Among these descriptions there are also some from Dinaric karst. Pseudo-Skylax’s Periplous (The Circum- navigation of the Inhabited World) of 4th cen- 
Short History of Research 
Andrej Kranjc 
tury BC mentions the springs of Timavo (Herak & Stringfield 1974) which were later studied by Poseidonios of Apameia (135 – 50 BC). In connection with them he mentions also »the chasm« - Škocjanske jame (Škocjan caves; Kranjc 1998). In Virgil’s Aeneida the Timavo springs are called the Mother of the sea and Strabo’s Geography names Lugeon Lacus. Curi- ously all these phenomena are from the north- western part of the Dinaric karst. Taking into the consideration that this is the most distant related to Greece, I would say that we do not know the appropriate references. 
From the Middle Ages it is not known much more. Tabula Peutingeriana showing the springs of the Timavus is in fact a Roman map. Karst phenomena are mentioned in the documents from different reasons but without a notion of karst yet. In 888 the king Berang- er donated the church in the cave Sv. Ivan v Čele – San Giovanni d’Antro located in the last parts of the karst above the plain of Friuli, the Croatian word for the cave Pechice, Pechie or Pechine ossia Grotta, that is pećina, figures on the map of the domain of a monastery on the Ugljan Island in the year 1096 and 1166 respectively as shown in many contributions of late M. Malez (1984). Well known is Byzan- tine’s Emperor Constantine Porphyrogennetos description of his empire De Administrando Imperio (948 – 952) where many karst sites are mentioned like the rivers Pliva and Buna (one of the biggest karst springs), poljes of Imotski and Krbava, and the place Vrulja (Bury 1920). The study of this work from the karstological point of view is still waiting to be done. 
It can be said that during the 16th cen- tury the interest for the karst, future karstol- 
9 
10ogy started. In 1531 a lawyer from Ljubljana, Benedikt Kuripečič (Kuripešič) (born 1490) published a diary of his voyage through the Balkans as the interpreter to the Turkish sul- tan Suleiman to Constantinople (Curipeschitz 1531). From the point of view of karst he men- tions just some karst spring (Kranjc 2008). Equally unimportant is Leonberger’s long poem about the Lake of Cerknica. According to the description (oral or written) of S. Her- berstein, Vienna’s diplomat by the origin from Vipava, G. Wernher (1551) published a de- scription of this lake (in fact seasonally flooded polje), including the map (Simoniti 2010). On the other side of Dinaric karst a philosopher from Dubrovnik, Nikola Gučetić (Gozze 1584) published a discussion of the wind in the Cave of Vjetrenica (Wind Cave) and of the speleo- 
Fig. 4: Valvasor’s hydraulic model of Cerkniško jezero (Cerknica lake). 
thems from the cave Šipun. The reputation of the Cerkniško jezero (Cerknica lake) grew which can be well seen from the contempora- neous maps of Lazius, Ortelius or Mercator for example: the lake is drawn much bigger than it deserves according to the scale of the map. 
Evliya Çelebi (Evlija Efendi), his full name was Evlijā ibn Derviš Mehmed Zillī, travelled the whole of his life (1611 – 1682), a lot through Balkans too. In his diaries, discovered little more than 100 years ago, are described karst landscapes, water phenomena, caves (mostly in connection with fighting guerrilla). Curious- ly he knows a sort of corrosion: to make the road through limestone terrain large enough to pass the canons, soldiers had to pour the acid on the limestone (Kranjc 2008)! This is also a time when one of the leading scientists 
of his time, a Jesuit Athanasius Kircher (1678), has published his monumental work Mundus Subterraneus (1665 the first edition). The big karst springs are explained by enormous un- derground reservoirs hydrophillafia and as the proof of his theory the Cerkniško jezero is used (Fig. 4). Ten years later Valvasor (1689) travelled many times to Cerknica, to explore it by himself (neither Wernher nor Kircher ever visited it). He did not agree with Kircher and made his own explanation which earned him the London’s Royal Society membership. 
The fame of the Dinaric karst phenomena, from Carniola specially, is in great deal due to Valvasor’s descriptions; he was not interested in the Cerkniško polje (Cerknica polje) only, but in other karst phenomena also: sinking rivers, karst springs and caves especially. In 1748 the emperor Franz I. Stephan sent the director of his Cabinet of rarities J. A. Nagel (1748) to Car- niola to found out what are these unusual phe- nomena, and to bring some samples for his col- lection. After returning Nagel wrote a detailed report; the most important is his explanation of the periodicity of Cerkniško jezero and the observation of the age of speleothems. F. Steinberg (1758) published the whole book on the Cerkniško jezero and T. Gruber (1781) was the first who published (probably the ideas of his brother Gabriel) the accurate explanation of the lake. He even advised a sort of meteo- rological stations to be able to calculate the quantities of in- and output of the water. 
For the coastal part of Dinaric karst the description and exploration even of karst phe- nomena by the Abbot Alberto Fortis published in 1774 is especially important due to the polit- ical situation on the Balkans. He was accompa- nied by foreign scholars and even by an English bishop so his book was well known. Commen- taries were published about the book (Lovr- ich 1776) but without discussing his views of karst phenomena. Just to mention that Fortis supports the collapse theory of foibas (shafts) formation. In the same time another scholar travelled through Dinaric karst too, B. Hacquet 
(1778). He was a doctor of medicine but by his own opinion he was a chemist. Some of his ideas about geological development, about rocks and the solution of limestone (corrosion) were too early and although they were pub- lished and despite his relations with learned societies and scholars all round the Europe his ideas were not recognised. Maybe he is the first to largely use the expression Dinaric Alps. In 1785 he has published “The physical- political travel from Dinaric through Julian, Carnian, Rhätian and Noric Alps”, including the panoramic view from the river Zrmanja to the mountain Dinara (Hacquet 1785). 
The first phase of karst geomorphology research During the 19th century the boom of geo- logical research touched the Dinaric karst too. Vienna was very important scientific centre and Dinaric karst, well developed and large karst region in its vicinity, became the source of main ideas on karst. In 1830 already F. Hoh- enwart writes in the preface of a guide book to Postojnska jama (Postojna cave) that the karst is not on the plateau of Karst only, but stretch- es from the Friuli plain to the Greek Island of Cephalonia. 
In 1848 A. v. Morlot published the map and the text about the geology of Istria including discussion of morphological features, especial- ly dolines. The basic work on speleology of the Carniolian part of Dinaric karst was achieved by A. Schmidl (1854) exploration in the middle of the 19th century (Fig. 5), helped by Vienna’s Academy and the Southern Railway Company (the railroad Vienna – Trieste was opened in 1857). Western scholars, it is true that few, were interested in the Turkish part of the Bal- kans, like A. Boué (1840) who published “La Turquie d’Europe; observations sur la géogra- phie, la géologie, l’histoire naturelle“. Later he was interested in karst (Karst und Trichterplas- tik from 1861) and in Bosnia specially. There were some serious published reports whose titles imply narrow application but in fact they 
11 
of include numerous data and general observa- 
Karst (Kras) and in 1893 he published Das tions on karst, as are Beyer et al. (1874) and 
Karstphänomen (Fig. 6), a turning-point and at Wessely (1876). 
the same times the beginning of the intensive Following the occupation of Bosnia and 
study of karst morphology, including the use Herzegovina (1878) a new and complex ap- 
of the term karstification. In 1899 W.M. Davies proach to karst problems coincided with the 
joined Penck and his students at the field trip beginning of the geological survey. Leading 
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. The previous flu- Vienna’s geologists of the time, E. Mojsisov- 
vial erosion and the cyclic evolution (dolina – ics, E. Tietze and E. Bittner (1880) gave a scien- 
uvala – polje) were introduced into the theory tific explanation of the karst features genesis, 
of karst. but the discussion between the supporters of 
In 1903, A. Grund, also the disciple of collapse and of solution theories continued. 
Penck, has published a basic work on karst Leading Vienna’s geomorphologist, A. Penck 
hydrography which is a new milestone also was the most prominent protagonist of the 
in karst morphology, introducing a concept of new discipline, karstology. He suggested to his 
karst groundwater concordant with the cyclic student J. Cvijić for his doctor thesis to study 
theory too and supported by Penck himself. karst. He got main ideas of karst on the plateau 
Speleologists, Knebel and Martel especially, and some geologists (Katzer) and geographers (Kraus 1894) opposed strongly to Grund’s karst groundwater. 1910 Grund has published the work of the relief of the Dinarsko gorovje (Dinaric mountains) based on his observations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where his views on the evolution of poljes and karst plains are explained. Hungarian geologist H. Terzaghi in 1913 introduced a theory of marginal or bor- der corrosion to explain limestone plains and flat polje surfaces. Two decades passed before it was recognized and later further developed by the most prominent Croatian geomorphol- ogist J. Roglić (1952). During the 1st World War when he was teaching at Sorbonne Cvijić has prepared a synthesis of his views about the evolution of karst relief and has published it in 1918 (Cvijić 1918). He accepts karst ground- water and distinguishes three hydrographical zones: permanent inundation, periodical in- undation, and a dry zone. He renames Grund’s “Halbkarst” (half-karst) into “merokarst” and introduces fully developed “holokarst”. 
The defeat of Austro-Hungarian Monarchy resulted in almost complete lethargy in the Viennese centre of karst research. After the 1st World War the investigations of karst relief 
Fig. 5: In 1854, A. Schmidl published the basic work on spe- leology for the area of Carniola, Slovenia. 
stagnated, followers of the respected masters were few and did not produce worthwhile con- 
12 
tributions. The first phase was rich in general ideas and poor in real analyses (Roglić 1974). 
The second phase of karst research The previous research, including Penck-Gr- und concept did not resolve the problem of the water circulation through fractures, fissures, and joints and its relation to the evolution of karst relief. This was explained by Vienna’s geomorphology group member O. Lehman (1932). According to nearly forgotten Terza- ghi’s marginal corrosion Kayser (1934) explains the plains at the border of Skadar Lake (Mon- tenegro). Roglić (1938) describes and explains accordingly to the theory of a border corrosion such terraces of the Dinaric poljes. The new concept was largely adopted by the authors of different general or specialised works related 
Fig. 6: The book Das Karstphänomen of Jovan Cvijić was a pioneering monograph and marked the beginning of modern karst studies (Shaw 1992). 
to Dinaric karst. The example is the work of A. Melik, Slovenia and Sima M. Milojević, Ser- bia. Conclusion 
The second phase was tragically inter- rupted by the 2nd World War. Soon after the war investigations of karst morphology were revived and increased in volume as well as in intensity in an essentially different way than those in the past. In the post-war period there are global scientific contacts and exchanges. The different countries are easily accessible. Observations and data are multiplying, con- cepts are modified and combined, sophisti- cated methods, based on computer and digital technologies are widely used. With more ex- act observations and data, the corresponding conclusions have been improved. In the area of Dinaric karst specially, important practical work in the prospection and exploitation of ore deposits has been carried out, as well as the construction of accumulation basins, hy- droelectric power plants, tunnels, railways, and motorways. Scientific concepts have nec- essarily become adapted to new ideas and facts. So the Dinaric karst has given a lot of data and other material to study, there were a great number of authors and even much great- er number of professional and amateur works, there are new centres working on Dinaric karst, there are specialised journals, meetings from the World congresses to local symposia. But the same can be said for the karst all over the world. New theories and concepts are elaborated on the knowledge of other karsts, not the Dinaric one. So this contribution ends somewhere with the 2nd World War. On one hand it would require too much work and time to analyse in detail the imposing investigations of the Dinaric karst in the last 60 years, and on the other hand, regarding the investigations of the karst worldwide it would be too difficult to find out the role, the importance and the in- fluence of the Dinaric karst studies upon the general karstology. 
13 
Nadja Zupan Hajna 
14 
The Dinaric karst is geographically and geo- logically part of the Dinarsko gorovje (Dinaric mountains; Dinarides) and includes all of the External Dinarides and some parts of the Inter- nal Dinarides (Fig. 7). 
According to some authors (for instance, Schmid et al. 2004), from a tectonics perspec- tive the Dinarides (Dinaric Alps) include the Southern Limestone Alps, External and Inter- nal Dinarides. Other researchers (for instance: Placer 1999, 2008; Tari 2002; Kastelic et al. 2008) take the view that only the External and Internal Dinarides are included. 
The geological evolution of the Dinarides is closely associated with the history of the Te- thys Ocean, which closed during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic as a result of the convergence of the Africa and Eurasian Plates. Intermediate 
Geology 
microplates played an important role in ocean shortening. The present geological structures resulted from post-collision processes in the Alpine orogenic system, which started before about 35 Ma (Vrabec & Fodor 2006). 
The Dinaric karst denotes an area within the Dinaric Mountain System, confined mostly to the External Dinarides, which consists pre- dominantly of Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous limestones and dolomites; see the Geological map (Fig. 8). Geological data (i.e.,Vlahović et al. 2002) indicate that the External Dinarides were formed by the destruction of a single, (yet, in morphological terms, highly variable) shallow water carbonate platform. The plat- form was very dynamic in some periods be- cause of its paleogeographic position during the Mesozoic, especially during the Late Creta- 
Fig. 7: Simplified tectonic map of Dinaric Mountains (after Schmid et al. 2004; Šumanovac et al. 2009). 
15 
ceous. The final disintegration of the platform area culminated in the formation of flysch trough(s) in the late Cretaceous and Paleogene and the subsequent uplift of the Dinarides. There is confusion among the scientific litera- ture due to the different names used for this same shallow water carbonate platform. Prob- ably the best, although not the ideal, name is the most frequently used one: the Adriatic Carbonate Platform (Vlahović et al. 2002). Its duration is estimated to be from the Late Lias (Fig. 9) to the Late Cretaceous, representing the most important part of a thick carbonate succession in the Dinaric karst (ranging from Carboniferous to Eocene). 
Fig. 9: Liassic limestone with lithiofides; Rujno above Paklenica canyon (photo: N. Zupan Hajna). 
16 
Differing opinions about the geologic evo- lution of this system in the northeastern Adri- atic region reflect its complexity (Korbar 2009). After Korbar (2009), the External Dinarides are a fold-and-thrust belt, part of the Alpine orogenic system, characterized by generally southwest-verging structures, and can be con- sidered as the detached, backthrust and high- ly deformed upper crust of the Adria during subduction to the northeast. This belt, along with the related part of the Adriatic foreland, is geographically situated within the Dinaric karst region. 
The main tectonostratigraphic units of the Dinarides (Tari 2002; Fig. 10) are related to: a) Early and Middle Triassic rifting; b) Late Juras- sic to present day compression. 
Early and Middle Triassic rifting was marked by strong magmatism and horst and graben-related deposition overlying the Va- riscian basement. Along the “eastern” Apulian margin toward the Sava-Vardar, ocean rifting was followed by subduction-generated exten- sion from the Early Triassic until the Late Juras- sic. Subduction-related attenuation of conti- nental crust along the eastern margin of Apulia caused the formation of a back-arc basin in the oceanic crust. The remnants of these active continental margin lithologies are found with- in the Eastern thrust belt as the ophiolite me- lange of the Central Dinarides Ophiolite Belt. 
Late Jurassic-to-present day compression generated: 
• the Eastern thrust belt, foredeep and foreland: the Dinaridic carbonate plat- form toward the west presented the foreland of the generally west directed thrusting. During the Early Cretaceous, compressional stresses began to be transmitted westward through the Di- narides, causing the migration of the foredeep basin and regional uplift of the Eastern thrust belt. 
• the Northern Dinarides accretion- ary wedge: subduction of the oceanic plate along the northern margin of the Dinarides resulted in the accumulation of this accretionary wedge from the Maastrichtian to the Eocene. 
• the Western thrust belt, foredeep and foreland: from the end of the Creta- ceous until the early Eocene the entire carbonate platform was uplifted. Dur- ing the Eocene, the Dinaridic carbon- ate platform was finally buried under the flysch deposits in the broad fore- deep basin of the Western thrust belt. 
• the Eastern Adria imbricated struc- tures: at the beginning of the Oligo- 
cene, collision and progressive un- derthrusting of the Adria below the Dinarides created the imbricate struc- tures of Adria provenience in front of the Western thrust belt. The structural style of the Dinaridic thrust belt is a result of the polyphase tectonic com- pression and the competence of the sedimentary units involved. The com- petent carbonate rocks are the stron- gest influencing factor on the structural style of the thrust belt. The compres- sion started with ramping along the deep decollement from the root zone with a southwestern tectonic trans- port. In this way, by progressive over- stepping of the thrust faults, various structural forms were created along the eastern and western thrust belt - fault bend folds, tear fault-related folds and folded thrust structures reworked by footwall deformations. 
• Wrenching and tectonic inversion: the northeast-southwest striking system 
of the dextral strike slip faults during Oligocene - Miocene was followed by northwest-southeast striking and wrenching in the early and middle Miocene, affecting the South Panno- nian Basin, the Western thrust belt and the Adriatic foreland. This activity is re- flected in the large flower structures of the Dinaridic thrust belt. The main structures of the Dinaric karst have a strike trend in a northwest - southeast direction (in the so-called “Dinaric” direc- tion). This structural pre-disposition is visually reflected in the directional trend of high pla- teaus and karst poljes from south Slovenia to Montenegro. 
Mountains above 1,100 m a.s.l. in the Di- naric karst were glaciated during the Pleisto- cene. Valley glaciers reshaped the original flu- vial valleys into typical U-shaped valleys and deposited vast amounts of sediments. There are a number of characteristic glacial features such as hanging valleys, remains of moraines, fluvioglacial sediments, eratic blocks and 
Fig. 10: The main tectonostrafigraphic units of the Dinarides and Adria; after Tari (2002). 
Legend: 1. Eastern thrust belt; 2. Dinaridic carbonate platform, fore- land of the Eastern thrust belt; 2a. Frontal thrust of the Western thrust 
belt; 3. Maastrichfian-Paleogene accre- 
fionary wedge; 3a. Maastrichfian- Paleogene retroarc 
area, North-Bosnian flysch; 4. Slovenian Basin; 5. Budva-Cukali Basin; 6. Gently tectonised Adriafic carbon- 
ate platform; 7. Adriafic Basin; 8. Gargano-Sazani-Paxos carbonate 
platform; 9. Miocene wrenching; 10. Miocene tectonic inversion. 
17 
striated cobbles and boulders. The remains of Pleistocene glaciations are visible from Snežnik Mountain in Slovenia, Risnjak and Velebit mountains in Croatia to Orjen, Lovčen and Durmitor mountains in Montenegro. 
Along Dinaric karst, karst features are fa- vored specially in massive and thick bedded Cretaceous limestones (with rudist shells) and in two characteristic lithological units (Fig. 11) which host an exceptional abundance of well developed karst features. These two are the Promina Beds, Eocene-Oligocene in age, and the Jelar Breccia, of unknown age - Oligocene or younger (McCann 2008). 
The Tertiary Jelar Breccia covers large ar- eas along the northeastern Adriatic coast on 
the southwest rim of Velebit Mountain (west- ern Croatia). The larg- est outcrop is >100 km long, 2–10 km wide, and thicker than 500 m in places. The Jelar Brec- cia was poorly studied because of its very com- plex composition, un- clear structural position and intense younger tectonic deformation (Vlahović et al. 2007). It is usually considered a result of the disintegra- tion of frontal parts of the major thrusts. The Jelar Breccia is a mas- sive, thick-bedded car- bonate rock, comprised predominantly of angu- lar, poorly sorted debris (Fig. 12). The breccia has a carbonate matrix, which is gray- to reddish in color. The lithostrati- Fig. 11: Locafions of Jelar Breccia and Promina beds; from Perica & Marjanac (2009; after Oluić et al. 1972; cartography: Iztok Sajko). 
graphic composition of the debris is varied (Bahun 1974). Clasts of Cretaceous limestones and dolomites are the most common, with lesser amounts of Triassic carbonates and Paleogene limestones. The de- bris grain sizes are highly variable, with clasts in ranging in size from a few mm up to several meters. 
Due to its specific mechanical and petro- graphic properties, the Jelar Breccia is char- acterized by an abundance of such solutional karst features as karren (Perica & Marjanac 2009), dolines, conical hills and caves. In the Jelar Breccia along the south- and southwest parts of Velebit, ridges of conical hills (named “Kuk” in the local language) are numerous. Be- tween these hills, big and deep karst depres- sions are developed. Well known examples 
18 
Fig. 12: The Jelar Breccia is a massive, thick-bedded carbonate rock, comprised predominantly of angular, poorly sorted debris; North Velebit (photo: N. Zupan Hajna). 
The deepest explored caves in Croatia are developed in Jelar Breccia (Garašič 2005), and are found north of Velebit. These caves are Lukina jama-Trojama (-1,392 m), Slovačka jama (-1,320 m), Velebita cave system (-1,026 m) with a 513 m underground vertical shaft and Meduza (-679 m) (these data are from Lacković et al. (1999) and the web pages of the Croa- tian Speleological Federation (http://www. speleo.hr/deepest.htm); Fig. 30 on page 41). Several significant caves were also discovered in the Jelar Breccia of Crnopac area (South Velebit). Their main morphological character- istic is a network of multiphase cave passages, some of them with very large cross-sectional dimensions (Bajo et al. 2009). The most im- portant caves of Crnopac massif are Munižaba (5,993 m long, -437 m) and Kita Gaćešina (10,603 m long, -456 m). 
The Promina Beds (Promina Formation) consist of two different lithological parts (Mc- Cann 2008). The lower part is characterized by an alternation of marls, sandstones, conglom- erates, limestones and cherts. The upper parts are alluvial sedi- ments – conglom- erates with marly beds with coal and plant remains. Promina beds are Eocene-Oligocene in age (Babić & Zupanič 2007). The Promina Beds can be seen on Promina Moun- tain, at Kistanjski ravnik and Ravni Kotari (the area between Velebit, Novigradsko more (Novigrad Sea) and the River Krka).19 
include Hajdučki and Rožanski kukovi near Zavižan (Northern Velebit National Park); Da- barski kukovi next to Baške Oštarije; Bojinac (Fig. 13) above Paklenica Canyon (National Park Paklenica) and Tulove grede on the south edge of the Velebit. 
Fig. 13: Karst in Jelar Breccia; Bojinac at South Velebit. In the distance is Adriafic Sea and levelled surface around Novigradsko more (Novigrad Sea; photo: N. Zupan Hajna). 
Mitja Prelovšek 
20 
The Dinaric karst is situated between 42° and 46° N at the northeastern edge of the Mediterranean Sea. From a climatic point of view, this geographic position falls within a temperate climatic zone where mid-latitude westerly winds (westerlies) prevail throughout the year. Nevertheless, the declination of the Earth and its movement around the Sun shifts the position of temperate belt 23° northward during summer and southward again during winter. This means that these latitudes can be under a strong subtropical zone influence during the summer months and under the in- fluence of polar fronts during winter since the polar front can move southward of Greece (Kocsis 2007). Westerlies can therefore be very dry during several summer months but also very wet during winter. 
Besides the global atmospheric circula- tion system, the climate of the Dinaric karst is strongly influenced by the Dinarsko goro- vje (Dinaric Mountains), which form an oro- graphic barrier that affects precipitation pat- terns (Fig. 16) and hinders winter intrusions of cold polar air flowing from continental regions in the east toward Adriatic coast. Westerlies usually blow from the Atlantic Ocean over the warm Mediterranean Sea. If the pressure is low over the Mediterranean Sea, air masses become enriched with humidity. When they hit the Dinarsko gorovje, the result is a high amount of precipitation on the west-facing side (Crkvice, Orjen-5,317 mm/a-the highest amount in Europe; Rodić 1987) and a much smaller amount of precipitation on the east- facing side. Lower amounts of precipitation are also characteristic for low-lying areas along the Adriatic coast and low islands (e.g., Pula-713 mm/a, Vis-676 mm/a; Rodič 1987). In summer, 
Climate 
high pressure over the Mediterranean Sea hinders uplifting and condensation of the air masses over the sea, while over the continent precipitation is possible due to strong convec- tion. In winter, the Dinarsko gorovje prevent intrusions of cool air masses that develop over continental Eastern Europe. Nevertheless, if the pressure difference between marine and continental air masses is too high, pockets of cold air spill over the orographic barrier, caus- ing strong katabatic winds called “the Bora”, which can exceed even 200 km/h. The main ridge of the Dinarsko gorovje, which ranges in altitude from 612 m to more than 2,500 m, also causes a strong vertical decline of temper- ature. Average annual temperatures decrease with height over quite short horizontal dis- tances (80 km) from 15.3 °C (Podgorica; Kovacs & Dobos 2007) to about 2°C (Durmitor). Even steeper spatial temperature changes are char- acteristic for mountain Velebit. At such high altitudes, snow is present for up to half a year. The Adriatic Sea has a strong moderating influence especially on temperatures along the coast and islands. Along the coast, at the southwestern boundary of the Dinaric karst, winter temperatures are much higher in com- parison with places on the northeastern edge of the Dinaric karst. Along the coast, tempera- tures below zero are rare even during winter but very common on the continental edge of the Dinaric karst at only slightly higher al- titudes (~170 m a.s.l.). Consequently, snow at the coast is very rare, but not impossible (when it does occur, it is always related to the intrusion of cold continental air from the northeast). In summer, daily temperatures along the coast are usually lower than in the continental part of the Dinaric karst due to the 
maritime influence of the Adriatic Sea. In some cases, the influence of the Adriatic Sea can ex- tend even further toward the Dinarsko gorovje through wide valleys of rivers such as the Krka, Bojana, Morača, Zeta and the downstream part of the Neretva. 
On the continental side of the Dinarsko go- rovje, the absence of the maritime influence results in more extreme diurnal and seasonal temperature variations. Snow can persist on the ground for more than one month on av- erage during the winter, and up to several months at higher altitudes. Another difference in comparison with Mediterranean part of Di- naric karst is higher amount of summer precip- itation, which is a result of higher daily summer temperatures and more intensive convection during the day. Nevertheless, the influence of the Mediterranean Sea can be still observed in relatively high autumn-winter amount of pre- cipitation, which is not characteristic for the pure continental climate (where peak precipi- tation occurs in the summer months). 
While global factors define the framework for general climate conditions, the highest in- fluence on the Dinaric karst climate is the Di- narsko gorovje, which act as an orographic bar- rier. While latitudinal dependence (in NW-SE direction) is of minor importance, the greatest differences in climate can be observed across a southwest-northeast transect, along which 
three different distinct climates with gradual transitions can be identified: 
• Mediterranean and Transitional Medi- terranean climates 
• Mountainous climate 
• Transitional Continental climate. 
The Mediterranean and Transitional Med- iterranean climates extend along the Adriatic coast. The extent of these climates into the mountainous massif depends on topographic relief, ranging from 2 km below coastal moun- tains up to 120 km along the river Neretva (Rodić 1987). These climates are characterized by mild wet winters and hot dry summers. The average January temperature of the Mediter- ranean climate (southern Dinaric karst, e.g. Dubrovnik) is higher than 5 °C while that of the Transitional Mediterranean climate (northern Dinaric karst) is only slightly above 0 °C. Aver- age July temperatures can be up to 26 °C and they decrease toward the Dinarsko gorovje and toward Adriatic Sea (since the sea is some degrees cooler during summer). Precipitation is highest in the early winter months (Decem- ber/January; for Transitional Mediterranean climate in November), with lesser amounts in April/May, while the lowest amounts of pre- cipitation occur during the summer. Amounts of precipitation vary from 600 to 1,500 mm/a (the island of Palagruža receives as little as 21 
311 mm/a; Zaninović 2008) and increase from the low islands and coast toward sea-side part of Dinarsko gorovje. Moving from the sout- west to the northwest, the characteristics of the typical Mediterranean climate decreases. 
Mountainous climate extends over the majority of the Dinarsko gorovje. Changes from the Mediterranean and Transitional Mediterranean climates are caused by higher elevations and increased distances from Adri- atic coast. The average amount of precipitation can exceed 3,000 mm/a at the karst plateaus Trnovski gozd, Snežnik, Gorski Kotar, Velebit and the wider area of Orjen. Areas near the Adriatic coast have the lowest amounts of pre- cipitation in summer months, while mountain- ous areas on the northeast side of Dinarsko gorovje receive the lowest amounts of precipi- tation during winter months. At Zavižan me- teorological station (Velebit, 1,594 m a.s.l.), the average annual temperature can be as low 
as 3.5 °C, with 1,899 mm/a of rain which on average results in almost 6 months of snow- covered ground (Fig. 14) and up to 320 cm of snow (Zaninović 2008). Even more severe con- ditions can occur at some karst depressions at even lower elevations. 
The Transitional Continental climate is similar to the Continental climate but it is moderated somewhat by its relatively close proximity to the Adriatic coast. It is charac- terized by higher annual temperature ranges (even more than 20 °C between January and July), lower mean annual temperatures (up to 11 °C at karst leveled surface between rivers Kupa/Kolpa and Una; Zaninović 2008), with an average January temperature close or be- low 0 °C. The Transitional Continental climate has lower July temperatures due to night cool- ing in comparison with the Mediterranean climate but higher maximum daily summer temperatures and lower amounts of annual 
22 
Fig. 14: Several meters high snow cover can be seen at Dinarsko gorovje even in the beginning of summer (exemple from Durmitor, Montenegro; 11th June 2006; photo: M. Prelovšek). 
Fig. 15: Temperature and vegetafional inversion in the Smrekova draga closed depression (Trnovski gozd, Slovenia; photo: A. Mihevc). 
precipitation. The lowest amount of precipi- tation typically occurs in the winter months. Precipitation amounts peak in the autumn months (only close to Panonian basin, e.g. in Novo mesto, in the summer months) and is above 800 mm/a, which differ slightly for the Transitional Continental climate in comparison with the Continental climate. Amounts of pre- cipitation decrease toward the northeast as distance from the orographic barrier (Dinarsko gorovje) increases. 
Although these three climates can be eas- ily observed, less obvious microlocal changes of climate can be important in several cases, especially in karst areas where the strongest 
23 influence comes from topography. As a rule, the interiors of karst depressions are colder than the higher ground surrounding them. This is especially true for karst poljes, where absolute minimum temperatures can be as low as -34.5 °C (Babno polje at Notranjsko podolje (Notranjska lowland) at 756 m a.s.l.) and -41.8 °C (Veliko polje below mountain Bjelašnica (Rodič 1987) due to temperature inversions. Besides lower absolute minimum temperatures, greater numbers of cold days, and greater amounts of snow cover, fog and frost are also characteristic for enclosed karst depressions (Fig. 15). 
24 
The present day hydrological character- istics of the Dinaric karst are the result of its complex geologic structures and a long and intensive geomorphic evolution. In addition to its varied geology and geomorphology, the hy- drology of the Dinaric karst is one of its most distinctive and recognizable elements. The Di- naric karst is an area where hydro-geomorphic phenomena were studied for the first time in the world in details and where some hydrogeo- logical ideas were born. It is a place of rivers that sink and reappear several times, a place of abundant ponors and springs connected by hydrologically active caves, a place where the typically impressive features of contact karst occur, and a place where the complex hydro- logical systems between poljes were modified 
Fig. 17: Glavaš is over 115 m deep spring of river Cefina (photo: A. Mihevc). 
Hydrology 
Mitja Prelovšek 
and used for production of hydroelectricity af- ter the 2nd World War. 
The Dinaric karst is a region that extends over Dinarsko gorovje (the Dinaric mountains) and comprises both permeable (karstic) and non-permeable rocks. Due to this mixed geol- ogy, two major types of drainage have devel- oped: non-karstic surface drainage and the prevailing subsurface drainage typically associ- ated with karst. Even pure and fractured lime- stone can support superficial flow if regional factors (e.g., hydrological barriers, hydraulic gradients that are too low) do not favor under- ground flow (i.e., as occurs at karst poljes). Nev- ertheless, fully developed underground drain- age is characteristic for areas with very pure limestones (those with less than 1 % of impuri- ties are abundant in Dinaric karst), with springs at relatively low elevation and without important fault zones. At such places, subverti- cal drainage which turns subhorizon- tal at water level and drains toward springs nearby. Very good examples of such drainage are at the mountains Velebit, Biokovo and also at some lowland plateaus (e.g. plateau Kras). 
Aside from superficial drain- age on impervious 
25 
rocks (such as Eocene flysch, Lower Mesozoic and Upper Paleozoic rocks), very extensive ar- eas of the Inner Dinarides exhibit the fluvio- karstic type of drainage. This type of drainage is especially characteristic for dolomite that is not able to transfer all the water underground due to rapid superficial weathering, too high fractionation or too slow solubility. In such cases, a portion of water flows on the surface, especially during heavy rain or intensive melt- ing of snow in springtime, but the rest can flow underground toward springs at the sides of deep valleys. Fluviokarstic drainage is impres- sively developed in the southeastern part of the Dinaric karst where dolomites are widely exposed. Here, the rivers Tara and Piva have formed canyons exceeding 1,000 m in depth. 
At the interfaces between permeable and impermeable rocks, impressive contact karst developed where the superficial rivers en- counter permeable karstic rocks. At these geo- logical contacts, superficial streams strongly influence the characteristics of underground 
hydrology, especially with respect to point re- charge, flow regime and high sediment load. During their long history of sinking, these riv- ers and streams have formed big, and still hy- drologically active, underground passages, as well as blind valleys and collapse dolines. One of the best examples of such a sinking river is the Reka, which sinks into Škocjanske jame (Škocjan Caves). Concentration of water is also characteristic for some sinks at the down- stream ends of karst poljes, where long epi- phreatic cave systems have been developed (i.e. Postojnska jama, Vjetrenica). 
Based on described lithological factors, major geomorphic features and hydrological characteristics, the Dinaric karst is usually hy- drologically divided into three spatial regions (Gams 1974; Herak et al. 1969; Šarin 1984): low coastal and insular Adriatic karst, conti- nental mountainous karst and low northeast- ern and high southeastern inland karst. All of these hydrogeological regions are parallel to Adriatic Sea. 
Low coastal and insular Adriatic karst, formed mainly in Cre- taceous-Tertiary rocks, is characteristic for nearly all of the islands along the Croatian coast, the northeast- ern coastal part of Italy (northwest of Trieste/ Trst), the coastal area of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Mon- tenegro. In Slovenia, the coastal area is formed in Eocene fly- sch rocks and is there- fore non-karstic. The main characteristic of the low coastal and insular Adriatic karst 
Fig. 18: Traverfine dams are building for impresive waterfalls along Croafian Krka river (photo: A. Mihevc). 
is the contact of fresh water with seawater. 
26 
Seawater usually underlies fresh water on the islands, resulting in lenses of fresh water be- low surface. The interface between fresh and salt water along the Adriatic coast is more complex due to different patterns of inflow of fresh water (superficial or underwater), dif- ferent discharge and different geometry of conduits. On the western peninsula Istra (Is- tria), below the mountains Učka, Velebit, Bio- kovo, in Stonski zaljev (Ston Bay) and in the bay of Boka-Kotorska, examples of submarine springs, also called “vruljas”, are numerous and efficacious. In some cases water is mixed (i.e., brackish), which presents a problem for water supply, especially in summer when dis- charges are the lowest. A lot of coastal springs are located above sea level and discharge fresh water – the biggest ones are Timavo/Timava (Qmin= 9 m3/s, Qavg= 30.2 m3/s, Qmax= 138 m3/s; Ford & Williams 2007 after Smart & Worthing- ton 2000) and Ombla spring, near Dubrovnik, with a natural average discharge of 33.8 m3/s 
Fig. 19: Canyon of river Cefina with mountain Mosor in the background (photo: A. Mihevc). 
(after 1965, the average discharge was reduced to 29.6 m3/s due to the construction of a hy- droelectric plant in the hinterland; Milanović 2006). Parsts of the hinterland along coast rise steeply to Učka, Velebit, Biokovo and Orjen, but in many cases shallow karst is developed in areas with little topographic relief (e.g., Is- tra, Sjevernodalmatinska zaravan (North Dal- matian plain), Ravni kotari). A similar situation occurs on the continental leveled surface be- tween rivers Kupa/Kolpa and Una. Homogene- ity of such karst is often interrupted with belts of Eocene flysch rocks trending in a northwest- southeasterly direction, which often divert the general southwesterly flow of streams parallel to the Dinaric direction (NW-SE) and stimulate superficial drainage, while on the karst rocks canyons are developed. The canyons along the rivers Krka, Zrmanja and Cetina (Fig. 19) are up to 180 m deep and were even deeper during Ice ages, when the sea level was lower and travertine dams (Fig. 18) were probably 
27 
absent. Downstream parts of the canyons are submerged due to the tufa dams and the rise in sea level at the beginning of Ho- locene. In Istria, the canyons of the rivers Mirna and Raša are shallower but also partly submerged at the downstream ends.The most char- acteristic hydro-geo- morphic phenomena of the continental mountainous karst are high plateaus and karst poljes. The main 
Fig. 20: Spring of river Buna (photo: M. Prelovšek). ridge of continental mountainous karst lies above 612 m a.s.l. The width continental mountainous karst ranges between 30 to 110 km (Šarin 1984). The tran- sition from the southwestern coastal Adriatic karst can be double this width in places. In some parts of Adriatic coast, Dinarsko gorovje rise from the coast very steeply without lev- eled transition (Učka, Velebit, Biokovo, Orjen, Lovčen). In such areas, water is drained ver- tically through vadose zones up to 1,350 m deep and often discharges in vruljas along the Adriatic coast. Behind Istra and Sjevernodal- matinska zaravan, the rise is more gradual. In eastern Herzegovina, the rise in elevation goes through several karst overflow poljes, where the lowest are in southwest and the highest in northeast. Water appears and disappears here several times, from the highest Gatačko polje and Nevesinjsko polje (Nevesinje polje)) through Cerničko (Cernica polje), Fatničko (Fatnica polje), Dabarsko (Dabar polje), Lju- bijsko (Ljubinje polje) and Ljubomirsko polje (Ljubomir polje) to Popovo polje and finally to the spring Ombla at Adriatic coast and springs along the river Neretva (Milanović 2006). 
28 
Besides Ljubljanica springs (Qmin= 4.3 m3/s, Qavg= 39 m3/s, Qmax= 132 m3/s; Gospodarič & Habič 1976), the most efficacious springs in Dinaric karst are located in this area (Fig. 16 on page 24: Buna spring (Qmin= 3.0 m3/s, Qavg= 23.7 m3/s, Qmax= 123 m3/s; Fig. 20), Bu- nica spring (Qmin= 0.7 m3/s, Qavg= 20.3 m3/s, Qmax= 207 m3/s) and Trebišnjica spring (Qmin= 2 m3/s, Qavg= 80 m3/s, Qmax> 800 m3/s; Milanović 2006; Ford & Williams 2007 after Milanović 2000). Similar topography and hy- drological systems have developed in west Bosnia and Herzegovina. Underground water flow between karst poljes can be directed ei- ther perpendicular to the main ridge of Dinar- sko gorovje (this means also perpendicular to the smaller ridges and karst poljes –e.g., west- ern and eastern Herzegovina, the higher part of Slovene Dolenjska) or parallel to it (part of Ljubljanica basin, NE of Velebit). Some tec- tonic windows of older (Paleozoic) impervious, or less permeable, rocks enhance superficial runoff that drains into ponors (e.g., NE of Vele- bit, central Bosnia), but in very rare cases riv- ers can flow across Dinarsko gorovje (Neretva, 
Kupa/Kolpa, Morača). The continental moun- tainous Dinaric karst was for many hydro- logical phenomena (polje flooding, complex underground water flow between poljes, big ponors, springs and estavellas, hydro technical works) the first area to be studied or extensive- ly used. In recent years, big karst springs are recognized also due to their surprisingly deep sumps (Fig. 17 on page 25) of Una (-205 m), Di- vje jezero (-160 m), Sinac (-155 m), Kupa/Kol- pa (-154 m; Knab, 2008). Nowadays, at least 14 sumps are deeper than -100 m. An even more exceptional case is Crve- no jezero (Red lake; Fig. 21) with depth -281 m (Knab 2008) and without clear genesis. 
The low northeastern and high southeastern inland karst lies northeast of continental mountainous karst. The north- eastern part is characterized by low elevation hills and plains, where both surface and sub- surface drainage occur. A great portion of the relief is occu- pied by a karst-leveled surface (e.g., Bela Krajina, the leveled surface between the rivers Kupa/Kolpa and Una), in which canyons are deepened (Slo- vene Krka, Kupa/Kolpa, Dobra, Mrežnica, Una). The elevation of the rivers is similar and the elevation of subsurface water between them is slightly high- er; this prevents from under- ground circulation between rivers. Regarding these charac- teristics, the low northeastern inland karst is similar to Sjever- nodalmatinska zaravan and Ravni kotari along the Adriatic coast. In the northeastern di- rection, the elevation of inland karst decreases until it sinks beneath young sediments of 
the Panonian basin. Toward the southeast, the southeastern inland karst becomes more and more hilly and karst valleys become deeper due to a higher portion of Triassic dolomite and higher elevation. Rivers (e.g., the Tara and Pliva) flow in canyons over 1,000 m deep be- tween dissected karst plateaus with combined surface and underground drainage flow. Big karst springs are absent, but several of them can initiate larger rivers (e.g., the Neretva, Vr- bas, Miljacka, Željeznica, Usora; Papeš & Srdić 1969). 
Fig. 21: Crveno jezero (Red lake; photo: A. Mihevc). 
29 
Andrej Mihevc 
30 
In folk language, “karst” meant “barren stony land.” This term often occurred in local toponyms and could denote an entire land- scape. Today, the word “karst” means a land- scape with specific relief, water, and under- ground features that formed in long geological periods on water-soluble rock, mostly lime- stone and dolomite (Gams 1973; Kranjc 1998). Relief on impermeable non-karst rock is primarily sculpted by water that runs on the surface in river networks. Rivers sculpt fluvial valleys that dissect the surface into valleys, slopes, and ridges. The valleys are deepened by the mechanical erosion of rivers, which is greater where the inclination is steeper and there is more water. The slopes above valleys are shaped by sheet erosion or denudation. As a rule, closed depressions do not form in this relief, but if they do, they are immediately filled by water or sediment. 
On karst, however, relief is formed by wa- ter that chemically dissolves the limestone and carries the solution away. Gravel therefore does not form on the surface and very little insoluble debris remains on the limestone. Gravel and insoluble debris could fill nascent depressions in the relief, cover the bedrock, and be the basis for the formation of soil. Since this is not the case, the karst surface is rocky and hollowed. 
Pure water can dissolve only a little lime- stone or its main component, the mineral cal- cite. Solubility air or soil is increases when dissolved in the water CO2 from the resulting in weak carbonic acid. Dissolving or corrosion is further accelerated by acids produced by plants or the decomposition of organic matter in the soil. 
Geomorphology 
The dissolution of karst rock is strongest on the surface or a few meters below the surface, but water remains aggressive for a long time and can form caves underground. Sheet ero- sion and the lowering of the surface results in karst denudation. Various methods have de- termined that denudation has amounted to between twenty and fifty meters in a million years in Slovenia’s karst regions (Gams 1974). This also means that surface denudation has already reached individual caves and removed their ceilings to create roofless caves (Mihevc 2007)Rivers flow onto karst areas and form un- derground streams. Because they carry large amounts of water and sediment from imper- meable neighbouring areas, they are capable of dissolving a considerable amount of lime- stone, but their effect is limited only to the vi- cinity of the watercourse (Gams 1962; Mihevc 2001). 
Karst rock features Some dolomites and most of the lime- stone are mechanically very resistant types of rock, but they are all subjected to dissolution. Precipitations start to dissolve them as soon as they get into contact with the karst rocks. Intensity of the corrosion depends on proper- ties of the rock, aggressively of the water and the way in which water flows on the surface of the rock. Small corrosion features that form on the rock make its surface uneven and rough or form different shapes. 
Karen is common term used for dissolu- tion features on exposed soluble rock surfac- es. (Gines 2009). Two basic processes control their formation, the dissolution by thin water 
films flowing down inclined surfaces and the dissolution kinetics of the CO2-containing rain- water (Dreybrodt & Kaufmann 2007). Some of these features and widely spread so they got special names. 
According to Ford and Williams (2007) the main groups are circular plane forms like mi- cropits, pits, pans, heelprints. Linear forms that are fracture-controlled are microfisures, splitkarren and grikes. Linear forms that are hydrodynamically controlled are microrills, so- lution chanels or rillenkarren, solution runnels, decantation runnels and flutings. 
Polygenetic formsare mixtures of solution channels or assamblages of karren: karen- feld, limestone pavement (clints and grikes), stepped pavements, pinnacle karst, corridor karst, costal karren. 
Common features on the bare horizon- tal rock surfaces exposed to rain are solution 
Fig. 22: Kamenitza on Velebit mountain (photo: N. Zupan Hajna). 
pans. This is circular or irregular depression in the surface of the rock with flat bottom and often undercut edges. They are from few cm to 1 m large. Corrosion in them is encouraged by biologic processes like decay of organic matter where organic acids form. Water from them evaporates; crystals of calcite are blown by wind or washed out by rain. Shepards often used for watering the animals (Perica 2009). 
Characteristic form of corrosion is rillen- karren. They are formed by channelled flow of the rain water on steep slopes on the tops of limestone blocks. They are few cm wide and deep, semi-circulars in cross section and have sharp edges of crests between them. On the lower side they often transform into plat, non dissected surface. 
Down the slope of the exposed rock larger channels, runnels form. They are few tens of centimeters wide and can be several meters 31 
kamenitzas long. They are smoother especially if they 
are frequent. In higher karst ar- were formed below the soil. 
eas, where is more precipitations, long lasting Corrosion dissects karst rocks into clints by 
snow cover and higher air humidity, rocks are creating grikes along joints or bedding planes. 
more rounded. Mosses which grow on rocks in The size of clints depends on the thickness of 
forests also make smooth rounded surface of the limestone layers. Clints are larger on lime- 
the rock. stone with thicker layers and less joints. 
Corrosion sculptures the surface of the 
Leveled Corrosion Plains rock also under cover o soil. Soil or even moss 
Leveled surfaces are one of the very dis- that grows on limestone blocks is soaked with 
tinct relief features of the Dinaric karst. They water and this water slowly and more evenly 
can be found at different elevations. They are corrodes the rock. Surfaces of such rocks are 
common in all the karst regions on the inner smoother and more rounded and there is no 
side of the Dinarsko gorovje (Dinaric moun- forms indicating the vertical flow of water. 
tains), and especially on the seaward side. Where soils were eroded the sculpture of the 
They are absent only in the central highest rock shows the height to where soil was cover- 
part of the karst (Roglič 1957). ing the clints. 
These corrosion plains have been pro- Small corrosion forms on the rock depend 
duced over a long period of denudation by cor- on the properties of the rock but also on the 
rosion planation in the level of the karst water. climatic conditions. In the lower positions es- 
Later uplift connected with regional tecton- pecially in Mediterranean climate with dry 
ics caused entrenchment of major allogenic summers sharper forms like rillenkarren and 
through-rivers. Canyons were formed and the 
32 
Fig. 23: Kras plateau - view toward south (photo: A. Mihevc). 
water table dropped beneath the level of the uplifted corrosion plain. Percolating rainwa- ter could escape vertically and form solution dolines. 
An example of such an uplifted and slightly tilted leveled surface is Kras, a plateau on the NW part of the Dinaric karst (Fig. 23). Before uplift there were two rivers crossing its sur- face. Two dry valleys remain there. Only later did dolines and collapse dolines dissect the surface. 
Elongated remnants of former leveled cor- rosion plains developed in higher relief are named “podolje” or “ravnik” (Gams 1973). They are smaller features, a couple of kilo- meters wide and several tens of kilometers in length. In some of them, deeper poljes like Planinsko polje and Fatničko Polje have devel- oped. 
Fig. 24: Sjevernodalmafinska zaravan (North Dalmafian plan) with canyons of Krka, Cefinja and Čikola (DEM source: ASTER GDEM 1”; figure made by: A. Mihevc). 
Larger leveled surfaces are often called “zaravan”. A leveled surface forms the main part of Istria. It is slightly tilted and dissected by large dry valleys, some canyons and numer- ous dolines. The largest is 40-km long Sever- nodalmatinska zaravan between Velebit and Dinara mountains and the sea (Fig. 24). On this surface, the 150-m deep canyons of the Zr- manja, Krka and Čikola rivers are entrenched. Large leveled surfaces are also cut by the Neretva and Cetina rivers. In the high leveled surface at Durmitor Mountain, the River Tara cut a 1,000-m deep canyon. 
On the inner side, toward the Panonian Basin, Kordunska zaravan is developed around Kolpa, Una and Sana rivers (Roglič, 1952). It is large - approximately 100 km long and up to 30 km wide. This leveled surface is cut by the canyons of several rivers in which travertine 
33 
is now depositing. Best known are the trav- ertines at Plitvička Jezera, in the Korana River, which form numerous lakes behind travertine dams. 
In some cases rivers could not follow the uplift, so canyons became dry and are pre- served in such surfaces. The largest dry val- leys of the Dinaric karst is the 20-km long and 300-m deep dry Čepovanska dolina, cut into Trnovski gozd plateau. A dry valley in Istria is 40 km long and 150 m deep. The dry valley of Bregava is 10 km long and up to 700 m deep. The dry valley Zavala, a former outlet of Popo- vo polje, is 10 km long and 500 m deep. 
Closed depressions The water that shapes the karst comes mainly from precipitation. Water dissolves the rock and carries it through the underground in solution. Dissolution occurs on the surface on 
34 
Fig. 25: Digital elevafion model (DEM) and spafial distribufion of Dinaric karst poljes (DEM source: ASTER GDEM 1”, poljes after Gams, 1974). 
bare rock or under the layer of soil and sedi- ment. This direct corrosion sculpts tiny rock relief forms. 
Precipitation is dispersed evenly on the sur- face and percolates into the karst via fissures in the limestone widened by corrosion. The varying solubility of the rock and other factors foster the formation of an irregular and rough surface dotted with depressions of all sizes. Depression features can form and preserve their shape because the water percolates into the ground carrying the dissolved rock with it or because there is no surface drainage and insoluble debris is not transported across the surface to fill them. 
Closed depressions are a characteristic fea- ture of the Dinaric karst. In some places they occur only as topologically lowered surface, while elsewhere depressions with distinct shapes form. The most numerous are corro- 
sion dolines that form due to locally stronger corrosion. Suffusion dolines form primarily at the edges of karst poljes due to the washing of sediments. Some dolines are collapse dolines. Larger features of the Dinaric karst include uv- alas and karst poljes. 
Poljes Karst poljes are the largest flat-floored en- closed depressions in karst (Fig. 26). They differ from other closed depressions in size and their large flat bottoms which formed as baselevel corrosion plains. Typical forms have a sinking river, steep slopes and a sharp transition be- tween the polje floors and slopes. The bottom of the polje may be covered by sediments. 
Fig. 26: Fatničko polje (Fatnica polje) in the eastern Herzegovina (DEM source: ASTER GDEM 1”; figure made by: A. Mihevc). 
There are about 130 poljes in the Dinaric karst (Gams 1978); about 44 of them are recognized as outstanding (Fig. 25). 
Gams (1978) defined some criteria that must be met for a depression to be classified as a polje. These include a flat floor in the rock or in unconsolidated sediments such as alluvi- um, a closed basin with steeply rising marginal slope on at least one side, and karstic drainage. Three basic types of poljes have been de- fined: border poljes, structural poljes and baselevel poljes (Ford & Williams 2007). 
Border poljes develop where water table fluctuations in karst control allogenic fluvial activity at the surface, so lateral planation dominates valley incision. 
35 
highest is Trebistovo polje, (1,278 m a.s.l.) and the lowest are Bokanjačko polje and Vrgoračko jezero (Vrgorac lake; only 20–25 m a.s.l.). 
The largest poljes are Liško polje (460 km2) and Livanjsko Polje (65 km long and 6 km, 402 km2), but the majority of poljes are small- er, covering only few 10 km2. 
In natural conditions floods are normal phenomena for many poljes. In some poljes like Cerkniško polje and Buško blato they last- ed about half a year. The flooding of 60 km long Popovo polje under natural conditions reached a height of 40 m in the lowest section of the polje, and the average yearly flood dura- tion was 253 days. 
Poljes are very important for human settle- ment. In them the best, and often only, arable land in the Dinaric karst is available. There is always some water available and floods are regular and limited to lower parts of poljes, so all of the largest settlements are located there. 
36 
Structural poljes are dominated by bedrock geological controls. This type of poljes prevails on the Dinaric karst. They are connected with graben or overthrust structures, or as inliers of less karstified rocks like dolomite, marl or even flysch. 
Baselevel poljes occur where dissolution has lowered the karst surface to the regional epiphreatic zone. Typically these poljes de- velop in lower parts of the karst, but they also occur in higher parts of the Dinaric mountains where impermeable formations may act as hy- drological barriers. 
Dinaric poljes are polygenetic features. They are generally elongated along the strike of the Dinarsko gorovje (i.e. in a northwest— southeast direction). Poljes are developed at all elevations, between 1,200 and 20 m above sea level. A complex suite of processes gov- erns their genesis. They develop along regional faults, graben structures and overthrust. The 
Fig. 27: Klekovača and Materniča uvala are two large closed depressions northern of Livanjsko polje in Bosnia. Note that the bottom of large uvala is dotted with dolines (DEM source: ASTER GDEM 1”, figure made by: A. Mihevc). 
Uvalas Uvalas are large, km-scale closed karst de- pressions of elongated or irregular plan form. Their bottoms are undulating or pitted with dolines, seldom flattened by colluvial sedi- ments. Uvalas are always situated above the karst water table. They are polygenetic features and are strongly guided by geological structure and tectonics (Čalić 2009). The word “uvala” is common toponym in the Dinaric karst, always denoting a large depression. In folk language it has a morphological meaning only. 
The term was introduced into literature by Jovan Cvijić (1893) for dolines with huge di- ameters, but unfortunately with an erroneous explanation of their genesis – that the uvalas are transitional evolutional elements between dolines and poljes, formed by the coales- cence of several dolines which have enlarged and merged towards each other (Cvijić 1901, 1960). Because of this erroneous explanation, the term “uvala” is mostly abandoned in pro- fessional literature outside the Dinaric karst. 
There is considerable variety among the dimensions, and also the shapes, of the uva- las, but there are also some common general characteristics (Čalić 2009). In most cases the uvalas are developed along tectonically bro- ken zones of regional extension. Their perim- eters are of irregular shape, the plan dimen- sions vary from approximately 1 km up to several kilometers along the longer axis, while the depths below the highest closed contours are at least 40-50 m, and sometimes exceed 200 m. Uvalas are not present on karst lev- eled surfaces, but only in areas with more or less dissected relief, so the bottoms are always above the karst water table. 
Uvalas have internal karstic drainage; oc- currences of small seasonal surface flows are an exception. Sediments in the bottoms are scarce; their origin is from denudation from the slopes. Infill is not threatening to fill up a depression. The inclinations of the slopes are generally smaller than those of dolines. Uvalas are formed because of differences in solubil- 
ity of the karstified rock, structural elements and recent tectonics. Formation of such topo- logically closed areas within larger karst areas needs only sufficient time and favorable cli- matic conditions. 
Uvalas can be found in all of the Dinaric karst except in low positions and on leveled surfaces. In many uvalas, because of some col- luvium, small settlements developed. Some uvalas were affected by glaciation; in some, glacial tongues ended and fluvioglacial till was deposited. In them, the lowest temperatures in the area were observed because of temper- ature inversions. 
Dolines Dolines are the most frequent karst de- pressions. They are centric and mostly round relief forms. Dolines commonly have circular to sub circular plan geometry, and a bowl- or funnel-shaped concave profile. Their depths range from a few decameters to a few hundred meters, and their inner slopes vary from sub horizontal to nearly vertical. Dolines up to ten meters deep and 100 meters wide dominate. 
Their genetic definition is difficult because although they formed in very diverse condi- tions, all the processes led to the same funnel or bowl shape. Morphologically, the same or similar dolines can therefore have different origins. In order to understand how dolines and other, closed karst depressions develop, it is necessary to examine their morphology and size, their relationships with the topographic and geomorphologic settings, their structures, their hydrological behaviour and related solu- tion processes, examples of evolution, and pe- culiar morphologies that occur under specific environmental conditions (Sauro 2005). 
Corrosion dolines occurred where verti- cal percolation into the karst was possible and dissolution of rock was stronger than in the surrounding area. The round shape with one lowest point indicates a spatially limited and active process of rock mass removal. In most cases, the soil plays a major role due to the 37 
selected production fies the corrosion of biological of the limestone. CO2 that locally Dolines ampli- 
are 
dolines and cattle were driven across the clay to compact it and make the bottoms found everywhere in Dinaric karst, but most 
impermeable enough to hold water well into are located on karst plains where, if small their 
a dry summer. number can exceed one hundred per square 
More than any other karst form, dolines kilometer. The number of dolines is much 
reflect man’s changed relationship to the envi- smaller on slopes and there are none at all on 
ronment, as the fact that villagers have trans- steep slopes. Larger dolines are found on high- 
formed numerous cow ponds and dolines into er karst plateaus, some of them up to a hun- 
dump sites demonstrates. dred meters wide (Gams 2000; Faivre 2002). 
A special type of doline is formed by the Dolines are a very important relief form 
washing, subsiding, and settling of sediments of the Dinaric karst. Because soil is only found 
on karst. In the past they formed only where at their bottoms, they are used for fields or 
layers of sediment piled up, for example, on gardens. In the past, rocks were carefully re- 
karst poljes, but in current conditions the sedi- moved from the slopes and the bottoms were 
ment is washed as particles into the karst un- levelled. Some of the rocks were buried under 
derground. the soil at the bottom while the rest of were used to build dry stone walls (Gams 1991, Mi- 
Collapse dolines hevc 2005). 
In the Dinaric karst, collapse dolines are The bottoms of dolines were often used 
quite common relief features. The term “col- as water reservoirs. Soil was removed from 
lapse doline” presumes the formation of a 
38 
Fig. 28: Typical dolines of Dinaric karst, Smoljana near Bosanski Petrovac (photo: A. Mihevc). 
doline by collapse into a karst cave situated beneath. Expert literature understands col- lapse dolines as dolines with exceptional di- mensions and steep or vertical walls (Gams 2004). Smaller collapse forms are frequently left aside because of lack of signs of collapse processes. In practice, it is often difficult to dis- tinguish a real collapse doline from other types of depression. It is even more difficult to do so in the case of the older features, which have been modified by corrosion and other surface processes, and where the primary origin is no longer clear (Šušteršič 1974; Stepišnik 2006). 
The cave roof collapse is a slow process that proceeds by the breaking of the walls and ceiling until equilibrium is established on the slopes of the doline. The volume of the new- ly formed feature (i.e., the collapse doline) should be smaller, since the collapsed rock oc- cupies a larger volume than the solid rock. 
With respect to genesis and dimensions, there are two distinctive types of collapse 
dolines on the Dinaric karst. One of these types is dolines formed by the collapse of relict caves, usually when denudation thins the ceil- ing above the underground chamber. As most of the known cave chambers within the area have dimensions of up to some 10,000 m3, we should expect the dimensions of collapses to be smaller than that. These collapse dolines differ from other dolines because they have vertical walls or slopes’. 
The second type of dolines of collapse origin is often several hundreds of m in diam- eter, with steep or vertical walls and volumes of to several million m3. The formation of large chambers by collapsing, and of collapse dolines, is a result of a combination of several factors and not just simple collapse because of rock failure in the cave ceiling (Habič 1982). It cannot be treated as the decay of caves, but as a distinct speleologenetic and geomorphic process (Mihevc 2009). Their immense dimen- sions are mainly the result of the removal of 
Fig. 29: Divača karst is the best Dinaric example of the interrelafion between contact karst features - ponor caves, collapse dolines and unroofed caves (DEM source: ASTER GDEM 1”; figure made by: A. Mihevc). 
Legend: 1. hydrologicaly acfive 
caves; 2. dry caves; 3. unroofed caves; 4. terrain elevafion; 5. water level; 6. surface water flow. 
39 
material the disintegrated collapsed rock at depth by 
into the undamaged and karstified solution of the underground flow. Therefore, 
dolomite. the volumes of these collapse dolines are 
The sediment on the surface and the small- much larger than the volumes of the pre-ex- 
er permeability of the dolomite can slow down isting cavities. 
the infiltration, therefore after rains waters Usually these dolines are connected with 
often flow across the surface. Because of lim- main underground watercourses, and are 
ited permeability a mixture of fluvial and karst more abundant in levelled surfaces near sinks 
features can develop on dolomite. This type or springs of the rivers. In Slovenia, there is a 
of karst was named fluviokarst (Gams 2004). concentration of dolines on the Kras plateau 
On the dolomites there are less caves, they are above the underground course of the Reka 
usually shorter and smaller. river. More than 16 large dolines are situated 
Characteristic features of dolomite areas here. The largest has a volume of 9 m3 (Mi- 
are dells, dolines and large surfaces with un- hevc 2001). There are numerous dolines in the 
derground drainage but no distinct karst or Ljubljanica river basin above cave Postojnska 
fluvial relief features. Where rock is more re- jama, between Cerkniško and Planinsko poljes. 
sistant to weathering tors develop. In steeper On the edge of Imotsko polje, there are several 
relief or in high mountains fluvial features like large collapse dolines. One of them is Crveno 
gullies and erosion valleys divided with ridges jezero, which is the deepest collapse doline of 
and develop. On smaller slopes most common the Dinaric karst. Its maximum depth is 528 m, 
feature is dells and on smaller even doline and it is filled with water 287 m deep. Recent 
(Komac 2004). diving explorations have found large openings 
Dell is a shallow valley with steep slopes in the submerged walls of the doline and cave 
and lesser gradient of the bottom. There are entrances at its floor (Garašić 2000). 
no traces of erosion and the bottoms and There are groups of large colapse dolines 
slopes are covered with soil. Sometimes they around Liško polje, Lušci polje, above springs 
open out on a plain on lover end; sometimes of Pliva, springs of Zeta, between Duvanjsko 
they end blindly in a doline. polje and Buško bato, and on Nevesinjsko 
Typical for the dolomite areas is soft land- polje. Many others scattered on the karst sur- 
scape with no rocks exposed. In past these ar- faces. eas were used for agriculture, pastures, mead- ows and even field are located on dolomite. Karst on dolomite 
Also they are favourable for settlements. They Dolomite is a type of rock that dissolves and 
are widely used in quarries for sand for build- is karstified similarly as limestone. Dolomites 
ing and road constructing. are rarely pure; they are formed of different 
Dolomites are more common on inner side mixture of mineral dolomite and calcium 
of Dinaric karst. There are large areas of dolo- carbonate. There are important differences 
mite karst or fluviokarst in eastern side of Di- between karst landscape on dolomite and 
naric karst in Slovenia, around Plitvička jezera those on limestone. Jurassic or cretaceous 
and Lika in Croatia, around Una river, upper dolomites are resistant, but they disintegrate 
valley of Neretva river in Bosnia and north of on the surface into fine sand. Triassic dolomites 
Orjen in Montenegro. which prevail are less resistant against frost shattering and they easily disintegrate into 
Contact karst gravel and sand. This is sometimes so intensive, 
One of the possible classifications of the that whole surface is covered with dolomite 
karst is by the dominant morphological pro- gravel. Precipitations infiltrates trough this 
cess. Karst formed by the influence surface 
40 
river flow could be designated by the term of contact karst. The term grows familiar in Slove- nia and Croatia where the karst contacts non carbonate rocks and specific relief forms and phenomena developed (Roglič 1957, Gams 1973). The term is reasonable, because such karst essentially differs from the karst which surface and underground was formed by pre- cipitation water only. In the international kar- stological literature these forms and phenom- ena are usually named as karst influenced by allogenic inputs (Ford &Williams 2007). 
Contact karst develops where water flows from fluvial relief onto karst. The distribution of contact karst is preconditioned to spatial distribution of karstic and non-karstic rock or less karstified rocks like some dolomites. Be- cause here is more water available dissolution of limestone is faster than on other karst sur- face where only precipitations shape the relief. Surface waters also transport and deposit sed- iments before they sink into sinks or ponors and caves (Gams 1962). That is because the underground channels are shaped by low or average water and can not transfer the high waters, which causes short but regular flood- ing and precipitation of sediments in front of ponors. Corrosion is faster also because of the sediments are accelerating the corrosion be- neath them because of organic CO2 produced in sediment or soil. The results of these are often widened bottoms of blind valleys before sinks.Contact karst features are limited only to the area influenced by sinking rivers. They are mostly depressions, most common are blind valleys. These are valleys, which from non karst fluvial valley protrude some distance to karst and end above the sinks. His relief has some characteristics of fluvial relief, but the features are karstic. The sinking into the karst is controlled by the gradient and the morphol- ogy in the whole karst area between sink and a spring. If this is changing due to tectonic movements, evolution of the caves also the contact karst forms change. So we have often a 
set of evolutionary stages in the contact zone, reflecting the changes trough whole evolution of karst (Mihevc 2007). 
We must differentiate between sinking riv- ers on poljes and allogenic sinking rivers. Dif- ference is that the flooding in contact karst is because of surface inflow, while in the karst poljes because of oscillation or rise of the level of karst water. 
Areas of contact karst with developed re- lief of blind valleys and similar border depres- sions in Dinaric karst are in the inner side of the mountains where older noncarbonate rocks and Triassic dolomite are in contact with limestone. On the Mediterranean side of the karst main supply for allogenic sinking rivers are Eocene flysch rocks. Best examples are blind valleys in Matarsko podolje (Mihevc 1993) and blind valleys in Istra peninsula. 
Largest sinking rivers are Reka with mean discharge 8 m3/s (max over 200 m3/s) that sinks on the edge of Kras in Škocjanske jame caves (Fig. 29). Large sinking rivers of contact karst are also Pivka river (4 m3/s), Pazinska reka in Istra sinking in Foiba cave, Dobra which sinks near Ogulin. Large sinking river is Zalomska reka that sinks in Biogradski ponor on Nevesin- jsko polje with capacity over 110 m3/s. 
Caves Caves are one ob the most remarkable karst features. We can find them from the high- est karst mountain to the lowest parts along the sea, and some of them are submerged be- low the recent sea level. Caves are active or relict parts of the karst drainage system. Most accessible or known caves however are just small fractions of old relict cave systems. Ac- tive caves are often flooded or obstructed with sediments. The cave distribution, morphology and sediments give us information about evo- lution of the whole karst. 
On the high karst mountains vertical shafts and deep caves without horizontal passages prevail. They were formed by vertical percola- tion of precipitations. The deepest caves are 41 
Today on Northern Velebit, where three caves are 
Postojnska jama, Škocjanske jame, deeper than 1,000 m (Fig. 30). The deepest 
Cerovačke pečine, Vjetrenica, and many small- Lukina jama 1,355 m ends only 83 m above 
er caves are managed. They are important the sea level which is only 10 km away (Bakšič 
tourist attraction and are visited by nearly one 2000). 
million visitors per a year. Horizontal caves are common on the lev- elled surfaces and lower karst plateaus. They 
The age of the Dinaric karst are formed by more horizontal flow of water 
The age of the karst can be defined as the towards the springs. The longest like Postojn- 
time when the karst rocks were uplifted out of ska jama (20.5 km), Đulin ponor - Medvedica 
the sea. For the most of central part of Dinaric (16,396 m), and many others were formed by 
karst this occurred after the Eocene, because sinking rivers. These caves have also large pas- 
there is no evidence of younger marine sedi- sages. One profile in Škocjanske jame the pas- 
ments, on the inner part however marine sedi- sage is in general 20 m wide and about 80 m 
mentation lasted till Neogene. As soon as the high. The sinking rivers like Reka in Škocjanske 
carbonate rocks were exposed, we can expect jame can take more than 270 m3 at flood. 
that the karst start to form, but there are no Biogradski ponori of river Zalomska rijeka dis- 
remnants of karst features from that time. De- charge is 110 m3 (Milanović 2000). 
nudation has already destroyed them. In Slovenia only on 7,000 km2 10,000 caves 
The other view on the age of karst is to de- is known, but that number shows only actual 
fine the age of karst features that are present knowledge. These caves together are longer 
on the surface and underground. We know the than 700 km. 
conditions in which features form. If these con- Caves are important archaeological histori- 
ditions changed in past, features may still be cal religious and cultural sites. They are impor- 
unchanged or only slightly changed by general tant scientific localities and also great subject 
karst denudation. Such features are levelled to be explored or visit by cavers. 
now dissected surfaces high above the ground 
Fig. 30: Cross-secfion through Velebit mountain with outstanding caves (published with permision of the author-D. Bakšić). 
42 
water level, dry and blind valleys and caves that are now exposed to the surface due to karst denudation. This tells us about the gen- esis of the landscape trough different phases but not the age of a karst features itself. 
Measurements show, that denudation is lowering surface of karst with rate between 30-50 m/Ma (Gams 1963; Gabrovšek 2009). If we consider, that the then we understand that most of the surface karst features can not be 
older than maybe 3-6 Ma. The oldest elements in karst are probably the caves that formed deep below the sur- face and are now exposed as unroofed caves (Mihevc 1996, 1998, 2001; Fig. 31). 
Real datation of karst is possible only from the sedi- ments that were deposited in karst features, caves or karst depressions. Different methods are used and they can date only the time of the sedimentation. 
Datation of flowstone using different U/Th meth- ods we can date only about 500,000 years old sedi- ments, that is the limit of the method. Paleomagnetic analyses can give us paleo- magnetic record in sedi- ments, but method is rela- tive, so the data has to be calibrated by some other method, like palaeontology (Zupan et. al. 2008). This method is basing on com- 
Fig. 31: The oldest caves are found on the surface where they are incorporated into the karst surface. Example of unroofed cave by Povir at Kras plateu, Slovenia (photo: J. Hajna). 
parison of animals remains that preserve in caves. 
The oldest cave profiles are in Račiška pečina, where with combination of paleo- magnetic method and palaeontology method a sedimentary profile was dated to 3.2 Ma. In unroofed cave cut in Črnotiče quarry sedi- ments with same methods were about 4 Ma old. They were covering remains of cave ani- mal Marifugia cavafica, which was living in that at the time water cave. This is also the oldest known remnant of the cave animal and with it we can also reconstruct the paleoenvi- ronment of that time (Mihevc 2001). 
43 
44 
Nadja Zupan Hajna, Andrej Mihevc, Mitja Prelovšek 
The lack of soil cover on the stones and the disappearance of water under the surface are the main characteristics of the Dinaric karst. In the past, when most of the people made a living from farming, these characteristics were the main limiting factors for populating and developing settlements in the area. Many studies (Gams 1974, 1991, 2003; Gams et al. 1993; Gams & Gabrovec 1999) show that the management phases have been in relation with the historical conditions and changes. 
The largest problem was the soil. The in- habitants cleaned the surface of the stones and piled them into walls and heaps which also protected the arable land against strong bora wind. In this way, they created thin patches of 
soil that were connected and thus made some farming possible. Thicker layers of soil emerged at the bottom of dolines (Fig. 32, Fig. 34). Small fields were created there, where the drought was not so devastating. Other more stony sur- faces of the plateau were used for pastures, which replaced the natural forests. 
To illustrate the amount of the work in- volved, and also man’s impact, three villages were studied by Mihevc (2005). Village Divača has 7.9 km2 of land in its cadastral unit. The karst surface was cleaned of rock that was piled to dry walls. There are 69.5 km of dry walls, which gives 11.3 km, or 2,825 m3, of stones removed from one square kilometer. In this way they gained 99 hectares of field sur- 
Fig. 32: Thicker soil in dolines was often used for fields and later replaced by grassland. Example from Lovčen, mountainous part of Dinaric karst (photo: A. Mihevc). 
Land Use 
faces. Out of that, 24.6 ha are fields in the bot- toms of 261 dolines. The rest of the surfaces were used as pastures. 
At Račice village, 11.9 km2 of the land is mostly covered by forest. There are 1,395 dolines. While cleaning the land, the stones were piled into 23.2 km of dry walls. The volume of the removed stones is about 5,815 m3, or 488 m3 per km2. On some Adriatic islands, quantity of removed stones is similar; at Krk island, more than 1,000 kg of stones were removed from one m2 of the surface (Gams 1987). During long history of cleaning the land, width and length of walls increased together with fragmentation, while the area of arable land decreased. 
Volčji Grad village is in the central part of the Kras plateau. It has 4.8 km2 of land. Clean- ing started in Bronze Age and by this means they gained 38.6 ha of fields. All of the dolines were cultivated too, and there are 20 ha of cul- tivated land in the 162 dolines. 
Fig. 33: Island Kornat. Especially along the Adriafic coast, deforestafion led to bare rocky country (photo: A. Mihevc). 
Even with such long and intensive land use, there was no more than about 10 cm of soil erosion on the slopes of dolines. 
One of the main parts of the Dinaric karst - the Kras, the islands and low plateaus of the Dalmatian coast - present the types of land use typical of Mediterranean countries. These land use activities produce changes in the surface (Nicod 2003) like stone clearing, the building of dry walls and hill slope terraces and man- agement in the dolines, uvalas and poljes. 
From historical data, it is known (Kranjc 2008) that a great part of the Dinaric karst was deforested and that the landscape trans- formed into a bare rocky country, a real stone desert. Human deforestation began during the Neolithic period (6,500-6,000 BC). There were several reasons for deforestation, mostly re- quirements of new land for pasture and tim- ber use. 
The Dinaric karst became more and more barren and a great part of it became synonym 
45 
for ‘bare limestone desert’ – the karst (Fig. 33). Reforesta- tion is mentioned earlier in some of the areas, but suc- cessful reforestation did not begin until the 1850s. Sub- sequently, large parts of the Dinaric karst were artificially reforested, and eventually the process continued by it- self as the trees propagated naturally. However, instead of ‘natural’ forest with an optimal tree association, monoculture forests, domi- nated mainly by black pine, have resulted (Gams & Ga- brovec 1999). Nowadays, the great part of arable land between dry walls is no longer cultivated due to fragmentation and social changes (depopu- lation and deagrarization); box-like countryside slowly vanishes in dense bushes and degraded forests. Nowadays dense natural forests, ex- 
46 
Fig. 35: Water reservoir built in the bottom of small doline in Boljuni, near Stolac in Herzegovina. This water was used for animals only (photo: A. Mihevc).Fig. 34: Dry wals and small field above uvala Kruščica on the southern side of Orjen 
(photo: A. Mihevc). 
tensive forest plantations, dry karst shrublands and also completely barren karst areas can all be found on the Dinaric karst (Kranjc 2008). Inland, because of a more humid climate and different land use, the forests remained. 
Fig. 36: During Austro-Hungarian Empire and Yugoslavia kingdom surface streams were regulated, ponors were wid- ened and screens were installed in front of them to hold back deposits, all in order to shorten the flood fime in karst poljes. Example from Šica ponor at Radensko polje (Račna polje; Slovenia; photo: M. Prelovšek). 
Fig. 37: Hutovo accumulafion lake at the downstream end of Popovo polje (on the right), Herzegovina (photo: M. Prelovšek). 
The other problem of karst is water, es- pecially along Adriatic coast where the high- est lack of water occurs during summer. This is a result of low amount or precipitation and high evapotranspiration. For the water supply, some aqueducts were made in antiquity (Bo- nacci 1987). More common are wells, which were often built in closed depresions (Fig. 35). 
A greater impact was made by the irriga- tion of some poljes to avoid long lasting floods. They enlarged ponors on poljes and even dug some tunnels for the floodwaters. None the less, enlargement of ponors successfully re- duced the length of floods only at places, where a restristions were close to the ponors. At places with regional rise of water level, en- largement of ponors brought only minor suc- cess.However, the main impact on the karst was made by the use of waters in power stations. Especially high mountainous karst has been very interesting from the hydroenergetics aspect due to a high amount of precipitation, high runoff coefficient (about 0.7), high relief amplitude and relief suitability. Especially during the 1950s and 1960s, big hydroenergetic projects were initiated on Dinaric karst poljes in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Large works were done in the Trebišnjica river karst by flooding part of the karst (Fig. 37 and 38), by diverting water to other catchment areas (Fig. 39) and stopping regular flooding of the Popovo polje (Milanovič 2006). Important hydroenergetic objects were placed also in Cetina, Lika-Gacka and Zeta river basins. In the present day situation, hydroelectric power plants in the Dinaric karst have a total install power of over 2,727 MW. Nevertheless, the level of environmental concern about some areas (e.g., Planinsko polje, Cerkniško polje, Pivka basin, Reka valley, and the Kupa/Kolpa River) was so high that these areas remain hydroenergetically untouched. 
47 
48 
Fig. 39: Canalized Trebišnica river on Popovo polje. On the right bank, remnants of one of the 43 flour mills (Lučić 2007) that were built along Trebišnica river are located (photo: A. Mihevc). 
Fig. 38: Grančarevo dam in the upper part of Trebišnjica valley. Behind the dam, Bileća lake with starage capacity of 1,28 billion m3 (Milanović 2004) was formed and flooded spring of Trebišnjica (photo: A. Mihevc). 
Andrej Mihevc, Nadja Zupan Hajna, Mitja Prelovšek 
The Dinaric karst (Dinarski kras) is the major karst area of Slovenia. In past centuries, the Dinarski kras of Slovenia represented one of the world’s prime sites of early scientific exploration of karst phenomena (Kranjc 1997; Shaw 1992) due to the large number of outstanding karst features such as caves, large sinking rivers and flooded poljes. Speleology, karst hydrology and biospeleology were born here. The most prominent phenomena are situated in the north-western part on the plateau named Kras. In Slovene language, kras means a rocky, barren surface. The name is often used as toponym (Kranjc 1994, 1997). Kras plateau became a textbook example for this kind of landscape because of the extraordinary karst phenomena, and explorations done in the 19th Century. The name Kras in the German form of the word (der Karst) became an international scientific term. The area where these early explorations took place is called the Classical Karst (term introduced by Radinja 1966, also 1972 as Matični Kras; which should not be confused with the misinterpretation by Šušteršič 2000). 
The dominant relief features are rather extensive levelled surfaces at different elevations, large closed depressions (e.g., poljes), and conical hills. Fluviokarst features like dells are common on dolomites. Karst rivers appear only in the bottoms of poljes, where they result from a high level of karst water. Allogenic rivers flowing from non- 
carbonate regions either sink at the karst boundary, forming blind valleys, or cross the karst through deep karst valleys and canyons. There are numerous extensive and complicated cave systems formed by sinking rivers and connected with the surface also by numerous vadose shafts. The surface karst morphology is typified by the abundance of karren, dolines of various diameters and depths, sometimes extensive collapse dolines, cave entrances, unroofed caves, etc. 
For the Dinaric karst of Slovenia, two types of relief are characteristic: High Dinaric karst (high karst plateaus: Javorniki, Hrušica, Nanos, Trnovski gozd, Banjščice and Snežnik) and Low Dinaric karst (karst in the lower parts: Notranjsko podolje, Pivka basin, Kras). There are presented limestones and dolomites of Permian, Triassic, Jurassic, Cretaceous and Paleogene, cut by faults in the dominant Dinaric direction (i.e., NW-SE). The most dominant karst forms in the area are dolines, collapse dolines, karst poljes and high plateaus (Mihevc 1997). The main factor in relief development has been the dissolution process; others (fluvial erosion, slope processes, etc.) have a subordinate role. Along Idrija Fault the main karst poljes in Slovenia are developed: Loško polje (Lož polje), Cerkniško polje (Cerknica polje), Planinsko polje (Planina polje). There are many caves developed, among which is the outstanding Postojna caves system with about 20 km of known passages. 
49 
Case Studies from the Dinaric Karst of Slovenia 
50 
The Kras is a distinct plateau, especially when viewed from the seaward side. The Kras trends NW–SE between Trieste Bay, the north- ernmost part of the Adriatic Sea, Vipava val- ley in north-east, and the Friuli–Venezia Giulia lowlands and river Soča in northwest (Fig. 40). The 45°45 ́ ́N and 14°00 ́ ́E lines of latitude and longitude cross the Kras near Divača vil- lage. There are steep limestone slopes a few hundred meters high rising directly from the sea or from the neighbouring lowlands to the northwest. Higher relief on flysch in the east separates the Kras from the Pivka region. In the southeast, the border of Kras is again well defined by contact with the non-carbonate flysch of the Brkini hills and the valley of the Reka river. Toward the south, the transition to karst ridges and Matarsko podolje karst pla- teau is less obvious. The climate is sub-Med- iterranean with warm dry summers. Cold win- ters, with most of the precipitation, show the strong influence of the continent. 
The Kras belongs to the Adriatic–Dinaric Carbonate Platform of the External Dinarides, composed of shallow marine fossil-bearing Cretaceous and Palaeogene carbonates. Eo- cene flysch rocks encircle the carbonate pla- teau. Kras and Matarsko podolje tectonically belong to Komen thrust sheet (Placer 1999), which is thrust over Eocene flysch and Palaeo- cene/Eocene limestone of the Podgorski kras, a part of Kras imbricated structure (before known as Čičarija imbricated structure; Placer 2007). The whole structure is sub-thrust by the Istria unit. 
The main part of the plateau is essentially levelled, inclined slightly towards the north- west, with numerous dolines, caves and other karst features. There is a belt of slightly higher relief in the central part of the plateau, formed by conical hills-like Grmada (324 m a.s.l.), Volnik 
Kras 
(545 m a.s.l.) and Stari tabor (603 m a.s.l.), and dissected by large depressions. The higher relief divides the Kras into two separated levelled surfaces. The southern one is named Nabrežinsko podolje. In the northwestern part, the plateau descends to below 50 m a.s.l. on the edge of the Friuli Plain; on its south-eastern edge altitudes are about 500 m a.s.l There are about 300 m of accessible vadose zone with caves formed at all altitudes from the surface to the sea level and below it. No superficial streams occur on the Kras surface because all rainwater immediately infiltrates to carbonate rocks. There are two dry valleys crossing the plateau and some NW–SE-trending belts of lower relief which were believed to represent primary river valleys also because they contain remnants of fluvial sediments dated to a pre- karstification phase (Melik 1955; Radinja 1985). 
Geomorphologic and speleogenetic stud- ies and especially new interpretations of fluvial sediments from the Kras surface as the fluvial fill of now unroofed caves have enabled a new explanation of the evolution of the Kras (Mi- hevc 1996, 1998, 1999a-c, 2001b, 2007; Zupan Hajna et al. 2008a). 
Nabrežinski kras Nabrežinski kras (Nabrežina Karst) is the north-western part of the Kras around the village of Nabrežina (Aurisina in Italian). It is only about 150–180 m a.s.l. There are several old collapse dolines on the surface, more than 300 m wide and to 50 m deep. Smaller solution dolines are less abundant, most of the surface having plain or slightly undulating relief. Toward the north-east, the surface of the Nabrežinski kras gradually transforms into the slopes of the Volnik (545 m a.s.l.) hills and Grmada (324 m a.s.l.). An abrupt change of