----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/302306935 

Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology 

Chapter · February 2015 

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-12850-4_4 

CITATIONS                                                                                                    READS 

4                                                                                                            604 

1 author: 

           Nico Goldscheider 

           Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 

           159  PUBLICATIONS   3,189 CITATIONS    

              SEE PROFILE 

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: 

             World Karst Aquifer Mapping Project (WOKAM) View project 

             SMART-MOVE View project 

 All content following this page was uploaded by  Nico Goldscheider on 10 June 2016. 

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Chapter 4 
Overview of Methods Applied   
in Karst Hydrogeology 

Nico Goldscheider 

4.1   The Duality of Karst Aquifers and Investigation Methods 

Karst aquifers have a different hydraulic structure and behavior than porous media  
and  therefore  require  specific  investigation  methods  (Goldscheider  and  Drew  
2007). As  discussed  in  Chap.  3,  they  are  characterized  by  a  high  degree  of  het- 
erogeneity and discontinuity, resulting in a duality of recharge, infiltration, poros- 
ity, flow, and storage (Bakalowicz 2005; Ford and Williams 2007). Recharge either  
originates from the karst area itself (autogenic) or from adjacent non-karst areas  
that drain toward the karst aquifer (allogenic). Infiltration occurs diffusely through  
soil and epikarst or concentrated via dolines or swallow holes. Karst aquifers show  
double  or  triple  porosity,  consisting  of  intergranular  pores  and  fractures  (often  
summarized as matrix porosity), and solutional conduits. Flow in the network of  
conduits and caves is often rapid and turbulent, while flow in the matrix is gener- 
ally slower and laminar (Fig. 4.1). Storage occurs in the matrix and conduits, but  
residence times in the matrix are several orders of magnitude longer than those in  
the conduits (Kovacs et al. 2005). 
    The  heterogeneity  and  duality  of  karst  systems  have  to  be  considered  while  
choosing  appropriate  investigation  methods.  Most  methods  used  in  karst  are  not  
fundamentally different than those used in porous media hydrogeology, but spe- 
cific adaptations are required concerning the application and combination of ade- 
quate methods, as well as the interpretation of the results. 
    The duality of karst aquifers (matrix vs. conduits) also results in a duality of  
investigation  methods: Artificial  tracer  tests  are  the  ideal  methodological  tool  to  

N. Goldscheider (*)  
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute for Applied Geosciences (AGW),   
Division of Hydrogeology, Kaiserstr. 12, 76131, Karlsruhe, Germany 
e-mail: goldscheider@kit.edu 

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015                                         127 
Z. Stevanović (ed.), Karst Aquifers – Characterization and Engineering,   
Professional Practice in Earth Sciences, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12850-4_4 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

128                                                                                    N. Goldscheider 

Fig. 4.1   View of a karst  
spring illustrating the duality  
of karst: Rapid and turbulent  
flow in the conduits, while  
porosity and permeability  
in the adjacent rock matrix  
are much lower. This duality  
also requires a duality of  
investigation methods.  
Karst spring at Cirque de  
Consolation, French Jura  
Mountains 

study  the  rapid  flow  components  in  the  conduit  network  (Goldscheider  et  al.  
2008), whereas natural tracers, such as stable or radioactive isotopes, can be used  
to obtain information on the slow-flow and long-storage components in the matrix  
(Geyer et al. 2008; Maloszewski et al. 2002). 
    The hydraulic structure of karst systems results in a high degree of variability.  
Karst  systems  often  react  quickly  and  strongly  on  precipitation  events  or  snow- 
melt.  The  water  table  or  hydraulic  head  in  conduits  can  vary  by  tens  of  meters  
or  even  more  than  100  m.  Flow  velocities  in  conduits  were  reported  to  vary  by  
a factor of 10 or more, and the discharge of karst springs is also highly variable.  
Discharge variations by several orders of magnitude within a few hours or days  
are common at karst springs. Along with water table and discharge, the physical,  
chemical, and microbial compositions of karst groundwater and spring water also  
show marked variations (Ravbar et al. 2011). 
    This  variability  represents  a  major  challenge  in  the  exploitation  and  manage- 
ment  of  karst  water  resources,  but  also  requires  methodological  adaptations.  
Isolated measurements and observations are never adequate to characterize a karst  
system. Continuous monitoring of water levels, spring discharge, and water qual- 
ity is crucial in karst research. The dynamics of karst can only be captured on the  
basis of continuous, long-term, and event-based observations (Pronk et  al.  2006;  
Savoy  et  al.  2011).  Therefore,  adapted  monitoring  and  sampling  techniques  are  
crucial  in  studying  karst  systems.  For  the  same  reasons,  tracer  tests,  water  bal- 
ances,  and  other  methods  should  ideally  be  applied  repeatedly,  during  different  
flow conditions, to capture the variability of flow velocities, flow directions, and  
drainage divides (Göppert and Goldscheider 2008). 
    The  following  sections  present  an  overview  of  methods  used  to  study  karst  
aquifer systems, their structure, hydraulic duality, and dynamics. Numerical mod- 
els and other mathematical approaches are not described in this section, but pre- 
sented in Chap.  10 as well as in several review articles (Hartmann et al. 2014) and  
book chapters (Kovacs and Sauter  2007). The focus of this chapter is on experi- 
mental and field-based methods, methodological adaptations, and combinations of  
methods that are most specific for karst. More general, hydrogeological methods  
are described in various other textbooks, such as Fetter (2001). 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

4   Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                                 129 

4.2   The Karst Hydrogeology Toolbox 

Available methods in karst hydrogeology include geological, geophysical and spe- 
leological methods, hydrologic and hydraulic techniques, the use of natural trac- 
ers, such as isotopes and hydrochemical parameters, as well as the application of  
artificial  tracer  tests  (Goldscheider  and  Drew  2007).  The  choice  of  appropriate  
methods and the sequence of methods applied depend on the practical or scientific  
research questions, but also on the level of previous knowledge and on the availa- 
ble time, money, staff, and instrumentation. The following sections briefly present  
the most important methods of the “karst hydrogeology toolbox” and discuss the  
advantages, fields of applications, and limitation of the individual methods (con- 
densed in Table 4.1). 

Table  4.1   Summary of methods available in the “karst hydrogeology toolbox” (modified after  
Goldscheider and Drew 2007) 

 Group of methods             Applications and advantages            Limitations and drawbacks 
 Geological methods           External and internal geometry         Not always direct relations  
                              of the aquifer system                  between geological data and  
                                                                     groundwater flow 
                              Orientation and characteristics        Limited data availability in deep  
                              of potential flow paths                and confined settings 
                              Potential hydraulic properties,  
                              e.g., karstifiability and porosity 
 Geophysical methods          Determining geologic structures        Generally, no direct and clear  
                              and overburden thickness               information on groundwater 
                              Locating fracture zones and            Non-uniqueness of all results 
                              other preferential flow paths          The greater the investigation  
                              Low costs compared to drilling         depth, the lower the resolution 
                              Data can be obtained over wide         Noise problems and various   
                              areas (site coverage)                  technical limitations 
 Speleological methods        Locating and mapping of the            In many cases, only a limited  
                              past and active conduit network        and unrepresentative part of the  
                              Direct observations and                conduit system is accessible 
                              experiments inside the aquifer 
                              Understanding the temporal  
                              evolution of the karst system 
 Hydrological methods         Establishing dynamic water             Water budgets are often   
                              balances (input, output, storage)      problematic, because of  
                              Spring hydrographs to                  unknown and complex catchment  
                              characterize system behavior           boundaries 
                              and properties 
 Hydraulic methods            Determination of hydraulic             Scale-dependency of hydraulic  
                              parameters and boundary                properties results in limited   
                              conditions                             representativeness of data 
                              Determination of flow directions       Conventional hydraulic methods  
                              and water table variations             assume laminar (Darcian) flow 

                                                                                              (continued) 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

130                                                                                  N. Goldscheider 

Table 4.1   (continued) 

 Group of methods            Applications and advantages          Limitations and drawbacks 
 Hydrochemical               Information on water quality         Temporal variability requires  
 methods                     and contamination problems           event-based sampling or continu- 
                             Natural tracers for the origin,      ous monitoring 
                             movement and mixing of water  
                             and for water–rock interactions 
 Isotopic methods            Natural tracers for the origin,      Spatiotemporal input function  
                             movement and mixing of water         often not known precisely 
                             and for water–rock interactions      Ambiguities (non-uniqueness)   
                             Determination of residence           in interpreting data 
                             times and water ages 
 Artificial tracer           Determination of connections         Ambiguities in interpreting   
 methods                     and linear flow velocities           negative tracer results 
                             Delineation of catchment areas       Limited applicability in regional  
                             Information on contaminant           systems with long transit times 
                             transport                            Visible coloring or toxicity   
                                                                  concerns for some tracers 
                             Usually highly reliable, precise,  
                             and unambiguous information 

4.3   Geologic and Geophysical Methods 

A detailed  understanding of the geologic setting is always required for the char- 
acterization  and  management  of  karst  water  resources,  because  the  stratigraphic  
sequence and geologic structure define the external boundaries and internal geom- 
etry of the karst aquifer system. Fractures and fold axes often predetermine cave  
patterns  and  karst  water  flow  paths.  Every  conceptual  and  numerical  hydrogeo- 
logical model requires a geologic model as a basis. Therefore, geologic maps and  
sections  are  indispensable  bases  for  karst  hydrogeology.  In  most  cases,  existing  
geologic information has to be complemented by purpose-specific geologic field- 
work.  Geologic  methods  in  karst  terrains  are  similar  to  conventional  geologic  
methods and are not further described here. The reader is referred to Goldscheider  
and Andreo (2007) and geologic textbooks. 

    Box 4.1: KARSYS—Method for the conceptualization of karst systems 

    Jeannin et  al. (2013) have proposed an approach (KARSYS) for the hydro- 
    geological  conceptualization  of  karst  aquifer  systems,  based  on  geologi- 
    cal information and other available data, such as data on springs and caves  
    (Fig. 4.2). KARSYS is based on several generalized but defensible assump- 
    tions that make it possible to predict flow directions, delineate spring catch- 
    ments,  and  determine  the  extensions  and  dimensions  of  the  unsaturated  
    and  saturated  zones.  KARSYS  is  most  suitable  for  mountainous  and  shal- 
    low karst systems, such as the Swiss Jura Mountains and Alps for which the  

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

4   Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                                  131 

    Fig.  4.2   Illustration  of  the  KARSYS  approach  for  the  conceptualization  of  karst  systems  
    (Jeannin et  al. 2013). The approach uses geological maps and other data as a basis to estab- 
    lish a 3D conceptual model of the karst flow system. The 3D model is then used to generate  
    a set of maps that can be applied for a wide range of hydrological and engineering questions 

    approach was initially developed, but has also been applied for other karst  
    systems, related to various applied and research questions, such as ground- 
    water protection zoning, flooding, and engineering problems. 

In deep and confined hydrogeological settings, but also in many lowland areas with  
insufficient natural rock outcrops, direct geological information has to be obtained  
from  drillings.  However,  drillings  are  expensive  and  a  large  number  of  drillings  
would be necessary to localize linear elements, such as conduits or fracture zones.  
In such cases, geophysics comes into play. 
    Exploration geophysics is the science of seeing into the earth without digging  
or  drilling  (Bechtel  et  al.  2007).  Geophysical  methods  can  help  to  establish  the  

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

132                                                                           N. Goldscheider 

geological setting of a karst system, but can also be used to identify hydraulically  
relevant structures, such as fracture zones or large conduits. 
   Different  geophysical  methods  measure  different  physical  properties,  such  as  
gravity, electrical resistivity, or acoustic wave velocities. Geophysical methods can  
be grouped into active and passive ones. Passive methods use existing geophysical  
fields, such as the natural gravity field of the earth, while active methods introduce  
a signal into the earth, as it is done in explosion seismic. 
   Observed geophysical anomalies can be interpreted as geological heterogenei- 
ties  and  structures. This  so-called  data  inversion  represents  the  major  work  step  
and challenge of all geophysical investigations. Non-uniqueness is a key problem  
of geophysical data inversion: Different geological heterogeneities can cause the  
same geophysical anomaly, which means in turn that any observed anomaly can  
be interpreted in many different ways. Non-uniqueness can be partly overcome by  
combining different geophysical methods (Fig. 4.3) and/or by checking geophysi- 
cal interpretations by a limited number of well-selected drillings. Another general  
problem of geophysics is the trade-off between depth of investigation and resolu- 
tion: The greater the depth, the lower the resolution. 
   The  major  advantages  of  geophysics  include  relatively  rapid  and  inexpensive  
site coverage compared to detailed drilling campaigns. While drillings deliver pre- 
cise but expensive data for selected points, geophysics can generate less expensive  
but less precise data for larger areas. In karst terrains, geophysics is particularly  
useful for identifying suitable locations for drilling of wells and for mapping over- 
burden thickness, but also for geotechnical investigations, such as the identifica- 
tion of potential sinkhole hazards below building land (Bechtel et al. 2007). 
   A  wide  range  of  methods  is  available  in  karst  geophysics,  summarized  by  
Bechtel et al. (2007). Seismic methods involve measuring and evaluating the travel  
time of different types of acoustic waves. Seismic refraction is particularly useful  
for mapping overburden thickness. Seismic reflection is commonly used in gas and  
oil exploration and delivers the most detailed picture of deep subsurface structures. 
    Gravity  methods  required  precise  location  control  and  various  corrections.  
Microgravity is suitable for karst applications, such as the detection of cavities in  
the subsurface, which generate negative anomalies (Fig. 4.3), or bedrock pinnacles  
covered by sediments, which generate positive anomalies. 
   Electrical  and  electromagnetic  methods  include  a  wide  range  of  techniques  
that are based on very different operational principles but are all sensitive to the  
electrical and/or magnetic properties of the subsurface (Bechtel et al. 2007). In the  
context of karst and groundwater studies, these methods are particularly suitable  
to detect differences in porosity, water saturation, and water chemistry, which all  
generate anomalies of electrical resistivity. Application examples include the iden- 
tification  of  the  saltwater–freshwater  interface  in  coastal  aquifers  or  mapping  of  
fracture zones or cavities (Fig. 4.3). 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

4   Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                              133 

    Box 4.2: Advantage of combining different geophysical methods 

    Figure  4.3  presents  a  combined  depiction  of  two  geophysical  images  of  
    Port  Kennedy  Bone  Cave  in  Pennsylvania,  USA. The  cave  is  a  major  site  
    for  Pleistocene  fossils  that  was  initially  discovered  in  the  nineteenth  cen- 
    tury. Later on, the cave was filled with waste material, and the cave location  
    got lost. In 2005, the cave was rediscovered by an interdisciplinary research  
    effort  including  the  application  of  microgravity  and  electrical  resistivity  
    tomography.  The  combined  application  of  different  geophysical  methods  
    helps to overcome the problem of non-uniqueness that is inherent to all geo- 
    physical investigations. 

    Fig. 4.3   Geophysical images of Port Kennedy Bone Cave (PA, USA) that has been redis- 
    covered  by  microgravity  and  electrical  resistivity  tomography  (courtesy  of Tim  Bechtel,  
    Enviroscan Inc.) 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

134                                                                                   N. Goldscheider 

Borehole  geophysics  (Logging)  is  an  indispensable  supplement  to  the  analysis  of  
drilling cores. Drilling cores allow detailed lithological, mineralogical, geochemical,  
and paleontological analyses, while borehole geophysics makes it possible to study  
a wide range of physical underground properties in situ. Temperature logs are a sim- 
ple type of borehole geophysics and an example of a relevant underground property  
that cannot be obtained from drilling cores. Bechtel et  al. (2007) summarize avail- 
able borehole geophysical methods and their uses in karst and hydrogeology studies. 

4.4   Speleological Methods 

Caves make it possible to access the karst system and directly observe and study flow  
and transport in the unsaturated zone and in the aquifer (Jeannin et  al.  2007). Many  
accessible caves represent older parts of the drainage network that are no longer active  
today, while large parts of the active flow system are often developed in deep phreatic  
conduits that can only be accessed by divers or that are too narrow to be entered by  
humans  (Palmer  1991).  Nevertheless,  caving  has  revealed  great  knowledge  on  karst  
systems  and  is  increasingly  recognized  as  a  valuable  asset  to  karst  hydrogeological  
investigations. Speleologists can produce detailed cave maps that illustrate the geometry  
of karst conduit networks—although with the important restrictions mentioned above. 

    Box 4.3: Using caves as natural laboratories and visualizing conduit systems 

    Caves can be used as natural laboratories for monitoring and experimental  
    methods and are particularly useful to gain insights into the hydrology of the  
    vadose zone, e.g., by monitoring cave drip waters (McDonald and Drysdale  
    2007; Pronk et al. 2009) (Fig. 4.4). 

    Fig. 4.4   Example illustrating the utilization of a shallow cave as a monitoring site for tracer  
    tests to study flow and transport in the unsaturated zone (Pronk et al. 2009, slightly modified) 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

4   Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                              135 

        The combination of tracer tests, speleology, and hydrology makes it possible  
    to obtain a more detailed picture of the underground drainage system than one  
    of these methods alone (Lauber et al. 2014; Smart 1988). Figure 4.5 represents  
    a classical example of this approach. 

    Fig. 4.5   Representation of a karst conduit drainage network that has been obtained by the  
    combined  application  of  speleological  investigations  (mapping  of  accessible  caves),  sur- 
    face hydrology (mapping of springs, swallow holes, and estavelles), and artificial tracing  
    technique (characterization of inaccessible conduits) (Smart  1983; Copyrights Arctic and  
    Alpine Research journal, Alberta, Canada) 

4.5   Hydrologic and Hydraulic Methods 

Hydrologic methods often focus on the establishment and quantification of dynamic  
water balances (Groves 2007). The general form of any water balance is: 

                                  Input  = Output ± Storage.                                    (4.1) 

Concerning  the  quantification  of  input  into  karst  aquifer  systems,  the  described  
duality of recharge requires monitoring of both diffuse recharge via the soil and  
concentrated  infiltration  via  swallow  holes.  The  former  depends  on  rainfall  and  

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

136                                                                           N. Goldscheider 

snowmelt,  but  intermediate  storage  in  the  soil  or  snowpack  and  evapotranspira- 
tion losses have to be considered. The latter can be determined by continuous flow  
monitoring  at  sinking  streams.  Quantification  of  the  output  requires  continuous  
discharge monitoring at karst springs. However, in many case, not all groundwater  
flows to monitored springs but may drain toward adjacent surface waters or other  
aquifers. In these cases, water balances are more difficult and require sophisticated  
hydrogeological  methods  (as  discussed  in  Chap.  6).  Water  storage  can  occur  at  
many places in the hydrologic system, such as the soil, the unsaturated zone, or  
the aquifer, thus requiring a wide range of different methods. Differences in aqui- 
fer storage can be observed by water-level measurements at observation wells and  
piezometers (hydraulic methods, see below). 
   Continuous  discharge  monitoring  at  karst  springs  is  not  only  required  to  
establish  dynamic  water  balances,  but  also  delivers  hydrographs  that  are  invalu- 
able tools in karst hydrogeology, particularly in combination with chemographs,  
i.e.,  time  series  of  various  physicochemical  or  chemical  parameters  (Grasso  and  
Jeannin  2002; Hartmann et  al.  2013). Spring hydrographs and chemographs can  
be  used  for  the  overall  characterization  of  karst  systems  (Kovacs  and  Perrochet  
2008)  and  to  better  understand  the  system  behavior  during  floods  (Winston  and  
Criss 2004) or droughts (Fiorillo 2009). 
   Flow  nets  are  two-dimensional  representations  of  groundwater  flow  and  con- 
sist of equipotential lines and flow lines. Real groundwater flow is always a three- 
dimensional phenomenon and can be described by equipotential surfaces and flow  
lines (Fetter  2001). Equipotential surfaces are locations of equal hydraulic head,  
which  can  be  measured  at  piezometers.  However,  the  construction  of  meaning- 
ful flow nets or flow fields in karst aquifers is complicated by their heterogeneity,  
hydraulic discontinuity, and anisotropy. Therefore, the interpretation of piezometer  
data and the construction of flow nets in karst aquifers need to be done with care  
and caution, and predicted flow directions must be checked with tracer tests and  
compared with geological and speleological information. 
   Hydraulic  borehole  methods,  such  as  pumping  tests  and  slug  tests,  are  key  
methods  to  quantify  the  hydraulic  properties  of  alluvial  aquifers,  such  as  trans- 
missivity and storage capacity, and to identify the hydraulic boundary conditions.  
Specific methodological adaptations are required, concerning both the implemen- 
tation and interpretation of hydraulic tests (Kresic  2007). For example, the time- 
drawdown  curves  of  pumping  tests  in  karst  aquifers  often  display  characteristic  
steps  that  result  from  the  consecutive  dewatering  of  discrete  karstified  fractures  
or  bedding  planes. Water-filled  karst  conduits  near  the  pumped  well  can  induce  
quasi-stationary  conditions,  similar  to  an  equipotential  boundary  of  an  alluvial  
aquifer, such as a lake or a river (Fig. 4.6). 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

4   Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                             137 

Fig.  4.6   Examples  of  characteristic  time—drawdown  curves  obtained  from  pumping  tests  in  
karst aquifers (not to scale).  a The consecutive drainage of three discrete karstified fractures or  
bedding planes creates a stepped curve.  b A nearby water-filled karst conduit causes quasi-sta- 
tionary conditions (modified after Kresic 2007, Copyrights Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London) 

4.6   Hydrochemical and Isotopic Methods 

Hydrochemical  and  microbiological  methods  are  either  applied  to  characterize  
water  quality  and  contamination  problems,  or  the  obtained  parameters  are  used  
as “natural tracers” to determine transit times, the origin and mixing of different  
water types as well as hydrologic or biogeochemical processes in the aquifer sys- 
tem. Due to the high degree of variability of karst systems, continuous monitor- 
ing or event-based high-frequency sampling is generally preferred. Hunkeler and  
Mudry (2007) group the available parameters into (i) precipitation-related param- 
eters,  (ii)  soil-related  parameters,  (iii)  carbonate-rock-related  parameters,  (iv)  
parameters related to other rock types, and (v) compounds of anthropogenic origin. 
    The primary result of detailed physicochemical and hydrochemical monitoring  
at a karst spring is a so-called chemograph. As described above, chemographs can  
be combined with hydrographs in order to gain insights into the behavior of the  
karst  system,  particularly  in  response  to  intense  precipitation  events  or  droughts  
(Grasso et al. 2003; Raeisi et al. 2007). 

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

138                                                                                        N. Goldscheider 

    Box 4.4: Understanding the behavior of a karst system from hydrographs  
    and chemographs 

    The primary increase of discharge at a karst spring, documented in a hydro- 
    graph, is often the result of a hydraulic pressure pulse in the conduit system,  
    while the arrival of freshly infiltrated water occurs later and can be observed  
    by means of physicochemical, hydrochemical, and/or microbiological param- 
    eters (Fig. 4.7). 

    Fig.  4.7   Variability  of  discharge,  fecal  bacteria  (Escherichia  coli),  total  organic  carbon  
    (TOC),  and  turbidity  observed  at  a  karst  spring  following  an  intense  precipitation  event  
    during  a  high-flow  period.  Discharge  increases  first,  as  a  result  of  a  hydraulic  pressure  
    pulse  in  the  aquifer.  The  three  “soil-related  parameters”  increase  about  12  h  later  and  
     indicate  the  arrival  of  freshly  infiltrated  water. This  example  also  illustrates  the  extreme  
    variability  of  contamination  at  karst  springs  and  the  potential  usefulness  of  continuous  
    monitoring of TOC and turbidity as “early warning system” for fecal bacteria contamina- 
    tion (Data Pronk et al. 2006, 2007) 

    Stable and radioactive isotopes are often used as natural tracers in karst hydro- 
geology  (Criss  et  al.  2007).  Deuterium  (D  or  2H)  and  oxygen-18  (18O)  are  the  

most important precipitation-related parameters. The comparison of the seasonal  
variation  of  D  and  18O  in  rainfall  with  the  observed  variability  in  karst  spring  

waters  allows  to  quantify  mean  transit  times  (Maloszewski  et  al.  2002). Tritium  
with its half-life time of 12.3  years can be used to determine groundwater ages.  
Other  radioactive  isotopes,  such  as  Radon,  can  be  used  to  quantify  mixing  pro- 
cesses in discharge areas (Eross et  al.  2012) or for various other purposes, simi- 
larly as described above for the different hydrochemical parameters. 

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

4   Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                     139 

4.7   Artificial Tracer Methods 

Tracer techniques using artificial tracers, such as fluorescent dyes, are a major tech- 
nique for the investigation of karst aquifer systems. They can be used, among others, to  
identify underground connections, for example, between swallow holes and springs or  
within cave systems, to delineate karst spring catchments, to quantify linear flow veloc- 
ities and other relevant parameters, and to obtain information on the processes of con- 
taminant transport and attenuation (Benischke et al. 2007; Goldscheider et al. 2008). 
   The basic principle of a tracer test is simple: A specific substance (i.e., an arti- 
ficial  tracer)  is  injected  into  the  hydrogeological  systems  at  a  particular  place  
and time, while other sites, usually springs or pumping wells, are monitored for  
the arrival of this tracer. Unlike most other hydrogeological methods, tracer tests  
deliver not just hints and indications, but clear and quantitative evidence on under- 
ground connections. Tracer tests can be applied in all types of hydro(geo)logical  
environments, but they are particularly useful in karst aquifers, where underground  
flow paths are often long, complicated, and unexpected, whereas flow velocities in  
the conduit network are fast, thus limiting the required duration of the sampling  
period (Benischke et al. 2007; Goldscheider et al. 2008). 
   A  wide  range  of  substances  can  be  used  as  artificial  tracers  (Käss  1998),  but  
some specific fluorescent dyes are by far the most important hydrogeological tracers,  
because  of  their  favorable  properties:  Extremely  low  detection  limits  and  absence  
in natural waters, thus requiring limited injection quantities; highly water soluble;  
non-toxic  to  humans  and  the  environment;  and  largely  conservative  behavior,  i.e.,  
microbiologically and chemically stable and mobile. The best and most important  
fluorescent  dyes  include  Uranine  (=Sodium-Fluorescein),  Amidorhodamine  G,  
Eosin and Sodium-Naphthionate; Sulforhodamine B is also a good water tracer, but  
with some ecotoxicological limitations. The detection limit of Uranine is as low as  
0.005  µg/L. This means that injection quantities of 100 to 10  g are generally suf- 
ficient  even  for  large-scale  tracer  tests  with  flow  distances  of  many  kilometers  
(Goldscheider et al. 2008). 
    Salts can also be used as artificial tracers. However, there is always some natural  
background in the water and the detection limits are much higher than those of fluo- 
rescent dyes, so that tracer tests over large distances would require enormous injec- 
tion quantities (>100 kg). Different types of particles, colloids, and microbiological  
substances  (e.g.,  bacteriophages)  can  also  be  used  as  water  tracers  (Goldscheider  
et al. 2007), but this section focuses on the application of fluorescent dyes. 

   Box 4.5: Where and how to inject the tracers? 

   Tracer tests are powerful tools, but the preparation and operation of tracer  
   tests is rather expensive and laborious. Therefore, tracer tests usually require  
   careful preliminary investigations, such as geological mapping, hydrological  

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

140                                                                                  N. Goldscheider 

   measurements and water balances, and the application of hydrochemical and  
   isotopic methods to obtain first indications on aquifer properties, catchment  
    areas, flow, and mixing processes. On this basis, tracer tests can be used to  
   check research  hypotheses and obtain clear evidence on underground con- 
   nections and catchments. 
       Simple tracer tests require one single injection site, while multi-tracer tests  
   involve the injection of several different tracers into different injection sites.  
    Successful  tracer  injections  require  flowing  water.  Therefore,  sinking  sur- 
   face waters (i.e., swallow holes), cave streams, or water wells are favorable  
   injections sites. When no naturally flowing water is available, large quantities  
   of  flushing  water  need  to  be  used,  but  this  injection  technique  has  a  lower  
   chance of success. Usually, the tracer powder is dissolved in an appropriate  
   container  (plastic  bottle,  canister,  and  barrel)  and  then  slowly  released  into  
   the injection site, along with naturally or artificially flowing water (Fig. 4.8). 

   Fig.  4.8   Tracer  injection  into  Blauhöhle  cave,  Germany  (photo  courtesy  of A.  Kücha).  
   The tracer powder was transported to this hard-to-reach injection site in a plastic canister,  
   mixed with water from the cave stream, and directly released into flowing water to ensure  
   optimal tracer transport. In-cave dye tracing makes it possible to obtain spatially resolved  
   information on conduit flow (Lauber et al. 2014) 

   Box 4.6: Estimation of required trace injection quantities 

   Two  groups  of  methods  are  available  to  determine  appropriate  injection  
   quantities. Several authors have suggested purely empirical methods, based  
   on experience and requiring a minimum of prior knowledge, such as the for- 
   mula by Käss ( 1998): 

                                         M  = L  × K  × B                                    (4.2) 

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

4   Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                     141 

   where 

   M     is required tracer mass (kg), 
   L     is relevant distance (km), 
   K     is a coefficient for the tracer type (e.g., one for Uranine, two for Amidorho-  
         damine G, 15 for Naphthionate, and 20,000 for NaCl), and 
   B     is a coefficient for the hydrogeological framework conditions (e.g., 0.1– 
         1.0 for karst conduits) 

       According  to  this  formula,  a  tracer  test  in  karst  over  10  km  distance  
   would require 1–10 kg of Uranine (or 2–20 tons of salt!). 
       Alternatively,  the  required  tracer  injection  quantity  can  be  determined  
   on  the  basis  of  quantitative  transport  equations,  such  as  the  Advection– 
   Dispersion  Model  (ADM)  described  further  below.  This  approach  requires  
   more input data (that are usually not available prior to the tracer test) but also  
   represents a more objective and defensible basis of estimation (Field 2003). 

   Three groups of methods are available for sampling and monitoring the arrival  
of the injected tracers at springs or other observation sites: integrative sampling,  
discrete sampling, or continuous monitoring. In the case of fluorescent dyes, inte- 
grative sampling can be done by means of charcoal adapters that are placed in the  
water, usually for a time period of several days. Fluorescent dyes accumulate in  
the charcoal and can later be eluted and analyzed in the laboratory. This technique  
is cheap and timesaving but delivers only qualitative results (basically Yes or No).  
It can thus be used for a large number of minor sampling sites, such as small and  
rather unimportant springs. 
   Discrete sampling means to take water samples at given time intervals, either  
manually  (grab  sampling)  or  by  means  of  automatic  samplers. The  samples  can  
then be analyzed quantitatively in the laboratory thus generating a series of time- 
concentration data. This sampling method is highly reliable and reproducible, but  
also requires sufficient staff and/or auto-samplers. 
   Continuous  monitoring  of  fluorescent  tracers  involves  the  application  of  field  
fluorimeters.  Different  models  are  available,  such  as  downhole  or  flow-through  
fluorimeters with up to four optical channels that make it possible to monitor sev- 
eral  fluorescent  tracers  and  turbidity  at  the  same  time  (Schnegg  2002). The  UV  
channel can also be used for organic carbon monitoring (Pronk et al. 2006). 
   The primary result of a tracer test is a breakthrough curve (BTC), where tracer  
concentrations are plotted versus time (Fig. 4.9). A well-documented BTC is a much  
more convincing evidence for an underground connection than an isolated result from  
a  single  charcoal  bag  or  from  scarce  water  samples.  Furthermore,  several  relevant  
flow and transport parameters can be directly obtained from the BTC, such as the  
time of first arrival, the peak time, and the maximum concentration. Concentrations  
are either plotted as absolute values (e.g., in µg/L) or normalized by the respective  
injection quantity to allow better comparison of BTCs from multi-tracer tests. 

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

142                                                                               N. Goldscheider 

Fig.  4.9   Breakthrough curves of two tracer tests carried out in the same conduit system during  
low- and high-flow conditions, demonstrating the variability of flow velocities and dilutions in  
karst aquifers. Concentrations (c) are normalized by the injection mass (M) to allow unambigu- 
ous comparison [Data Göppert and Goldscheider (2008)] 

    Linear flow velocities can be calculated by dividing the linear distance between  
injection  and  sampling  point  by  the  corresponding  transit  time.  Tracer  recovery  
can be calculated as follows: 

                                               ∞ 
                                      MR   =     (Q · c)dt                                  (4.3) 

                                             t=0 

where 

MR  is recovered tracer mass, 
Q    is discharge or pumping rate, 
c    is concentration, and 
t    is time 

    More  advanced  transport  parameters  can  be  obtained  by  different  analyti- 
cal, stochastic, or numerical modeling approaches. The usual procedure consists  
of fitting a theoretical BTC to the measured data (best-fit approach and inverse  
modeling).  The   most   conventional   approach   is   the   one-dimensional  ADM  
(Kreft and Zuber  1978). This model can also be used for the prediction of tracer  
transport  (forward  modeling)  and  thus  for  the  determination  of  optimal  injec- 
tion  quantities  and  sampling  strategies  (Field  2003).  Several  computer  codes  
are available for direct and inverse tracer transport modeling, such as CXTFIT  
(Toride et al.  1999). 

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

4   Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                              143 

    Box 4.7: Repeated tracer tests to capture hydrologic variability 

    Repeated  tracer  tests  during  low-flow  and  high-flow  conditions  are  rarely  
    done  but  are  highly  useful,  as  they  make  it  possible  to  quantify  the  varia- 
    bility  of  flow  velocities  and  contaminant  transport  processes  (Göppert  and  
    Goldscheider 2008) as well as the shifting of catchment boundaries (Ravbar  
    et  al.  2011)  as  a  function  of  the  hydrologic  condition.  Flow  velocities  
    obtained from such repeated tracer tests can vary by a factor of 5 (Fig.  4.9;  
    Göppert and Goldscheider 2008) or even 10 or more (Pronk et al. 2007). This  
    type of information is also important for the delineation of protection zones. 

References 

Bakalowicz M (2005) Karst groundwater: a challenge for new resources. Hydrogeol J 13:148–160 
Bechtel TD, Bosch FP, Gurk M (2007) Geophysical methods. In: Goldscheider N, Drew D (eds)  
    Methods  in  karst  hydrogeology.  International  Contribution  to  Hydrogeology,  IAH,  vol  26.  
    Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London, pp 171–199 
Benischke R, Goldscheider N, Smart CC (2007) Tracer techniques. In: Goldscheider N, Drew D  
    (eds) Methods in karst hydrogeology. International Contribution to Hydrogeology, IAH, vol  
    26. Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London, pp 147–170 
Criss R, Davisson L, Surbeck H, Winston W (2007) Isotopic methods, In: Goldscheider N, Drew  
    D (eds.), Methods in karst hydrogeology. International Contribution to Hydrogeology, IAH,  
    vol 26. Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London, pp 123–145 
Eross   A,   Madl-Szonyi   J,   Surbeck   H,   Horvath   A,   Goldscheider   N,   Csoma   AE   (2012)  
    Radionuclides as natural tracers for the characterization of fluids in regional discharge areas,  
    Buda Thermal karst, Hungary. J Hydrol 426:124–137 
Fetter CW (2001) Applied hydrogeology, 4th edn. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 
Field MS (2003) A review of some tracer-test design equations for tracer-mass estimation and  
    sample-collection frequency. Environ Geol 43:867–881 
Fiorillo F (2009) Spring hydrographs as indicators of droughts in a karst environment. J Hydrol  
    373:290–301 
Ford D, Williams P (2007) Karst hydrogeology and geomorphology. Wiley, Chichester 
Geyer T, Birk S, Liedl R, Sauter M (2008) Quantification of temporal distribution of recharge in  
    karst systems from spring hydrographs. J Hydrol 348:452–463 
Goldscheider   N,  Andreo   B   (2007)  The   geological   and   geomorphological   framework,   In:  
    Goldscheider N, Drew D (eds.) Methods in karst hydrogeology. International Contribution to  
    Hydrogeology, IAH, vol 26. Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London, pp 9–23 
Goldscheider N, Drew D (eds) (2007) Methods in karst hydrogeology. International Contribution  
    to Hydrogeology, IAH, vol 26. Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London 
Goldscheider N, Haller L, Poté J, Wildi W, Zopfi J (2007) Characterizing water circulation and  
    contaminant transport in Lake Geneva using bacteriophage tracer experiments and limnologi- 
    cal methods. Environ Sci Technol 41:5252–5258 
Goldscheider N, Meiman J, Pronk M, Smart C (2008) Tracer tests in karst hydrogeology and spe- 
    leology. Int J Speleol 37:27–40 
Göppert N, Goldscheider N (2008) Solute and colloid transport in karst conduits under low- and  
    high-flow conditions. Ground Water 46:61–68 
Grasso DA, Jeannin PY (2002) A global experimental system approach of karst springs’ hydro- 
    graphs and chemographs. Ground Water 40:608–617 

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

144                                                                                      N. Goldscheider 

Grasso DA, Jeannin PY, Zwahlen F (2003) A deterministic approach to the coupled analysis of  
    karst springs’ hydrographs and chemographs. J Hydrol 271:65–76 
Groves  C  (2007)  Hydrological  methods,  In:  Goldscheider  N,  Drew  D  (eds)  Methods  in  karst  
    hydrogeology.   International   Contribution   to   Hydrogeology,   IAH,   vol   26.   Taylor   and  
    Francis/Balkema, London, pp 45–64 
Hartmann A, Goldscheider N, Wagener T, Lange J, Weiler M (2014) Karst water resources in a  
    changing world: review of hydrological modeling approaches. Rev Geophys 52(3):218–242 
Hartmann A, Weiler M, Wagener T, Lange J, Kralik M, Humer F, Mizyed N, Rimmer A, Barbera  
    JA, Andreo B, Butscher C, Huggenberger P (2013) Process-based karst modelling to relate  
    hydrodynamic and hydrochemical characteristics to system properties. Hydrol Earth Syst Sci  
     17:3305–3321 
Hunkeler  D,  Mudry  J  (2007)  Hydrochemical  methods.  In:  Goldscheider  N,  Drew  D  (eds)  
    Methods  in  karst  hydrogeology.  International  Contribution  to  Hydrogeology,  IAH,  vol  26.  
    Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London, pp 93–121 
Jeannin PY, Eichenberger U, Sinreich M, Vouillamoz J, Malard A, Weber E (2013) KARSYS:  
    a  pragmatic  approach  to  karst  hydrogeological  system  conceptualisation.  Assessment  of  
    groundwater reserves and resources in Switzerland. Environ Earth Sci 69:999–1013 
Jeannin PY, Groves C, Häuselmann P (2007) Speleological investigations, In: Goldscheider N,  
    Drew D (eds) Methods in karst hydrogeology. International Contribution to Hydrogeology,  
    IAH, vol 26. Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London, pp 25–44 
Käss W (1998) Tracing technique in geohydrology. Balkema, Brookfield, p 581 
Kovacs A,  Perrochet  P  (2008) A  quantitative  approach  to  spring  hydrograph  decomposition.  J  
    Hydrol 352:16–29 
Kovacs A, Perrochet P, Kiraly L, Jeannin PY (2005) A quantitative method for the characterisa- 
    tion of karst aquifers based on spring hydrograph analysis. J Hydrol 303:152–164 
Kovacs A, Sauter M (2007) Modelling karst hydrodynamics. In: Goldscheider N, Drew D (eds.)  
    Methods  in  karst  hydrogeology.  International  Contribution  to  Hydrogeology,  IAH,  vol  26.  
    Taylor and Francis/Balkema, London, pp 201–222 
Kreft A, Zuber A (1978) Physical meaning of dispersion equation and its solution for different  
    initial and boundary conditions. Chem Eng Sci 33:1471–1480 
Kresic  N  (2007)  Hydraulic  methods.  In:  Goldscheider  N,  Drew  D  (eds.)  Methods  in  karst  
    hydrogeology.   International   Contribution   to   Hydrogeology,   IAH,   vol   26.   Taylor   and  
    Francis/Balkema, London, pp 65–91 
Lauber  U,  Ufrecht W,  Goldscheider  N  (2014)  Spatially  resolved  information  on  karst  conduit  
    flow from in-cave dye tracing. Hydrol Earth Syst Sci 18:435–445 
Maloszewski P, Stichler W, Zuber A, Rank D (2002) Identifying the flow systems in a karstic- 
    fissured-porous  aquifer,  the  Schneealpe, Austria,  by  modelling  of  environmental  O-18  and  
    H-3 isotopes. J Hydrol 256:48–59 
McDonald J, Drysdale R (2007) Hydrology of cave drip waters at varying bedrock depths from a  
    karst system in southeastern Australia. Hydrol Process 21:1737–1748 
Palmer AN (1991) Origin and morphology of limestone caves. Geol Soc Am Bull 103:1–21 
Pronk M, Goldscheider N, Zopfi J (2006) Dynamics and interaction of organic carbon, turbidity  
    and bacteria in a karst aquifer system. Hydrogeol J 14:473–484 
Pronk M, Goldscheider N, Zopfi J (2007) Particle-size distribution as indicator for fecal bacteria  
    contamination of drinking water from karst springs. Environ Sci Technol 41:8400–8405 
Pronk M, Goldscheider N, Zopfi J, Zwahlen F (2009) Percolation and particle transport in the  
    unsaturated zone of a karst aquifer. Ground Water 47:361–369 
Raeisi E, Groves C, Meiman J (2007) Effects of partial and full pipe flow on hydrochemographs  
    of Logsdon river, Mammoth Cave Kentucky USA. J Hydrol 337:1–10 
Ravbar  N,  Engelhardt  I,  Goldscheider  N  (2011)  Anomalous  behaviour  of  specific  electrical  
    conductivity  at  a  karst  spring  induced  by  variable  catchment  boundaries:  the  case  of  the  
    Podstenjsek spring, Slovenia. Hydrol Process 25:2130–2140 
Savoy  L,  Surbeck  H,  Hunkeler  D  (2011)  Radon  and  CO2  as  natural  tracers  to  investigate  the  
    recharge dynamics of karst aquifers. J Hydrol 406:148–157 

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

  4    Overview of Methods Applied in Karst Hydrogeology                                                                                 145 

  Schnegg  PA  (2002) An  inexpensive  field  fluorometer  for  hydrogeological  tracer  tests  with  three  
       tracers and turbidity measurement. In: XXXII IAH and ALHSUD congress Groundwater and  
       human development, Oct 2002, Balkema, Rotterdam, Mar del Plata, Argentina, pp 1484–1488 
  Smart CC (1983) The hydrology of the Castleguard karst, Columbia Icefields, Alberta, Canada.  
       Arct Alp Res 15:471–486 
  Smart  CC  (1988) Artificial  tracer  techniques  for  the  determination  of  the  structure  of  conduit  
       aquifers. Ground Water 26:445–453 
  Toride N, Leij FJ, van Genuchten MT (1999) The CXTFIT code for estimating transport parame- 
       ters from laboratory or field tracer experiments. US Salinity Laboratory, USDA, ARS, Riverside 
  Winston  WE,  Criss  RE  (2004)  Dynamic  hydrologic  and  geochemical  response  in  a  perennial  
       karst spring. Water Resour Res 40(W05106):11 

View publication statsView publication stats 
