Accepted Manuscript 
Advances in global mountain geomorphology 
Olav Slaymaker, Christine Embleton-Hamann 
Advances in Global Mountain Geomorphology Olav Slaymaker* and Christine Embleton-Hamann 
Department of Geography, University of British Columbia and Department of Geography and Regional Research, University of Vienna. *Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 604 261 9767 E-mail address: olav.slaymaker@ubc.ca 
Abstract: Three themes in global mountain geomorphology have been defined and reinforced over the past decade: (a) new ways of measuring, sensing, and analysing mountain morphology; (b) a new emphasis on disconnectivity in mountain geomorphology; and (c) the emergence of concerns about the increasing influence of anthropogenic disturbance of the mountain geomorphic environment, especially in intertropical mountains where population densities are higher than in any other mountain region. Anthropogenically induced hydroclimate change increases geomorphic hazards and risks but also provides new opportunities for mountain landscape enhancement. Each theme is considered with respect to the distinctiveness of mountain geomorphology and in relation to important advances in research over the past decade. The traditional reliance on the high energy condition to define mountain geomorphology seems less important than the presence of unique mountain landforms and landscapes and the distinctive ways in which human activity and anthropogenically induced hydroclimate change are transforming mountain landscapes. Keywords: mountain morphology; process; disconnectivity; hydroclimate change; arctic; temperate alpine; intertropical; human impacts. 
1. Introduction   A systematic approach to mountain geomorphology was introduced by Fairbridge (1968). But hesitancy remains among some geomorphologists to concede the distinctiveness of mountain geomorphology (Owens and Slaymaker, 2004). Skeptics note, correctly, that there are no unique mountain processes. The argument for distinctiveness has traditionally rested on three characteristics: (i) mountain morphology; (ii) the high energy condition with coupled slope and river processes; and (iii) regionally distinct mountain landforms and landscapes, such as arctic, temperate alpine, and intertropical mountain geomorphologies (Barsch and Caine, 1984). The purpose of this review is to document progress over the past decade in these three broad research themes and to assess the claim that mountain geomorphology is a distinctive subdiscipline within geomorphology (see sections 1.1.7, 2.5, and 3.7). 
1.1. The form of mountain landscapes 1.1.1. Conceptual framework for mountain morphology Intuition suggests that processes or relationships operating at different scales require separate treatment (Phillips, 2016). Thus, individual landforms, landscapes, and land systems would benefit from independent discussion before extrapolation across scales is attempted. Figure 1 identifies the real world hierarchy of landforms, landscapes, and land systems with specific but notional ranges of time and space scales (Slaymaker et al., 2009). The shortest time scales and the smallest space scales are the domain of landforms and are represented by the daily changes experienced at a 100-m2 plot. The longest time scales of 100 Ma and 100 Mkm2 are geological time scales and the domain of landscape belts. The separation of these units by 12 orders of magnitude emphasizes the importance of specifying temporal and spatial scale of every research project.   Fig. 1. The spatiotemporal hierarchy of landforms and landscapes: spatial scale is plotted on the x axis and temporal scale is plotted on the y axis (after Slaymaker and Embleton-Hamann, 2009). Temporal scale refers to the time taken to form the landscape unit. Factors that determine the character of landforms can be either dependent or independent variables as the limits of time and space change. The list of variables may not change with scale, but their relative importance or direction does shift (Schumm and Lichty, 1965). Because the terrestrial surface is intrinsically hierarchical and because no general formula to demonstrate physical connections between hierarchical levels exists, at least three hierarchical levels in mountain landscapes could be explored with benefit: (i) the level of the object of interest; (ii) a level above the level of interest that constrains lower levels; and (iii) a level below the level of interest that provides details needed to explain the behavior of individual components of the system. In geomorphology this is rarely done, though Church et al. (1999) provided a model that explored several levels of the sediment flux hierarchy in Canada. 1.1.2. Terrain analysis   Landforms are shaped in three dimensions by natural processes and societal demands; societies in turn are shaped by the landscapes they alter. Understanding and modeling these interacting forces across Earth are not small challenges (Tarolli et al., 2017). Terrain analysis is the first step in characterizing these landforms and landscapes. Morphological variables that relate to the driving forces in the mountain energy environment include absolute elevation (which controls temperature and precipitation), gradient (which controls the erosional force: gsin.), available relief (terrain ruggedness), concave slopes (which tend to concentrate water), and convex slopes (which tend to shed water). Aspect controls the amount of radiant energy received at the surface and leads to highly contrasted slope climates. The local hydroclimate of mountains is dependent on morphologic variations. At the same time, hillslope length is a fundamental attribute of landscapes that is intrinsically linked to drainage density (lo= 1 of the reciprocal of Dd), and drives landslide hazard, biogeochemical cycling, and hillslope sediment transport.   Fig. 2. Global distribution of mountains. (A) relief roughness in m.km -1 and (B) relief typology that combines elevation band and local elevation range (modified by Pamela Green from Meybeck et al., 2001). Figure 2(A) depicts relief roughness or local elevation range that is a surrogate for gradient (or m.km -1). Figure 2(B) uses a relief typology that combines elevation band and local elevation range. The necessity for two figures is derived from the fact that the property of mountainness is defined by two necessary conditions: high gradient and high absolute elevation above sea level. At global scale relief roughness and relief typology that take into account regional slope, elevation band and local elevation range can now be conveniently mapped (Slaymaker, 2010b). Existing methods to estimate catchment average hillslope lengths include inversion of drainage density or identification of a break in slope–area scaling, where the hillslope domain transitions into the fluvial domain. However, estimating hillslope length in this way has been shown to systematically underestimate hillslope length, and in addition, hillslope lengths estimated by slope–area scaling breaks show large variations between catchments of similar morphology and area (Stuart et al., 2016). Traditional (remote) sensing platforms—such as balloons, helicopters, airborne multispectral scanners, aerial photographs, radar, and satellites—combined with the explosive growth of computing capacity has given rise to a new field of digital terrain modelling (DTM) (Kapos, 2000; Meybeck et al., 2001). Remote sensing of relief in mountain environments is useful where the complexity of the terrain has made conventional cartography and remote sensing less accurate than desired (e.g., USGS, GSC, NOAA, and government agencies in general). Wundram and Loffler (2008) addressed the gap between terrestrial investigations and high altitude remote sensing with a low altitude sensing approach using kite aerial photography. Automatic digital cameras (e.g., Kellerer-Pirklbauer and Riekh, 2016) provide improved local scale detail and spatial heterogeneity at glacier, river channel, and reach scales that are better   characterized by such technical developments (Church and Zimmerman, 2007; Sam et al., 2016; Wohl, 2016). Laser scanning in geomorphology also provides improved resolution at local scales (Bollmann et al., 2011; Fritzmann et al., 2011). Developments in LiDAR and bare earth digital elevation models (DEMs) provide new insights into the shape of the earth—the implications of which have only become apparent during the past decade (Wilford, 2009). Technical developments have made calculations of hypsometry (distribution of elevation in the landscape) possible at all scales from micro to global. Swath profile analysis is an improved, DTM-based version of traditional crosssection analysis and is useful to evaluate the effects of vertical tectonic surface movements as well as in the investigation of fluvially or glacially sculpted topography (Telbisz et al., 2013). Swath profile and analysis of morphometric parameters have facilitated geological mapping of headwater catchments in the Outer Carpathians, Poland (Placzkowska, 2014). Topographic rims, tilted remnant surfaces, and fluvial incision have been identified even where these features are obscured by the dissected topography (Telbisz et al., 2013). Where crustal shortening rates are slow and satellite data may be equivocal, we propose that DTMs could guide the identification of potential earthquake risk. For example, the earthquake that shook China’s Sichuan Province in May 2008 struck an area that had no expectation of seismic activity of such magnitude (7.9 on the Richter scale) on the basis of conventional earthquake risk assessment (Kirby et al, 2008). Earth observation satellite systems assess impacts and coordinate emergency response activities after major natural disasters, such as earthquakes or volcanism that are responsible for rearranging the morphology of Earth’s surface (Voigt et al., 2016). 1.1.3. Elevation zones as surrogates for hydroclimate The hydroclimate is undoubtedly an important driver of mountain change in the Anthropocene epoch. Unfortunately, monitoring of the hydroclimate at high elevations is inadequate everywhere. Only the European Alps have enough monitoring stations to constitute a network. In the absence of monitored data, biomes are used as surrogates for hydroclimate   (Körner and Ohsawa, 2005). In many mountain regions, where hydrometric and meteorological data are scarce, biomes are the only reliable basis for global comparisons. In southern British Columbia the timberline declines in elevation in eastern British Columbia from south (49°N at 2200 masl) to north (60°N at 1400 masl) (Fig. 3A) and rises in elevation from west (at 1100 masl) to east (at 2200 masl) (Fig. 3B). FIG. 3. Timber line zone, lower limit of continuous permafrost, and the annual snowline in British Columbia. (A) S-N transect along the crest of the Rocky Mountains (49-60°N); (B). W-E transect from Vancouver Island to the Rocky Mountains (after Arno and Hammerley, 1984). Figure 3 provides three examples of surrogates for hydroclimate: (i) timberline is a zone of transitional vegetation that lies between continuous forest cover and the treeless alpine tundra; (ii) the lower limit of continuous permafrost lies typically above the timberline, but discontinuous permafrost extends well below the timberline, and (iii) the annual snowline corresponds closely   with the equilibrium line altitude (ELA) and is commonly several hundred metres above the lower limit of continuous permafrost. The timberline zone is included in the definition of alpine area and includes forest with openings, park-like areas with openings, park-like areas with tree clusters, and stunted and wind-distorted trees in the so-called krummholz zone. The transition takes place over a range in elevation of about 300 m, depending on local edaphic conditions. If temperature change proceeds as predicted, then one of the most apparent results should be a rise in the timberline. Traditional mountain zonation depends on observable biome variations with elevation as a function of temperature (Troll, 1973). Troll’s high (elevation) mountain category, defined as consisting of multiple ecotones, glacierization, and extensive impact on surrounding regions, has been a valuable tool for recognizing hydroclimatic variations from one mountain range to another (Holtmeier, 2015; Stahr and Langenschiedt, 2015). Nested systems of cascading water, ice, and sediments cut across standard biome divisions and complicate the regular altitudinal zonation (e.g., Slaymaker, 2013). Research of the past decade has identified several problems with the use of surrogates, such as the following: the use of standard elevation bands to estimate hydroclimate is inadequate in circumstances where shortterm variability in climate does not trigger ecotone change. For example, the forest-tundra ecotone has changed during the last century in the Putorana Mountains, northern Siberia. At the current upper species line, densification of a formerly open forest is ongoing and an upslope shift of the tree-line position has occurred (30 to 50 m in altitude during the last century). More difficult is determining which hydroclimatic factor is the stronger driver, e.g. summer temperature or winter precipitation (Kirdyanov et al., 2012). These problems are further exacerbated when standard elevation bands are used to predict or to associate geomorphological features, as illustrated from the Dovrefjell massif, Scandes Mountains. The spatial and temporal irregularities of the functional periglacial belt lead to periglacial features that do not accord precisely with altitude belts (Kerguillec et al., 2015). Contemporary climate changes also complicate the traditional mountain zonation in the periglacial belt as in the role of   aridification in the Sierra Nevada in Spain (Oliva et al., 2011). Much recent work on altitudinal belts in China is informed by digital and statistical analyses that provide detailed information on patterns of its mountain geoecology (Yao et al., 2010). Global snowline fluctuations in the Tropics depend on many more factors than hydroclimate (Mark et al., 2005), as do glaciation level correlations with Equilibrium Line Altitude (ELA) variations as shown in central Alaska (Dortch et al., 2010). Despite these problems, surrogate information may be the only estimating tool where no hydroclimatic data are available. 
1.1.4. Tertiary forms Unusual events that have a major influence on mountain morphology, e.g. massive earthquakes, huge landslides, and river avulsions, have very low recurrence intervals in contemporary time; but their recurrence is inevitable over the billions of years of deep time. At geological time scales, the imprint of plate tectonics tends to override lithologic control. At regional and global spatial scales, landscape is complex and is characterized by emergent properties. Tectonics and mountains: a strong relation exists between plate tectonics and the form and distribution of mountains (e.g. Summerfield, 2000). Most, but by no means all, large mountain systems or cordilleras are associated with plate boundaries, whether convergent, divergent, or transform. Much of the literature on mountain building over the last decade has concentrated on active plate margins where collision and subduction can explain mountains and the structures within them. But mountains are also found in plate interior settings, such as (i) hot spots, (ii) continental flood basalts, (iii) shields, (iv) intra-cratonic uplift sites, (v) post-tectonic magmatic intrusion sites, and (vi) evaporite diapirs. Plate tectonics is indispensable to the interpretation of pre-Quaternary mountains (Binnie et al, 2007; Brocklehurst, 2010; Burbank and Anderson, 2012; Blenkinsop and Moore, 2013; Frankel and Owen, 2013).   Ollier (2006) disagreed with the prevailing plate tectonic viewpoint by emphasizing the presence of mountains on passive plate margins also and noting that many mountains are made by uplift of continental areas. If the uplifted area is deeply dissected, it will be a typical mountain chain with isolated peaks. Disagreement arises in part from the different methodologies adopted by those who emphasize the close relation between mountains and plate tectonics (who are heavily invested in fission track analysis) and the Ollier school (which emphasizes landforms, stratigraphy, and physical geologic data). With respect to passive margin evolution, the erosional pattern often follows the fabric of ancient, compressional geological structures exposed by the topographic energy of rifting. As erosion cuts into these belted outcrop systems, they impose initial conditions that steer drainage recession into the plateau edge and control escarpment-forming conditions. Contingency or pattern in such cases therefore controls process. Given the pre-rift geological heterogeneities of the Blue Ridge, western Ghats and eastern Ghats, no a priori reasons exist why escarpment landscape change should be uniform, steady, or self-similar (Gunnell and Harbor, 2010). The Niesen nappe in the Swiss Penninic Prealps, for example, has opposite facing flanks with basins underlain by identical lithologies but contrasting lithotectonic architectures. Lithologies either dip parallel to the topographic slope or in the opposite direction. The contrasting dip orientations of the underlying flysch bedrock have promoted hillslope and channelized processes to contrasting extents. This illustrates that while the regional landscape properties in this part of the northern Alpine border can mainly be related to the tectonic architecture of the underlying bedrock, the denudation rates have a strong local orographic control through elevation dependent mean annual temperature and precipitation (Chittenden et al., 2014). Lithology and landscape: (i) Granite landscapes: Study of landforms developed on granitoid rocks has for long been of particular interest in geomorphology. Reasons for this include the wide distribution of granites and similar acid plutonic rocks, the variety and striking character of granite   scenery, and the individual rock landforms of granites. Geology of granite, granite weathering, boulders, tors and inselbergs, slope development in granite landscapes, granite coasts, cold climate granite landscapes, and geological controls in the evolution of granite have been discussed by Migon (2010). Steep-sided granite exfoliation domes and smooth slopes, where granite has weathered into granite sand (grus or growan), are typical forms of granite areas. Huang Shan, which is often described as the ‘loveliest mountain of China’, displays granite landscape to perfection (Fig. 4A). Many peaks have local relief of more than 1000 m. and the inspirational scenery became a favourite theme of Chinese landscape painters. Tors and weathering pits are also typical at local scale. Tuolumne Meadow at Yosemite National Park in California provides a classic demonstration of granodiorite landscape response to weathering and glaciation (cf. Fig. 4B; Becker et al, 2014). FIG. 4. Granite landscapes. (A) Huang Shan, Anhui Province, China and 
(B) Half Dome, Yosemite National Park, California (photos by Piotr Migon).   (ii) Limestone, especially karst mountain landscapes: Karst topography develops where the chemical dissolution of carbonate limestone or dolostone of chemically precipitated evaporite rocks is a significant process. Karst landscapes are generally dominated by subsurface drainage and the development of depressions. However, in mountainous relief in tropical and subtropical environments, karstification produces positive landforms (Fig. 5). FIG. 5. Tower karst landscape. Li Jiang at Yanshuo near Guilin in Guangxi Province, China (source: Chensiyuan, Wikimedia Commons, 2011). Two styles are observed: fenglin (tower) karst is characterized by isolated limestone towers with vertical flanks rising from alluvial plains where the water table is close to the surface. By contrast, fengcong (cockpit) karst consists of clustered hills, often described as egg-carton-shaped topography, that share many features such as shafts, sinkholes, and deep dolines (cockpits) (Sweeting, 1995). In fengcong landscapes, a well-developed vadose water zone exists above a deep water table. Where thick, pure, and hard carbonate strata are present, such as in China,   Vietnam, and in parts of Cuba, the fengcong and fenglin karst are found side-by-side. In dolomite and thin-bedded limestones, only a shallow, rounded, and gentle relief will develop, as is the case in Java, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico (Zhu et al., 2013). The development of fengcong-fenglin karst is strongly associated with tropical/subtropical climate. Precipitation of 2000–3000 mm is optimal. In combination with high temperatures, denser biota and thus greater sources of CO2 lead to high dissolution rates (Pfeffer 2010; Zhu et al., 2013). Whether fengcong and fenglin karst follow sequential or simultaneous development paths has been much debated, although the consensus now appears to be that the two forms can and do develop contemporaneously (Huang et al., 2014). The relationships between the two styles are seen as the key to unveiling their genesis and evolution; current research tries to do so by examining their morphometric characteristics (Huang et al., 2014; Liang and Xu, 2014). (iii) Sandstone landscapes: Basins in sandstone have been found to have smaller associated alluvial fans than those underlain by shales or mudstone (Bull, 1977). Indeed, fans derived from basins underlain by shales and mudstones are almost twice as large as those derived from sandstone basins of equal size in Death Valley, California. The stress field is the primary control of the shape evolution of sandstone landforms (Young et al., 2009; Bruthans et al., 2014). Thinly bedded sandstones of the Bungle Bungle Ranges and Echidna Chasm, Western Australia, demonstrate distinctive landscapes (Figs. 6 and 7) (Young et al., 2009).   FIG. 6. Thinly bedded sandstone in the Bungle Bungle Ranges, Picaninny Creek, Western Australia. Note the giant termitaria in the foreground (photo by Ian Douglas). FIG. 7. Thinly bedded sandstone in Echidna Chasm, Western Australia (photo by Ian Douglas). This is also well illustrated in stepped sandstone plateaus in central Europe (Kasprzak and Migon, 2015a). The Danxia Shan and Lang Shan mountains provide classic illustrations of ways in which the stress field in massively bedded sandstones expresses itself at local scale (Fig. 8A) and at landscape scale (Fig. 8B). A review of danxia (massively bedded sandstone)   geomorphology can be found in Hua et al. (2015). Approximately 40 groups of distinctive rock landforms are discussed. The occurrence of clay/silt/marl substrata under rather thin sandstone series is the crucial factor controlling block movements over distances of tens of meters across a low angle slope (5–20° and even less) (Washington and Wray, 2011). A second gravitational process associated with sandstone crag formation is detachment of sand grains caused by mechanical weathering and formation of detrital slope covers, leading to stripping of rock cliffs. The slope covers effectively developed during the pleniglacial, whereas the displacement of blocks was caused by deformation of the sandstone substratum under periglacial conditions (Urban, 2015). 
  (iv) General: Landforms and landscapes do not always reflect the distinctive lithologies that underly them even though lithology and structure have highly variable strength properties (Ouimet et al., 2008; Adams et al., 2009; Bull, 2009; Pike et al., 2010; Mueller and Pitlick, 2013; Mueller et al., 2016). The high mountains of Taiwan are reputed to be the most actively eroded on Earth. These mountains remain relatively lightly settled because of the erosion hazard presented by high precipitation and seismic risk. Average rates of denudation in Taiwan around 5 mm.a¯1 were reported early by Lin (1976). But highly fractured mudstones in Taiwan have recorded specific sediment yields of close to 100 mm.a¯1, of the same order as the most prolific glacierized basins (Dadson et al., 2003). Specific rock types, notably the contemporary volcanics of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, have generated the highest absolute values of natural erosion (up to 1000 mm.a¯1). Such rates are unlikely to continue much beyond a decade or two and are not thereforestrictly comparable with the longer term rates quoted (Church and Slaymaker, 2016) The key differences between megafans along the flanks of the Kohrud Mountains, central Iran (Fig. 9A), are the lithologies of the source areas (Arzani, 2012). Soh, Zefreh, and Feshark fans, along the west and south flanks of this mountain range have catchments that are underlain by dissimilar bedrock types with differing weathering intensities. The Soh fan (Fig. 9B), with limited sediment supply from Paleozoic-Mesozoic sandstones and dolomites, has resulted in a megafan with deeply incised channels; the Zefreh and Feshark fans, derived from highly weathered Eocene volcaniclastics, is strongly aggradational with little or no trenching (Fig. 9C). In a followup paper (Jones et al, 2014), greater emphasis is placed on structural control and the role of faulting in controlling the locations of the fans. In this example, structure controls location and lithology controls form. 
  FIG. 9. Megafans in the Kohrud Mountains, Iran (after Arzani, 2012; Jones et al, 2014). (A) Geological map of Kohrud Mountains; (B) Soh fan, and (C) Zefreh and Feshark fans. 
  Summit accordances: Summit accordances are present in most mountain systems. The question is what mechanism or mechanisms can account for their presence when millions of years of differential erosion have operated on the landscape. The European Alps were early identified as having a gipfelflur (summit accordance), which was explained as a remnant of a preexisting Pliocene erosion surface (Penck, 1919). Alpine crests and summit accordances in general have also been explained as the product of equally spaced gully/river dissection that would lead to an accordance of summit heights between them (Perron et al., 2009; Ferrier et al., 2013). Uniform lithology over a broad area would certainly favour equally spaced fluvial dissection, but such uniformity of lithology is unusual and is certainly not found, for example, in the European Alps. Previous studies have shown a regularity of valley spacing across mountain ranges worldwide, but the origin of this geomorphological feature is complex. A landscape evolution model has been developed to investigate the process of fluvial network organization and the evolution of regular ridge-and-valley patterns on simulated mountain ranges. In particular, catchment reorganization is characterized by the growth of smaller catchments between shrinking larger catchments on the side with lower erodibility and the growth of larger catchments on the side with higher erodibility.(Giachetta et al., 2014). Relatively new topographic analysis techniques using DEMs, recent application of low temperature thermochronometry, and the development of new landscape evolution models have provided the incentive for examining the complex relations among climate, tectonics, erosion, and topography in the world’s mountain ranges. An intriguing hypothesis called the glacial buzzsaw effect suggests that glacial erosion can rapidly denude topography raised above the ELA regardless of rock uplift rate or lithology and thereby limit how high mountains may rise. Glacial erosion is said to limit the height and to control the morphology of the Cascade Range in Washington State. Summit altitudes are set by a combination of higher rates of glacial and paraglacial erosion above the ELA and enhanced hillslope processes caused by the creation of steeper topography (Korup and Montgomery, 2008; Koppes and Montgomery, 2009). Two other possible hypotheses to explain links between   glaciation, erosion, and bedrock uplift are (i) the tectonic aneurysm model (river erosion and rock uplift giving dynamic interaction between topographic stress, thermal weakening, and deformation); and (ii) the Tsangpo knickpoints model (whereby glaciation influences river erosion and sedimentation by damming water courses that in turn controls the spatial distribution of erosion and the rate at which bedrock is brought to the surface) (Korup et al., 2007; Finnegan et al., 2008; Owen, 2008; Beltaos and Prowse, 2009; Whipple, 2009). 
1.1.5. Quaternary forms The net effect of repeated glaciation: The balance between glacial erosion and glacial protection remains an unanswered question. In Patagonia, we are told, glaciers have protected rather than eroded high mountain tops (Braun, 2010). A number of new approaches to these questions have been taken over the past decade. The Uummannaq region of Greenland, for example, is a mosaic of glacial landsystems. The region is dominated by selective linear erosion that has spatially and altitudinally partitioned the landscape. Low altitude areas are dominated by glacial scour, and higher elevations are dominated by plateaus or mountain valley and cirque glaciers. Fjord development has been enhanced by a downstream change in geology to less resistant lithologies, increasing erosional efficiency and allowing a single glacial channel to develop, encouraging glacier convergence and the initiation of ice streaming. Uplift has removed surfaces from the impact of widespread warm-based glaciation, leaving them as relict land surfaces. The result of this is a regional altitude-dependent continuum of glacial modification, with extreme differences in erosion between high and low elevation surfaces (Lane et al., 2016). The traditional assumption that trimlines separating glacially abraded lower slopes from blockfield-covered summits on Irish mountains represent the upper limit of the last ice sheet during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) has been challenged by Ballantyne and Stone (2015). Cosmogenic 10Be exposure ages obtained for samples from glacially deposited perched boulders   imply preservation of the blockfield under cold-based ice during the LGM and support the view that trimlines throughout the British Isles represent former englacial thermal regime boundaries between a lower zone of warm-based sliding ice and an upper zone of cold-based ice (Ballantyne and Stone, 2015). 
Another interesting approach to testing the importance of ice sheet protection versus ice sheet erosion is to map large numbers of glacial lineaments from remotely sensed data in order to develop a palaeoglacial reconstruction. A semiautomated algorithm, CLustre, for lineament clustering has been tested on synthetic data sets that simulate parallel and orthogonal cross-cutting lineaments, encompassing 1500 case studies for Dubawnt Lake and Victoria Island, Nunavut, Canada. The automated, repeatable assignment of lineaments to flow sets is important as qualitative visual interpretation may introduce bias, potentially weakening the testability of palaeoglacial reconstructions (Smith et al., 2016). 
Cirque landscapes: Cirque landscapes are widespread in formerly glaciated and glacierized mountains (Figs. 10A and 10B). 
The best discussions of allometry, scaling, and scale-specificity of cirques are found in Evans (2006, 2010) and Evans and Cox (2016). Evans (2010) has noted that the morphology of cirques is distinctive in one respect, namely they vary in size by only one order of magnitude and can therefore be called scale specific. Another question concerns allometry. Static allometry of glacial cirques of several European and British Columbian areas has been confirmed by Evans (2009). Expectations that morphometry can be used to clarify the main drivers of cirque formation continue. Since 2010 at least eight regional data sets were compiled: High Tatras (Køížek and Mida, 2013), Greece (Bathrellos et al., 2014), Carpathians,Romania (Mîndrescu and Evans, 2014), northwest Iceland (Principato and Lee, 2014), Zardkuh Mountains, Iran (Seif and Ebrahimi, 2014), eastern Pyrenees, France (Delmas et al., 2014), Cantabrian Mountains, Spain (Gomez-Villar et al., 2015), and Kamchatka Peninsula (Barr and Spagnolo, 2015). Several unanswered questions remain (Evans and Cox, 2016). Cirques have been used as indicators of long-term average palaeoclimate conditions on the assumption that they are associated with small glaciers. Regional studies explore the effects of altitude, aspect, and lithology. Comparative global studies have the potential to determine the effects of different climates, tectonic provinces, and ice sheets at glacial maxima. Numerous problems of standardization of data and quality of data as well as subjective differences between authors whose published data are rarely directly comparable have been identified. Glacial troughs and fjords: ‘The most spectacular manifestations of glacial erosion are troughs and fjords carved by ice flow through major rock channels’ (Benn and Evans, 2010, p. 305). Antarctica and Greenland have the largest examples (e.g. Tinto et al., 2015) but Norway is best known for its intricate and spectacular fjord system (e.g. Duffield et al., 2017; Fig. 11). 
  FIG. 11. Hardangerfjord, Norway, is a classic glacial trough and the second longest fjord in Norway, 179 km long and 860 m deep (photo by Christine Embleton-Hamann). 
Discussion of the ability of glacial/fluvial erosion to produce fjords is found in Kessler et al., (2008). In contrast with river valleys, troughs and fjords commonly have overdeepenings that tend to coincide with sites of formerly high ice discharge or narrowings in the valley. The resultant stepped long profile includes basins and intervening transverse rock bars (riegels). Differential deepening occurs as a function of lithology and structure, variable glacier discharge and preexisting relief but additional over-deepening takes place at the points where former tributary glaciers joined the main trunk ice (Anderson et al., 2006). For an instructive review of the state of glacial geomorphology refer to Bingham et al., 2010 and Giardino and Harbor, 2013. The role of geologic structure and pre-existing grabens or regional faulting must also be seriously considered, as for example in Chile (Glasser and Ghiglione, 2009). Benn and Evans (2010) propose that there exists a continuum of landforms ranging from tectonically controlled grabens, through glacially modified river and fault systems to entirely glacially eroded troughs and fjords. Glacivolcanic mountain landscapes: Glacivolcanic mountains are evident at all spatial scales and have distinctive extrusive forms. One of the most distinctive mountain landscapes is that   associated with volcano-ice interaction. In some cases, where volcanism has erupted through the Pleistocene ice cover and glaciers have been rerouted around the volcano, such as in the case of Hoodoo Mountain in the Boundary Ranges of the Coast Mountains, northwestern British Columbia, the history of the landscape is stunningly exposed (Fig. 12). Hoodoo Mountain is broad enough to have maintained an ice cap even as the Cordilleran Ice Sheet was flowing around it. The Hoodoo and Twin glaciers that presently flow around the volcano have had a complex glacier hydrology history. River in northwestern British Columbia. The volcano formed under glacial ice within the Cordilleran Ice Sheet during the Quaternary. Photo by Ben Edwards (1994); (B) Aerial photograph of Hoodoo Mountain volcano, the Hoodoo and Twin Valley glaciers and Lake Hoodoo. At present the summit is covered by a 3-4 km diameter ice cap above 1750 masl. Source: Province of British Columbia (BC82022:206). Neotectonic uplift: The Peloponnese Mountains, between the European and African plates, were affected by both large-amplitude climatic swings and neotectonic uplift/subsidence of individual blocks. Despite active neotectonics, the Peloponnese retains major landforms that have persisted through 1–3 My of slow erosion, caused by partial exhumation, karstification, and remoteness from drainage lines. The impact of climate changes is most obvious at the lowest and highest elevations (<500 and >2000 m). At the highest elevations, glaciation has during the last few glacial cycles left a diagnostic imprint. At intermediate elevations, the landscape can be described as a continuously evolving fluvial landscape in which climate changes have left few or no diagnostic landforms (Kleman et al, 2016). 
1.1.6. Holocene forms
Glacial forms: The St. Elias Mountains that straddle the British Columbia-Yukon-Alaska border hold the world’s most extensive ice fields outside the polar regions (Fig. 13) (Turner et al., 2016). The Tikki (Fig. 13A) and the Ferris glaciers (Fig. 13B) are located in the Boundary Ranges of British Columbia and display many of the characteristic glacial forms that exist in the landscape today. 
  
The advance and retreat of glaciers from the Older Dryas through the Younger Dryas to the numerous Neoglacial advances have been documented from many mountain regions. The North Patagonia Icefield (NPI) in South America for example contains evidence of Older and Younger Dryas glacier advances and four Neoglacial advances, with retreat during the intervening periods (Nimick et al., 2016). During the shrinking of the NPI, several glacial-lake outburst floods (GLOFs) have occurred and paraglacial alluvial cone development has been extensive (Isla et al., 2015). In southern Patagonia, the time scale dependence of glacial erosion has been discussed (Fernandez et al., 2011). In Scandinavia Latest Pleistocene and Holocene glacier retreats and advances in Scandinavia have been documented (Nesje, 2009), in the central Alps and in the Iberian Peninsula early Holocene chronology has been extended (González-Trueba, 2008; Moran et al., 2016) and Holocene landforms in the UK have been documented as belonging to the Little 
  Ice Age (Harrison et al., 2014). Early Holocene (8.2 ka) mountain glaciers on Baffin Island, Nunavut, were apparently larger than their Younger Dryas predecessors (Young et al., 2012). 
Periglacial forms: The periglacial morphogenetic milieu is that where the influence of freezethaw oscillations is dominant and permafrost is ubiquitous. Permafrost is defined on the basis of ground temperature: it is soil and/or rock that remains at or below 0°C for at least two consecutive years. More than 20% of the terrestrial surface is underlain by permafrost. Russia possesses the largest extent of permafrost, Canada is second, and the People’s Republic of China ranks third. French (2007) drew attention to the contrasting but sometimes overlapping (i) latitudinal, or polar, permafrost, (ii) alpine, or mountain, permafrost, and (iii) plateau or montane permafrost. The main interest in this review concerns alpine permafrost (Giardino and Harbor, 2013). Zonation of alpine permafrost is similar to that of polar permafrost: a zone of continuous permafrost occurs below the snow line and is replaced by a zone of discontinuous permafrost at lower elevations and, in turn, is replaced by a zone of sporadic permafrost. Periglacial rock glaciers come in two major types: talus-derived rock glaciers and debris-derived rock glaciers. Talus-derived rock glaciers are found below talus slopes, and debris-derived rock glaciers are extensions of glaciers. The common characteristic is that they are ice-cemented debris deformed by creep (French, 2007; Kellerer-Pirklbauer and Rieckh, 2016). The main purposes of studying rock glaciers are (i) to infer climatic and altitudinal limits of present and past permafrost and (ii) to better understand ice-cemented debris deformation by creep. Hydraulic (open) system pingos are conical hills or frost mounds that occur where intrapermafrost or subpermafrost groundwater, under artesian pressure, moves toward the surface and freezes. The largest examples occur in Yakutia (up to 50 m high) but are also found in Alaska, Yukon, Tibet, Svalbard and east Greenland (Worsley and Gurney, 1996). Patterned ground (in the form of stripes, sorted and nonsorted) form within the active layer on sloping terrain. Bare areas separated by parallel lines of vegetation-covered ground are nonsorted stripes; sorted stripes are recognized by alternating coarser and finer material oriented parallel to the gradient. Perhaps the most common forms developed in alpine permafrost 
  are thaw slumps (Kokelj et al., 2017). Within the time frame of this review, permafrost in Canada and in the central Andes has been reviewed by Zhang et al. (2008) and by Alonso and Liaudat (2010) respectively. Recent overviews of periglaciation in central Asia (Lemkuhl, 2016) and the west central Andes (Carretier et al., 2015) are valuable syntheses. Berthling and Etzelmüller (2011) and Blikra and Christiansen (2014) developed a new model of cryoconditioning as a key element in paraglaciation in Scandinavia. Mercier (2009) has coined the term paraperiglacial to cover Holocene mountain landforms conditioned by periglaciation. Although the term is cumbersome, the paper draws attention to the importance of those areas that remained unglaciated during the Quaternary Period. 
Paraglacial forms: The term paraglacial describes ‘non-glacial processes conditioned by glaciation’ and was first discussed in the context of the Holocene alluvial fans of the Interior Cordillera of British Columbia (Church and Ryder, 1972). However, the interpretation of the term remains controversial (Ballantyne, 2002; Knight and Harrison, 2014). Paraglacial alluvial fans are present in all glacierized and glaciated mountain regions and are most commonly expressed at scales on the order of 10 ky and 100 km2 (Church and Slaymaker, 1989). Paraglacial is also a descriptor of landforms and landscapes that are in transition between glacial and nonglacial conditions (Kokelj et al, 2017). This transitional landscape lasts until the glacially conditioned sediment stores are either removed or attain stability (Slaymaker, 2009). The Interior Cordillera was highly dissected during the early Holocene such that high relief, steep slopes have developed well expressed paraglacial alluvial fans (Fig. 14A) and that massive paraglacial alluvial fill (Fig. 14B) formed during more than one paraglacial episode. 
  
Deltaic regions on the order of 10,000 km2 can be viewed as paraglacial landsystems, such as, for example, the Fraser River delta in British Columbia (Kovanen and Slaymaker, 2015, 2017). In British Columbia, two new models of paraglacial activity have been presented by (i) Friele and Clague (2009) associated with Holocene volcanism and (ii) by Perkins and Brennand (2015) for glacier retreat in the Interior Plateau. 
Cossart et al. (2013) have provided an overview of landslide-influenced paraglacial landforms in Europe; Feuillet (2014) followed the overview with a detailed case study from Iceland. Paraglacial mass movement forms in the Austrian Alps have been documented by Kellerer-Pirklbauer et al. (2010) and Embleton-Hamann and Slaymaker (2012). Extensive paraglacial gully development on lateral moraines in the headwater of the Ijuez River, central southern Pyrenees is interpreted as another manifestation of paraglaciation (Jäger and Winkler, 2012). Work by Iturrizaga (2006, 2008, 2011) in the Karakorams developed the idea of transglacial landforms in which moraine material is the main source of post-glacial mass movements. This complements the traditional perspective on paraglaciation. 
In southern Siberia in the republics of Tuva and Altai, work on outburst floods from huge icedammed lakes has excited international interest (Rudoy and Baker, 1993; Herget, 2005; Agatova et al., 2015). Final cataclysmic draining of these Altai ice-dammed lakes took place about 15.8 ka BP (Reuther et al., 2006). Giant dunes and GLOF-related terraces are paraglacial forms (Fig. 15). 
  
1.1.7. The case for distinctiveness of mountain morphology The use of elevation zones as surrogates for hydroclimate in high mountains where monitored data are scarce is identified as distinctive in section 1.1.3; the uniquely well expressed lithological and structural controls on Tertiary landforms are most clearly demonstrated in high relief and high elevation environments, as illustrated in section 1.1.4; unique Quaternary glacial erosional and 
  depositional forms associated with mountain environments are documented in section 1.1.5; and unique Holocene glacial, periglacial and paraglacial forms in mountains are listed in section 1.1.6. These unique characteristics of mountain morphology are, in themselves, adequate justification for the recognition of mountain geomorphology as a distinct sub-discipline. 
2. Mountain processes
2.1 Conceptual framework for mountain processes
The hierarchical model (Fig. 1) is too static to characterize dynamic mountain geomorphic processes; and a different conceptual framework, which emphasizes dynamism, is therefore introduced (Fig. 16). Four distinct modes of theory construction that differ as a function of scale have been proposed (Church, 1996). At small space and time scales, descriptions are commonly statistical and processes are considered to be stochastic. At the scale of classical mechanics, deterministic theories from hydraulics of water movement in river channels are favoured. At still larger scales, system evolution reveals contingent effects (caused by historically unique events) that cannot be predicted. Nonlinear dynamic models, expressing chaotic behaviour, are appropriate and increasingly commonly adopted in dealing with sediment fluxes. At the largest scales of space and time, landscape evolution is entirely contingent and a narrative mode of explanation is most common (Church, 1996; Fig. 16). 
  
Figure 16, which derives primarily from a consideration of the virtual velocities of water and coarse sediment moving through fluvial systems, illustrates the relationship of spatiotemporal scale to modes of theory construction. Church suggested that channel switching in braided channels may not be derivable at all from characterization of the microscale sediment transport events. In this sense channel switching is emergent behaviour and is characteristic of complexity and self-organization of systems. Dunne et al. (2010) discussed complexity in river channel and floodplain organization and in river bank mass failures, and iceberg-jammed proglacial floods have been described as examples of self-organized criticality (Croke et al., 2014; Roussel et al., 2016). The contribution of self-organized change to understanding of global environmental change was evaluated by Elverfeldt et al. (2016). Systems subject to chaotic behaviour present one of the clearest examples of the scale-bound nature of theories (Church, 1996; Phillips, 2016). The universality of the distribution of fluid shear velocity associated with floods is evidence of selforganization of near-critical channels. Such channels are responsible for the blunting of the impact of extreme rainfall events on landscape evolution (Phillips and Jerolmack, 2016). 
2.2. Sediment yield and denudation
Sediment yield equations should always factor in the role of tectonic activity wherever possible (Hovius, 1998; Fig. 17). Scaled for drainage basin area, sediment yields increase through almost five orders of magnitude from tectonic cratons to contractional mountains. He noted that tectonically active mountain belts not only provide relief to drive erosion processes but also combine high regolith loss with rapid uplift of new bedrock into the weathering zone to continually refresh the erosion processes and maintain high sediment yield (Spencer et al., 2009; Korup et al., 2014). 

Historically, the highest mountains were assumed to be the sites of greatest geomorphic work (Habersack et al., 2017). An empirical model from Summerfield and Hulton (1994) confirmed that: 
From this model, annual erosion for drainage basins >500,000 km2 increases by 0.15% for every meter increase in maximum elevation. The traditional emphasis in high mountain geomorphology (Troll, 1973; Holtmeier, 2015) was that the high mountain zone was unique, in part because of its high energy environment. Unfortunately for this tradition, new evidence shows that work in the landscape is often maximized in moderate relief mountains (Slaymaker, 2013), in some cases even in low relief regions (Kirchner and Ferrier, 2013; Willenbring et al., 2013). Selfevident discontinuities in sediment production, transport, and deposition occur at every spatial scale (Deline, 2009; Fort et al., 2009; Hewitt, 2009; Hewitt et al., 2011); and extreme landslides, for example, are highly localized in the landscape (Plafker and Ericksen, 1978; Pearce and Watson, 1986; Korup and Tweed, 2007; Korup et al., 2007; Schwanghart et al., 2016). 
Faster sediment production rates and higher chemical weathering rates than previously recorded are key insights of the past decade (Pepin and Lundquist, 2008; Anderson and Anderson, 2010; Heimsath, 2014). Evidence of intense localized exposed mountain structures, driven by coupling between erosion and active tectonic rock uplift, has been found in the St. Elias Mountains. (Enkelmann et al., 2009). The sediment flux cycle is thought to regulate global climate over the million-year time scale while also responding to climate forcing itself (Larsen et al., 2014). 
Even the comparative rates of glacial vs. fluvial rates of erosion remain controversial in the literature. Evidence from the Swiss Alps suggests that fluvial erosion wins over longer time periods: for example, gorges are progressively incised below the elevations of glacial trough valleys through multiple glaciations (Strobl et al., 2010; Dixon, 2011; Montgomery and Korup, 2011). However, the fact that mountain erosion rates have increased since 6 My, and especially since 2 My, implicates glacial rather than fluvial processes (Herman et al., 2013). 
  2.3. Sediment cascades, critical zones, and coupling
2.3.1. Sediment cascades
The study of sediment cascades from source to sink and the use of sediment routing models have become central themes in mountain process geomorphology over the past three decades (Dietrich et al., 1982; Allen, 2008; Beylich et al., 2013; Castelltort et al., 2015). Sediment budget studies have proliferated, but the comparative advantage of using such a model is frequently ignored by the exclusion of one or more components of the sediment-solutes-nutrients continuum (Hartmann et al., 2004; Church et al., 2006; Morche et al., 2017). Sediment budgets incorporating sediment, dissolved solids, and nutrient fluxes are scarce, but Filippelli et al. (2006, 2010) provided instructive examples. Magnitude-frequency considerations in sediment budgets for arctic and subarctic catchments are also incorporated in Beylich and Kneisel (2009) and Beylich et al. (2013). Chemical components of sediment budgets operate on different time scales from the clastics as illustrated in Derry (2009). Riverine organic matter affected by glacier coverage is discussed by Hood and Scott (2008). One way of avoiding the problem of partial sediment budgets is to choose geomorphic locations in which clastic sediments dominate over all other mass fluxes. Examples such as sediment fluxes on alluvial fans in the Tien Shan Mountains, China (Guerit et al., 2016); sediment flux on a reach-by-reach assessment used to establish big picture sediment flux (Hassan et al., 2010, 2011; Miao, 2010); and upland gravel-bed rivers (Raven et al., 2010). Schiefer et al. (2010) provided a rare example of total sediment flux accounting. Holocene and contemporary sediment budgets for a 324-km2 cordilleran catchment have been estimated with the aid of seismic records, dated cores, and sections in lake and alluvial fill sediments at Chilliwack Lake in the North Cascade Mountains, British Columbia (Tunnicliffe et al., 2012a, 2012b). 
2.3.2. Critical zones   North American geomorphologists have developed the concept of a critical zone that refers to the heterogeneous, near-surface environment in which complex interactions involving rock, soil, water, air, living organisms, and humans regulate the natural habitat and determine availability of life-sustaining resources. The top of the canopy layer to the bottom of the aquifer delimits the critical zone (Giardino and Houser, 2015). Systematic characterization of the micro-and macroclimate of the climate, morphology. and geochemistry of the critical zone is scaled up to terrestrial landscape ecology and various natural and anthropogenically modified regions. Critical Zone Observatories were initiated at Boulder Creek (2007) in the Colorado Front Range and have been extended to a wide variety of mountain and nonmountain environments. Water is the thread that holds the concept of critical zone together, and the link with geochemistry is a major contribution in the light of (i) the fact that geochemical surface lowering processes are distributed throughout the mountains (Waller et al., 2012; Slaymaker et al., 2017); (ii) the fact that chemical weathering as a mechanism for climatic control of bedrock river incision has been much neglected (Church et al., 2006; Murphy et al., 2016); and (iii) the widespread ignoring of chemical weathering studies in the geomorphic literature (Hall and Thorn, 2011). One caveat should however be raised in relation to the emphasis on connectedness of preferred water pathways by noting that sediment flux and anthropogenic activities are intermittent processes that are often better described as decoupled. 
2.3.3. Coupling
Coupling is the extent to which surface and subsurface channels and slopes are physically connected (Schumm, 1977; Harvey, 2002; Heckmann and Schwanghart, 2013). More specifically, coupling considers the variety of ways in which water, sediment, and dissolved solids move through a system or are obstructed from moving between source areas and the river system. Continuous or semicontinuous flow of water, sediment, and dissolved solids from slopes to channels characterizes hillslopes and channels that are tightly coupled. Water and dissolved solids commonly follow preferred pathways from headwaters to the outlet of a river basin, whereas clastic sediments accumulate at preferred locations in the basin, such as breaks of slope or lake basins. Identification of preferred pathways is a nontrivial exercise (Embleton-Hamann and Slaymaker, 2006; Burt and Allison, 2010). The rate at which morphological changes propagate through the system (or virtual velocity) depends directly on the degree of coupling (Wu, 2012). Tight coupling implies relatively rapid change; decoupling implies slow change. 
A coupling model is consistent with the sediment cascade model by which the rate and nature of movement of sediments from source to sink and the associated rates of denudation of the mountain landscape can be estimated by determining all components of a sediment budget. Degrees of coupling are recognized in the literature as, for example, discontinuities in mountain streams (Lu and Richards, 2008; Phillips, 2009). Geomorphic coupling between hillslopes and channels has been documented in the Swiss Alps (Savi et al., 2013), and coupling of landslides and rivers has been identified in the Carpathian and Sudete mountains (Malgorzata et al., 2015). 
2.3.4. Decoupling
Recent empirical data suggest that decoupling is more common than coupling even in mountains. For example, the various morphological elements in the Lillooet-Harrison River basin (7870 km2) in the Pacific Ranges of the Coast Mountains of British Columbia, have been mapped according to the extent of their coupling to the mainstream river (Slaymaker et al., 2017). 
. Ridge tops and accordant summits with low local relief are coupled to the valley primarily through water and dissolved solids moving along subsurface pathways. Clastic sediments are commonly decoupled on ridge tops. 
. Small glaciers are decoupled from the valley by the presence of numerous proglacial lakes. 
. Larger glaciers are directly coupled to Lillooet River. 
. Hillslopes subject to infrequent large mass movements are episodically coupled. 
  . Debris avalanches and debris flow channels directly couple hillslopes with valley bottom 
(Fig. 18). . Mid-valley and lower valley are also episodically coupled with the adjacent river valley. . The outlet of the Lillooet-Harrison system is formed by a large lake (Harrison Lake) and the Harrison River, a tributary to Fraser River. This lower end of the system is completely decoupled from the upper system with respect to clastic sediments, but dissolved solids and water are fully coupled with the upper system. FIG. 18. The 2010 Capricorn debris avalanche and debris flow in the Mount Meager Volcanic Complex, upper Lillooet Valley, Pacific Ranges of the Coast Mountains, British Columbia (oblique photograph taken on 29 August, 2010 by John Clague; Springer International). 
  A second, quite different example of a partially decoupled mountain system is provided by Jefferson et al. (2010), working on the western slopes of the Cascade Range in Oregon, USA. They partitioned hydrologic flow paths between surface and subsurface flow. Young basalt terrains are highly permeable, allowing one to examine time scales and processes of geomorphic evolution via surface and subsurface flow. Thick sequences of lava flows ranging from Holocene to Oligocene in age, receive abundant precipitation of between 2000 and 3500 mm/y. On Holocene and late Pleistocene lava landscapes, groundwater systems transmit most of the recharge to large springs with very steady hydrographs. In watersheds >1 million years old, springs are absent; and well-developed drainage networks fed by shallow subsurface stormflow produce flashy hydrographs. Drainage density slowly increases with time in this basalt landscape, requiring a million years to double in density. Progressive hillslope steepening and fluvial incision also occur on this time scale. Springs and groundwater-fed streams transport little sediment and hence are largely ineffective in incising river valleys, so fluvial landscape dissection appears to occur only after springs are replaced by shallow subsurface stormflow as the dominant streamflow generation mechanism. They proposed that landscape evolution in basalt terrains is constrained by the coupling and decoupling of surface and subsurface flow (Jefferson et al., 2010). 
2.4. Connectivity and disconnectivity
A recent development in understanding of mountain geomorphology is the idea of disconnectivity, a concept that has been explored by Fryirs et al. (2007), Fryirs and Brierley (2009, 2013), and Fryirs (2013). Disconnectivity formed the central focus of the 2016 Binghamton Symposium (Wohl and Beckman, 2014). Buffers, barriers, and blankets are the terms given by Fryirs to the storage areas and disconnectivities in the system. The idea of connectivity clearly grows out of the idea of coupling, but it gives greater emphasis to the fact that most geomorphic systems, even mountain systems, are characterized more by decoupling than by coupling. The reason, selfevidently, is the lack of connectivity between the various components of the sediment cascade (Tunnicliffe and Church, 2011). Use of the concept of process domains is popular in North America to examine the connection between morphology and process. Examples of process domain influence on river long profiles and channel reach morphology (Brardinoni and Hassan, 
2007) and the organization of process domains as part of the legacy of glaciation in Puget Sound (Collins and Montgomery, 2011) demonstrate the flexibility of the approach. Sediment yield in fluvially dominated mountains is systematically scaled in the landscape; that is to say a welldefined relationship between drainage basin area and specific sediment yield exists. By contrast, in glaciated mountains, tectonically active mountains, and mountains heavily perturbed by human activity, the well-defined relationship between basin area and specific sediment yield ceases to hold because of different perturbations of sediment storage areas that produces multiple scaling (Church and Slaymaker, 2016). The paraglacial decay curve (Fig. 19) shows how paraglacial systems of differing scale evolve through time and over space. Specific sediment yield is used as a surrogate for overall system change, and drainage basins of different size are seen to respond quite differently over time. FIG. 19. Temporal pattern of paraglacial sediment yield in formerly glaciated upland and valley sites in coastal British Columbia and Alaska. Values plotted are for basins on the 
  order of 100, 1000, and 10,000 km2 based on the contemporary spatial pattern of specific sediment yield (Church and Slaymaker, 1989). 
The smallest basins respond most rapidly to the retreat of an icesheet, whereas the largest basins, containing the largest numbers of disconnected elements respond most slowly. Each process system —whether glacial, glacial lake outburst flood, fluvial, or mass movement— has its own internal disconnectivity issues as follows. 
2.4.1. Mountain rivers
The Mt. Alexandra-Alexandra Glacier-Alexandra River connectivity is exceptionally unbroken (Fig. 20). More commonly, the connectivity between glacial sediment production and downstream sediment fluxes is significantly reduced by the development of proglacial lakes. 
  
Proglacial lakes causing disconnectivity: Suspended and solute sediment fluxes from the proglacial zone of the retreating Obersulzbachkees Glacier, Hohe Tauern, Austria, are strongly controlled by the presence of proglacial lakes (Geilhausen et al., 2013). Three glacier basins in Norway have been shown to have totally different sediment budgets because overdeepened bedrock basins define the locations of proglacial lakes. Despite an expected increase in sediment yield from the glacier, little sediment will pass these lakes, and downstream sediment delivery is reduced markedly (Bogen et al., 2015). 
Sandurs causing disconnectivity: The Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) and the proglacial landscape draining into the fjord at Kangerlussuaq experienced at least three jökulhlaups over a 5year period (Hasholt et al., 2013). Thus the periodic nature of jokulhlaups produced disconnectivity over time, and sandurs provided storage areas and increased the disconnectivity in space. Disconnectivity created by sediment storage in sandurs was documented at Kviarjokull, Iceland (Bennett and Evans, 2012). Jokulhlaups figure prominently in proglacial landscape change at Sólheimajökull in southern Iceland from 1960 to 2010. Changes in glacial meltwater runoff regimes, glacier terminus position, sediment supply, and episodic events such as jökulhlaups are implicated (Staines et al., 2015). 
GLOFS as examples of disconnectivities over time: Agatova et al. (2015), working in SW Tuva, and Heckmann et al. (2016) have provided a valuable overview of the state of understanding of GLOFS. Numerical modelling has progressed (McKillop and Clague, 2007; Westoby et al., 2014); a GLOF vulnerability rating map has been developed (Bajracharya et al., 2007), and GLOF incidence figures prominently in fluvial adjustment to glacier retreat in Iceland (Marren and Toomath, 2013). 
  Disconnectivity caused by multiple independent sediment source areas: Kasprzak and Migon (2015b) commented on fluvial erosion and mass movement in the Sudetes Mountains in Poland in terms of the speed of response of fluvial systems. In providing an overview of morphodynamics of steep mountain channels (Brardinoni et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2015), the complex response of coarse and fine sediment plus large organic debris in steep mountain channels is illustrated from research in Canada, Austria, and Italy. In the tectonically active Chugach Mountains in Alaska, the rates of hillslope erosion are an order of magnitude below the rate of glacial sediment export because landslide rates are intermittent and localized and glacifluvial sediment flux is continuous over time (Uhlmann et al., 2013). 
Log and debris jams and storage: In forested mountain basins in the Pacific Northwest, USA, log and debris dams play an important role in delaying flood surges and thus creating at least temporary disconnectivity (Nakamura et al., 2000; Fig. 21). Note sites A, B, C, and D in Fig. 21 where dams reduce and/or delay the highest flood peaks. 
  
2.4.2. Mass movement
Mass movement processes are all intermittent, with the possible exception of soil and rock creep. Therefore it is not surprising that disconnectivity within mountain regions is the norm. The intermittency of mass movement processes has generated the need to improvise specific new techniques of field analysis, as illustrated below. In the case of rock glaciers, geodetic measurements of rock glacier movements (Hartl et al., 2016) and rates of slope movement using DInSAR (Barboux et al., 2014) have provided new insights into rock glacier scale effects (Scapozza et al., 2014; Falaschi et al., 2016). A multitemporal record of erosion (1963–2005) of a 
  rock slope in the Swiss Alps identified slope failures that affect 70% of the study slope and produced an inventory of ~2500 failures ranging over 6 orders of magnitude in volume. Rockslides and rockfalls of high magnitude and relatively low frequency make up 99% of the total failure volume from highly fractured and weathered quartzites and are thus responsible for the intermittency of sediment yield (Bennett et al., 2012;). Innovative work in Yosemite National Park, California, has demonstrated that cyclic temperature changes incrementally damage hard rock until failure is inevitable (Gischig, 2016) thereby reinforcing the intermittency of sediment yield. 
Disconnectivity and contingency are phenomena that complicate the interpretation of geomorphic processes. They imply that history (or contingency) is at the core of understanding landscape evolution and make explicit the well-known fact that sediment transport of all kinds is an intermittent process. Geomorphologists’ understanding of the implications of complexity and self-organization is at an early stage of development in spite of pioneering contributions by Culling in the 1980s (e.g. Culling, 1987). Chaotic behaviour incorporates an unpredictable sort of deterministic process that is helpful within a limited range of spatiotemporal scales (Fig. 16). 
Work in the Karakoram Himalayan region of Pakistan has produced some of the finest examples of disturbance regimes in which massive mass movements have generated disconnectivity over periods from centuries to millennia (Hewitt, 2009, 2014; Hewitt et al., 2011). Catastrophic rock failures of exceptional frequency are also discussed (Hewitt et al., 2008; Schwanghart et al., 2016). A stunning example of disconnectivity is provided by Fort et al. (2010) from the Nepal Himalaya (Fig. 22). In this case, the distinctive morphology is a legacy of past catastrophic events, consisting of partial obstructions by landslide barriers that ‘create a chronically fragmented drainage system’ (Hewitt, 2006). The Dhumpu-Kalopani rock avalanche that dammed the upper Kali Gandaki valley some 21,000 years ago is still influencing the thalweg and the habit of the river channel (Zech et al., 2009; Fort and Cossart, 2013; Fort et al., 2014). 
  
2.5. The case for distinctiveness of mountain processes
A new recognition of the importance of disconnectivity in mountain geomorphology leads to a consideration of the intermittency of sediment transport processes even in the highest and steepest mountains. Such consideration leads to downplaying the distinctiveness of mountain geomorphic processes and emphasizing the importance of the disconnectivity/connectivity ratio that links mountain and lowland fluxes and regulates extreme sediment flux events in lowlands as much as in the mountains. At large basin scale, the potential energy condition in mountains is 
  uniquely high, and the literature leans heavily on the importance of earthquake-induced rock avalanches at specific sites (e.g. Plafker and Ericksen, 1978; Pearce and Watson, 1986; Schwanghart et al., 2016). Some of the most spectacular geomorphic hazards, requiring sophisticated human response, are found at those sites. But calculations of energy expenditure, sediment flux, and denudation rates through mountain systems suggest that physical processes in mountains do not differ in kind from those that operate in lowlands. Hence the skepticism of some process geomorphologists with respect to the distinctiveness of mountain geomorphology (see section 1) is understandable. 
3. Mountain geomorphology in the Anthropocene epoch
3.1. Conceptual framework for mountain geomorphology in the Anthropocene
The Anthropocene epoch (Goudie and Viles, 2016) has been defined as the epoch in which humans have become the most important driver of environmental change. Figures 1 and 16, which are appropriate for analyzing morphological change and geomorphic process in mountains respectively, are simply inadequate to deal with the reflexive relationship between mountains and society. Concepts and methods applicable to coupled natural-human and socioecological systems are essential to deal with such problems (Holling, 2001; Gunderson and Holling, 2002; Slaymaker, 2010a). 
  FIG. 23. The panarchy framework showing the adaptive cycle and the spatiotemporal domain of panarchy (after Gunderson and Holling, 2002). 
The panarchy framework is a conceptual framework that retains the hierarchical nature of the real world by identifying adaptive cycles at a variety of scales. These adaptive cycles exist at a range of spatial scales and respond to disturbances: socioeconomic and ecological (Holling, 2001). At the heart of the metaphor is the concept of resilience or ease of adaptation of the system to changing circumstances. System resilience is itself a concept borrowed from ecology and is a function of size and connectedness (see Holling, 2001; Slaymaker and Embleton-Hamann, 2009). For adaptive cycles the geomorphologist can also read self-regulating systems (Phillips, 2016), and these self-regulating systems also depend on size, connectedness, and resilience. Slaymaker (2010a) has discussed mountain geomorphic hazards as a function of system size, connectedness, and resilience/vulnerability. The term resilience permits the consideration of coupled naturalhuman and socioecological systems under the same conceptual framework. The panarchy 
  framework (Fig. 23) is itself cyclic and envisages a resource exploitation phase, a conservation phase, a release phase, and a reorganization phase. The disturbance represented by the reflexive relation between environment and human activities is the driver of adaptive cycles. The panarchy framework is a self-organizing metaphor that is consistent with geomorphic concepts such as complex response, threshold exceedance, landscape sensitivity, and barriers to change (Schumm, 1977; Brunsden, 1993) but adds the essential role of society as the most influential transformer and responder to geomorphological constraints. 
3.2. The human footprint
Human activity has three broad impacts on mountains: (i) reduction of stability by serious soil and vegetation disturbance; (ii) fluvial erosion and landslide incidence responding to anthropogenically caused climate change; and (iii) inducement of stability by sensitive environmental engineering (Körner and Ohsawa, 2005; Marston, 2008; Munro et al., 2009; Kondolf and Piégay, 2011; Huggel et al., 2012). A reflexive relation exists between human activity (population density and land use) and geomorphic processes in mountains (Goudie and Viles, 2016). Unfortunately this interactive relation has been inadequately explored (Haeberli et al., 2014). The most substantial gaps in knowledge are in the human dimensions; little attention has been paid to how people perceive, feel, or value cryospheric change or how distinct social groups living near glaciers and permafrost are affected by glaciers, snow, and permafrost (Huggel et al, 2015). Human influence on mountain systems has now become so pervasive that global comparisons of mountain geomorphology must incorporate estimates of human impact in order to be meaningful. Urbanization, forest roads, highways, railways, electricity power, and communications networks alter water and sediment pathways. All these implications are considered in Fig. 24 under the heading the human footprint on Earth. 
  
The deliberate change in vegetation cover by society is one of the most important drivers of change (Montgomery, 2007). Deforestation, for example, sets in motion a series of geomorphic processes such as surface erosion of slopes, landslides, and debris flows that lead inexorably to environmental degradation (Clague and Stead, 2012). Another major perturber of the environment is wildfire, natural and human-caused (Martin, 2007). But many studies have shown how good management of land can also improve land stability (e.g. Tiffen et al., 1994). In either case (whether natural hazards have increased or decreased), the role of society is paramount. 
3.3. Aesthetics and stewardship of mountain landscapes   The scientist in the mountain world is driven by a passion or ‘love of landscape’ as described by Goudie and Viles (2010) and mountain landscapes are the dynamic backdrop to people’s lives. Whether one is describing the Alps (Fischer et al., 2008), the Dolomites (Panizza, 2009), the Tuolumne Meadows in Yosemite National Park (Becker et al., 2014), the Canadian Cordillera (Slaymaker, 2017), or just protected areas in general (Gillespie et al., 2015), landscape aesthetics is an important expression of human values. As the highest and most dramatic features of the natural landscape, mountains have an extraordinary power to evoke the sacred (Bernbaum, 1997). Sinai in the Middle East, Olympus in Greece, Kailas in Tibet, T’ai Shan in China, Fuji in Japan, and Uluru in Australia—all have acquired a special stature as natural objects of religious devotion (Wilcock et al., 2013). And perhaps most importantly, society’s attitudes toward mountain landscapes have critically influenced the evolution of those landscapes over the past few millennia. Migon (2014) has discussed many stories behind superlative scenery. 
Contemplation of the beauty and grandness of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River (Fig. 25), for example, produces not only an immediate emotional sense of awe and accompanying aesthetic pleasure but also, following careful observation, a deep sense of scientific curiosity (Montgomery, 2013). One and a half billion years of geological history lie exposed in the sidewalls of the canyon. ‘All this time was enough to erase a mountain range and hide the ruins of ancient worlds, familiar in design but alien in detail. My imagination wrestled with how a thousand million years could vanish from the geological record. Two worlds had come and gone, leaving nothing behind but their rocky bones’ (Montgomery, 2013, p. 22). Native Americans living along the Colorado River have stories about the origins of the canyon of which the following are just two examples: a mischievous god who unleashed a tremendous rainstorm producing a catastrophic flood or a god who put his daughter in a hollowed-out log to save her from the current rushing downstream. After the floodwaters receded she crawled out from her log and became the mother of all humanity. All people, geologists included, tell stories to explain the 
  world around them. Contemplation of that which has been created excites the imagination with respect to the sources of beauty in our world. 
FIG. 25. Aesthetics: Bright Angel Canyon within the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River. The maximum thickness of the wall of the canyon is 1857 m. Eighteen different rock units covering one and a half billion years of geologic history are exposed (after Strahler and Strahler, 1994; Cambridge University Press). Managing, enhancing, or conserving the landscape should be informed by an understanding of the cultural context. For example, if we wish to improve the management of river systems, we should try to understand the cultural relationship that local people have with their rivers. Where land is of religious significance, as among the First Nations of Canada or the Aborigines of Australia, forest management, power development projects, and oil and gas exploitation must surely respect local wisdom (Slaymaker et al., 2017). Mountain landscapes in which the vulnerability of local populations has increased because of their neglect of seismic culture and the forgetting of the worst effects of earthquakes, such as in the central Asian mountains should not be overlooked (Halvorson and Hamilton, 2007). The protection of mountain landscapes from the most serious effects of hydroclimate change is discussed by Meadows (2012). Badman (2010) pointed out the lack of empirical data to evaluate the aesthetics of mountain landscapes, but the 
  importance of the topic will undoubtedly increase as geotourism and geoheritage initiatives expand. 
3.4. Polar mountains
Barely 400,000 of the c.3.5 million permanent residents in the Arctic are indigenous people (Huntington and Weller, 2005). Others are recent arrivals in resource extraction industries, herders and hunters living on the land, and city dwellers with desk jobs. Over the past two decades total population has increased rapidly in only three areas: Alaska, Iceland, and the Faroe Islands. Population within the mountains proper is vanishingly small, and in effect, mountain landscapes of polar regions today are still dominated by their thermal regime rather than by direct human activity. Recent warming has been greater there than elsewhere (Stocker et al., 2013; Walsh, 2014). Ives (2015) documented the effects of climate warming on Baffin Island over the past 50 years. The official IPCC story provides a dramatic summary of the effects of changing thermal regime in the Arctic: (i) substantial arctic warming since the mid-twentieth century has been greater than elsewhere on the planet; (ii) accelerating loss of glacial ice during the 1993–2009 period compared with 1971-2009; (iii) continuing increase in permafrost temperature since the early 1980s (up to 3°C in northern Alaska) and (iv) loss of arctic sea ice at a rate of 3.8% per decade between 1979 and 2012 (Stocker et al., 2013). The extent and rapidity of recently observed landscape changes through coastal erosion, expansion of river channel networks, and the degradation of ground previously stable for thousands of years all suggest that arctic landscapes are particularly sensitive to perturbations caused by global warming (Jorgenson et al., 2006). Regional warming and thawing of permafrost in the Arctic results in rapid system wide geomorphic responses (Slaymaker and Kelly, 2007; Barry and Gan, 2011). Release of large amounts of carbon, currently stored in permafrost caused by permafrost thawing, may exert a positive feedback on global warming (Schuur et al., 2008). Rivers under and adjacent to the 
  melting Greenland Ice Sheet are comprehensively reviewed (Chu, 2014), and the danger of abrupt and irreversible loss of glacial ice does have to be considered seriously even though such an event is still unpredictable. Likely and highly likely changes by the end of the twentyfirst century include the continuing shrinking of arctic sea ice; global glacier volume decreasing by 15–85% and area of permafrost decreasing by 37–81% (Stocker et al., 2013). 
A specific example of inhabited arctic mountains can be found in Svalbard, a Norwegian archipelago of 61,000 km2 of which 36,600 km2 are covered by glaciers and ice caps and extends as far as 81°N. In regional terms human disturbance effects are scarcely visible beyond the town of Longyearbyen (population 2144 as of 2015) and communities of Barentsburg (coal mining) and Ny Alesund (research station). However, direct human impacts can be highly significant at the local scale where, for example, ground ice-rich permafrost is disturbed. The Longyearbyen meteorological record shows a 6°C increase in mean annual temperature over the past 100 years, mostly from winter warming. Most Svalbard glaciers have been retreating and thinning at least since the 1930s and most likely since the end of the Little Ice Age. Ninety percent of measurement years on glaciers on Svalbard show negative mass balances (Sharp and Wang, 2009). 
In relation to the panarchy model introduced in Fig. 23, arctic mountain regions are minimally impacted by direct human disturbance. They are, however, seriously threatened by climate warming and can be characterized as being in a release phase of their adaptive cycle, approaching and exceeding stability thresholds, depending on the rate of permafrost thawing. 
3.5. Temperate mountains
3.5.1. Hydroclimate change
We use the term hydroclimate change in preference to climate change given that temperate alpine regions are influenced as much by precipitation as by temperature changes. In general, at higher altitudes, naturally induced changes are more significant than anthropogenic impacts 
  (Nogues-Bravo et al., 2007; Tsonis et al., 2007; Pepin and Lundquist, 2008). Some of the higher rates of temperature increase recorded in the past few decades have occurred in alpine regions (Lemke et al., 2007). The continued amplified warming in the Arctic is also expected to decrease the temperature gradient between the Arctic and mid-latitudes, which is anticipated to influence the meandering of the polar jet stream and wind patterns (Walsh, 2014). Consequently, the probability of extreme weather events in the mid-latitudes is enhanced. The alpine biomes (globally averaging only 6 persons/km2) are strongly impacted by warming and precipitation in all its forms and are greatly influenced by human activity in the valley bottoms and tourism in the montane biome. The strong population growth in the bottoms of the main valleys (e.g. in the European Alps) complements the very slow growth of settlement in the higher zones, a trend which has been continuous over the past 150 years (Slaymaker and Embleton-Hamann, 2009). Population pressure—expressed especially through agriculture, forestry, recreation, and urbanization processes—is expected to exacerbate the effects of hydroclimate change. 
3.5.2. Changes in mountain permafrost
The thawing of mountain permafrost (Geertsema and Chiarle, 2013) in central and northern Norway (Lilleoren et al., 2012, 2013; Farbrot et al., 2013) and Scandinavia in general (Ridefelt et al., 2010), in the southern Carpathians (Popescu et al., 2015), in northwestern Canada (Lewkowicz et al., 2012), in the Colorado Rockies at Niwot Ridge (Leopold et al., 2014), and in Russia (Romanovsky et al., 2010) demonstrate the widespread influence of climate change in temperate alpine regions. The morphodynamics of the Mont Blanc Massif has been considered in the context of the changing cryosphere (Deline et al., 2012). A general review of mountain permafrost degradation confirms the globally increasing temperature of permafrost and thermokarst development in areas of discontinuous and sporadic permafrost (Verleysdonk et al., 2011). 
The Peel Plateau, Yukon, is a fluvially incised, ice-rich mountain landscape that extends along the eastern flanks of the Richardson and Mackenzie mountains in northwestern Canada. 
  Large stores of relict late Pleistocene ground ice preserved in this permafrost favour the development of retrogressive thaw slumps (Fig. 26) as the climate warms and fluvial incision takes place (Kokelj et al., 2017). 


3.5.3. Changes in glacier mass balance   Decadal scale changes in Lombardy, Italy (Diolaiuti et al., 2011, 2012; Gabbud et al., 2016) demonstrate accelerating glacier retreat, as do recent monitored changes in the Himalayas (Mehta, 2011; Mehta et al., 2013). Work on the Little Ice Age in British Columbia (Harvey and Smith, 2013), proglacial activity in the Cariboo Mountains (Leggat et al., 2015), and fluctuations in glacier coverage over the past millennium in Garibaldi Park in the same province (Koch et al., 2007) have documented progressively smaller advances in recent millennia and larger retreat events. 
Iceland's glaciers are particularly sensitive to hydroclimate change (Bradwell et al., 2013). In western Canada very few glaciers are expected to survive beyond A.D.2100 if present trends continue (Schiefer et al., 2007; Clarke et al., 2015). Williams et al. (2016) reviewed 101 years of glacier spatiotemporal change at Karsaglaciären in Sweden and concluded that the glacier retreat is inexorable; by way of contrast to the average behavior of retreating glaciers, Carrivick et al. (2015) documented an apparent slowing rate of retreat of a glacier in Austria. Although the trend is not definitive, they point out that the rate of reduction of glacier volume has been approaching steady state between 1998 and 2008. Global watershed discharge changes under melting glaciers confirm accelerating meltwater discharge (Frenierre, 2014). 
Glacier retreat and permafrost degradation are considered to be major hazards in alpine regions as they induce slow rock slope deformation and rockfall activity that endanger infrastructure and cause casualties (Krautblatter and Leith, 2015). Glacier advance and retreat not only changes stress patterns across formerly glaciated valleys but causes dynamic changes in glacier-permafrost connectivity, which may promote instability. Glacially induced and permafrost induced preconditioning and conditioning of alpine rock slopes represent a legacy of past climates. The thermal signal caused by present-day climate change will influence rock slope stability in sensitive deglaciated and permafrost affected rock slopes over time scales of decades to hundreds of years and may condition slow rock deformation and rapid rock slope failure (Krautblatter and Leith, 2015). Koppes et al. (2015) discussed the latitudinal variation of glacial erosion rates in the Americas. 
3.5.4. Changes in precipitation and associated hazards
In terms of impact on the landscape, extreme events (both high and low) and the freshet flows mobilize most of the sediment and are responsible for the greatest hazards and risks (Haeberli et al., 2014). With the exception of the European Alps, few baseline data are available for precipitation and geomorphic hazard trends in the alpine. Ryder (1998) has discussed the variety of surrogate measures that can help to give estimates of alpine extreme events in the absence of monitored data. The magnitude, frequency, and duration of storm events is vital information that often does not exist because precipitation data, where meteorological stations exist, are normally recorded in the form of daily totals. The debris flow hazard in Austria has been intensively studied (Kronfellner-Kraus, 1989). Debris load data from about 2000 torrent disasters from catchments up to 80 km2 in size have been regionalized in Fig. 27. Given that intense rainstorms are primarily responsible for the debris flow hazard, any increase in precipitation event magnitude and frequency will be feared for economic and safety reasons. 
  
Slope failure (Fischer et al, 2013) and a variety of mass movements (Stoffel and Huggel, 2012) are induced by intense rainstorms, whose frequency of occurrence in the past three decades has been increasing. Natural hazards of all kinds are projected to become more widespread and more economically damaging (Sass and Oberlechner, 2012). Debris flow incidence in western North America (Moore et al., 2009) and surface erosion in Japan (Ueno et al, 2015) are just two examples of hazards for which accelerated incidence has been documented in the past decade. 
3.5.5. Urbanization
Human activities such as urban development superimposed on hydroclimate change intensify flood hazard in the foothills of glacierized mountains. Calgary, Alberta, for example (Fig. 28A), lies close to the Rocky Mountain Foothills and is located at the junction of Elbow and Bow rivers that have their sources in glaciers. Flooding is not a stranger to Calgary as photographs from earlier flood events attest (Fig. 28B) but indications are that the coincidence of these trends (growth in urban development, accelerating loss of glacier ice, and increasingly intense rainstorms) is reducing the recurrence interval of extreme floods (Brooks et al., 2001) 
  

3.5.6. Deforestation and land disturbance
In the Carpathians and High Tatra Mountains, enhanced sediment delivery is interpreted as primarily because of tourist trampling on dirt roads and footpaths (Waldykowski and Krzemien, 2013; Bucala et al., 2015; Fidelus, 2016). In the Spanish Mediterranean mountains, deforestation and land disturbance are said to accelerate sediment delivery (Nadal-Romero et al, 2016). In the Pyrenees, overgrazing and recurring fires in the montane biome (1100–1600 masl) have led to increased soil erosion and triggering of debris flows (Sanjuan et al, 2016). A combination of human activity and hydroclimate change is blamed in Norway (Bogen, 2009). 
Deforestation superimposed on previously unstable slopes are generating concerns with respect to slope failure in New Zealand (Fig. 29). The Hawke’s Bay region of the North Island was originally covered in a mature indigenous temperate rainforest. Much of it was cleared and converted to pasture between A.D.1880 and 1920, although some of the removal occurred prior to European settlement in the preceding 600 years of Maori occupation. The general consensus is that the conversion of forest to pasture has greatly accelerated soil erosion by landslides by as much as 10 times (M. Crozier, University of Victoria, New Zealand, pers. comm.). Sustainability is a priority in countries such as New Zealand where braided gravel-bed streams, alluvial fans, and oversteepened forested montane and hilly biomes demand sophisticated management (Davies and McSaveney, 2008). 

3.5.7. Hydroelectric power generation
Hydroelectric power generation is a mountain economic sector that has evolved since the early twentieth century. Between 1931 and 1990, for example, 31 reservoirs for hydroelectric power generation were built in the Austrian Alps, with large-scale projects starting in the 1950s (Fig. 30). Massive changes in discharge and sediment transport (upstream and downstream) are imposed by large dams (Baker et al., 2011; Pralong et al., 2015). Run of river dams, which may be an alternative source of hydroelectric power to large dams, are controversial because of the many individual wilderness sites that are compromised in order to achieve comparable power generation (Csiki, 2010). 
  FIG. 30. Two reservoirs (Moserboden and Wasserfallboden) in the upper Kapruner valley, Salzburg Province, Austrian Alps (from Beckel and Zwittkovits, 1981; Cambridge University Press). 
3.5.8. Landscape enhancement
However compensating trends can be found in some alpine landscapes that are being enhanced. Indeed, some would claim that reservoirs such as those that are pictured in Fig. 30 actually enhance the landscape, but this is a controversial topic. The expansion of protected areas (19% of the eastern Alps, as of 2006), net afforestation, and reduced intensity of forest harvesting are increasing the sustainability of mountain landscapes in the face of anticipated hydroclimate changes. Specific sediment yield is controlled by dams (Fig. 30) and torrent control channels. The net effect of recent afforestation, expansion of protected areas, and reduced intensity of forest harvesting is a reduction in mountain erosion. Reduced risk of flooding, erosion, and snow avalanche incidence is provided for residential areas in the valleys by a sophisticated torrent control service (Slaymaker and Embleton-Hamann, 2009). 
National environmental control decision-making systems in Switzerland are relatively better developed than in many alpine regions. For example the GISALP project connects climate sensitive processes like glacial melting, permafrost degradation, and natural hazards within a geographical information system. The competences and challenges of geomorphology as a part of the decision-making process in high mountain regions can be described as a sort of portfolio of modern applied geomorphology (Keller et al., 2011). 
In relation to the panarchy model (Fig. 23), temperate alpine regions have passed through the exploitation and conservation phases and are in a reorganization or recovery phase in which it seems feasible that sustainability can be achieved through a combination of stringent environmental protection regulations and creative land use and hazard control responses. 
  3.6. Intertropical mountains
3.6.1. Carrying capacity
The intertropical mountain zone is the most densely populated mountain region in the world. Geomorphic hazards are intensifying and societal risks multiply accordingly (Huddleston et al., 2003) noted that all mountain zones below 4500 masl in the intertropical zone have exceeded the population that is thought to be sustainable (Fig. 31). The humid tropical montane biome (60 persons/km2) in particular is heavily influenced by human activity. Higher population densities lead to higher pressure on land resources such that the human signature on the mountain landscape is greater. It is not however the sheer numbers of people but aspects of population composition and distribution, especially the development status, level of urbanization, and household size that exert the greatest demands on the land (Huddleston et al., 2003; Lambin and Geist, 2006). 
FIG. 31. Percentage of mountain people living in given elevation classes as a function of development status (whether developed, transitional, or developing economies) (modified from Huddleston et al., 2003). 
  Developing and transitional economies are the only economies with a significant population pressure above 1500 masl. Developed countries have 90% of their mountain peoples between 500 and 1500 masl. In mature human landscapes deliberate land use treatments have been applied with the purpose of stabilizing the mountain landscape; whereas in less developed countries where mountain populations are growing most rapidly, controlling sediment yield is commonly not affordable. Intertropical mountains are densely populated in their mid-elevation montane biomes. Population pressure, insecurity of land tenure, and governance issues lead to deforestation. 
Ethiopia can be used to exemplify the carrying capacity problems of the intertropical mountains. The population of Ethiopia as of 2015 is estimated at around 100 million (UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2006) of which 80% of the population and 70% of the livestock live in the highlands. A deforestation rate of 1410 km2.a -1 has prevailed over the past four decades and if current deforestation rates were to continue no coffeebearing forests would be left in about 25 years. Ethiopia’s high population growth rate and unsustainable land use practices have led to a rapid loss of biomass cover, increased soil erosion, and desertification. Identification of mountain areas that are most vulnerable implicates intermediate elevation zones (1500–2400 masl) where infrastructure investments are greatest and natural hazards most severe. Soil erosion and landslides in Ethiopia are well documented (Nyssen et al., 2008; Broothaerts et al., 2012; Haregeweyn et al., 2015; Lanckriet et al., 2015). The achievement of sustainability is an almost impossible goal in this zone; even avoiding unsustainability is a severe challenge. But possibilities exist according to Nyssen et al. (2007) and Munro et al. (2009) in the Tigray Highlands where local knowledge and farmers’ initiatives have been integrated with conservation measures and impact assessments that suggest clear benefits from controlling runoff and soil erosion (cf. Tiffen et al., 1994). 
3.6.2. Hydroclimate change   Intertropical mountains are not exceptionally fragile in themselves, but they do show a greater range of vulnerability to disturbance than many landscapes, and their recovery rate after disturbance is often slow (Schreier, 2010). Warming of intertropical mountains produces no direct negative impact. On the other hand precipitation changes that are more difficult to predict could have serious implications in the intertropical mountains (i) if total precipitation were significantly reduced or (ii) if rainfall intensities were to increase (Körner and Ohsawa, 2005). The combination of extreme geophysical events, apparently increasing in magnitude and frequency with exceptional population growth and varied land use modifications underlines the urgency of greater understanding of the intertropical mountain zone. Tropical cyclones that can trigger exceptional landslides and environmental change in countries like Taiwan and the Philippines seem to be increasing in frequency and magnitude. However, the statistical evidence continues to be weak. 
Geomorphic hazards and risks under normal circumstances are incompletely understood, but when anthropogenic activity and hydroclimate change (which are also inadequately understood) are superimposed, the analysis becomes complex (Nogues-Bravo et al., 2007). Much literature on mountain geomorphic hazards has appeared in the last decade (e.g. Alcantara-Ayala and Goudie, 2010). The Himalayas (Bolch et al., 2012; Kääb et al, 2012), the Andes, and equatorial mountains in Africa and Irian Jaya (Lemke et al., 2007) confirm the global trend of glacier mass loss (Fig.32). The one significant anomaly of glacier mass gain is documented from the Karakorams (Gardelle et al., 2012; Hewitt, 2014); the specific reasons for this anomaly are not fully understood (Hewitt, 2005; Immerzeel et al., 2015). 
  FIG. 32. Changes in the surface area of tropical glaciers relative to their extent around 1900, grouped according to different glacier sizes. The sizes are given for 1990 or the closest available date to 1990. The insert shows the area change of the Kilimanjaro Plateau and slope glaciers as separated by the 5700-m contour line. CB= Cordillera Blanca; CR=Cordillera Real (from Lemke et al., 2007; Cambridge University Press). 
3.6.3. Deforestation   The Betsiboka River is a 525-km-long river that provides dramatic evidence of the catastrophic erosion of northwestern Madagascar (Fig. 33). Brick-red lateritic soils resulting from tropical weathering are responsible for the strong colour of the sediments. The river rises in the central highlands and flows toward the northwest emptying into Bombetoka Bay. Removal of native forest for cultivation and pastureland during the past 50 years has led to massive annual soil losses around 250 t/ha (Raharimahefa and Kusky, 2010). For Madagascar, a country that relies on agricultural production for the foundation of its economy, the loss of this soil is especially costly. 
FIG. 33. Discolouration of Betsiboka River because of erosion of lateritic soils from the Betsiboka catchment, Madagascar. Earth observation taken by an Expedition 10 crew 
  member on the International Space Station (Source: images assets.nasa.gov/image/iss01e19333). 
3.6.4. Agriculture
The system of agricultural terraces in the Middle Mountains of Nepal transmits 1500–2500 mm of rainfall down hillslopes during the monsoon season and retains moisture sufficient to irrigate crops. At higher elevations, rain-fed bari terraces, which do not have a bund and slope outward, experience rates of erosion two orders of magnitude higher than the khet terraces illustrated (Marston, 2008). The growing of temperate vegetables such as spring onions, lettuces, tomatoes, and cabbages, as well as fruits such as strawberries is expanding rapidly as the growing Asian middle class and increasing numbers of western tourists increase demand for them in the cities of Asia, especially in Indonesia (Java and Sulawesi), the Kinabalu highlands of Sabah and the Cameron highlands of Malaysia (I. Douglas, University of Manchester, UK, pers. comm.). 
FIG. 34. Cultivation of steep slopes on the volcano Mount Bromo, East Java, Indonesia (photo by Ian Douglas). 
  FIG. 35. Mount Lawu Mountain Drive, central Java, Indonesia. Illustrating the variety of commercial crop production, including strawberries, at the base of the stratovolcano (photo by Ian Douglas). 
3.6.5. Urbanization
Land use changes in the intertropical mountains typically generate enhanced vulnerability and natural hazards. Well-planned urban centres in these regions are an exception (Huddleston et al., 2003). The centre of Arequipa, Peru, for example lies only 17 km from the summit of El Misti, a stratovolcano in southern Peru whose last eruption occurred in 1985 (Fig. 36). Although no urban disruption by volcanic hazards has occurred during the last 500 years the hazard is real as confirmed by other large active Andean volcanoes. The volcanic island of Krakatau, located in the Sunda Strait between Java and Sumatra, has generated a large amount of information on landscape recovery from volcanism (Crisafulli et al., 2015; Schmidt et al., 2015). Mt. Agung, on the island of Bali, Indonesia, has been responsible for many urban fatalities and has been threatening international tourists since late 2017. In intertropical mountains the incidence of debris flows has been reported to be accelerating following urbanization (Santi et al., 2010; Cui et al., 2013). 
  
3.6.7. Damming
The accumulated negative environmental effects of existing and approved dams in the Amazon basin have led to the introduction of a Dam Environmental Vulnerability Index to quantify current and potential impacts of dams in the basin (Latrubesse et al., 2017). The focus of this latter paper is on the floodplains, estuary, and sediment plume of the Amazon; but assessments of individual large mountain basins are also included. The scale of foreseeable 
  environmental degradation indicates the need for collective action among the nine sovereign nations affected. In relation to the panarchy model (Fig. 23) the intertropical mountains in general appear to be close to collapse because of threshold exceedance and unpredictable system behaviour brought on by increasing population density. Intensified land use practices under the immediate pressure of population growth of ca. 3% per annum are more important than any documented hydroclimate change. 
3.7. The case for distinctiveness of mountain geomorphology in the Anthropocene epoch The population of montane biomes in mountains has tripled over the past three decades, and almost all of this increase has occurred in the intertropical mountains. This growth in human occupance contrasts with arctic and temperate mountains where mountain population density is vanishingly small (arctic) or declining and redistributed to the valley bottoms (temperate alpine). Climate warming and glacier retreat, which are also anthropogenically induced and important in all mountain regions, do not achieve as strong a differentiation of mountain environments as human occupance. We therefore propose that the distinctiveness of mountain geomorphology has increased during the Anthropocene epoch primarily because of the newly variable pattern and intensity of human occupance (Fig. 38). Therefore not one but several mountain geomorphologies can be defined based on human impacts. In section 3 we have chosen to consider three mountain geomorphologies that respond differently to human occupance, namely arctic, temperate alpine, and intertropical mountains. Human occupance takes a variety of forms such as avoidance of high risk zones, establishing of nature reserves, landscape enhancement through environmental engineering, and exceedance of carrying capacity. 
  
4. Conclusion
Recent global warming is influencing arctic and alpine environments more dramatically than the intertropical mountains. But although high and very high mountain elevation classes experience some of the most active geomorphic processes, they occupy collectively <8% of global mountains (Fig. 30). Furthermore, the effect of hydroclimate on sediment flux is buffered by the prevalence of decoupling in the mountain system (Kirchner and Ferrier, 2013; Slaymaker, 2013). New evidence from geochemical modelling suggests that, on a global basis, there is just not enough high mountain terrain to account for much of the global flux of sediment from erosion or solute from chemical weathering that is delivered to the oceans. Willenbring et al. (2013) calculated that landscapes with slopes of <100 m.km¯1 account for 90% of Earth’s terrestrial surface and 80% of global sediment and solute flux. Nevertheless, earthquake-induced rock slides and avalanches do generate some of the most serious geomorphic hazards and the magnitudefrequency problem is by no means resolved (e.g. Schwanghart et al., 2016). Hence terrain variability (in the form of disconnectivity), and population density complicate the hydroclimate change signal. 
Research on mountain geomorphology continues to multiply, reinforcing the validity of a distinctive mountain geomorphology as demonstrated in this discussion of research developments in the last decade. We have decided to focus on three megatrends that indicate a maturing of our science. The first development revolves around new technical expertise in the sensing and analysis of Earth’s surface and influences our understanding of morphology and spatial pattern broadly conceived. All landforms and landscapes can now be characterized more accurately, such that the form-process relationship at all spatial and temporal scales can potentially be better understood (as 
  documented in section 1). The second development is a conceptual development that we have called the reality of disconnectivity in mountain geomorphology (as documented in section 2). One implication of this understanding is that all geomorphic processes are contingent; meaning that a historical dimension is present in all erosional and depositional sediment systems. A third development, that is now inescapable, is the absolute importance of the reflexive relationship between landforms and humankind, such that cultural landscapes are becoming of greater importance in mountain geomorphology (as documented in section 3). Regional mountain geomorphology, which is also primarily contingent, is seen to have a higher priority in the science. 
The changes induced in mountain geomorphology by human activity pose new, regionally variable, and urgent questions. In the heavily populated intertropical mountains, whole societies face questions of survival; whereas in unpopulated arctic mountains questions of aesthetics, maintenance of pristine environments, and scientific research are central. In temperate alpine environments the interplay between hydroclimate change, environmental control, and social policy figures prominently. In short, every mountain environment has its own geomorphological questions and deserves focused investigation. The traditional reliance on the high energy condition to define mountain geomorphology seems less important than the presence of unique mountain landforms and landscapes and the distinctive ways in which human activity and anthropogenically induced hydroclimate change are transforming mountain landscapes. 
  