Studies of Cave Sediments 
Physical and Chemical Records of Paleoclimate 
Studies of Cave Sediments 
Physical and Chemical Records of Paleoclimate 
Revised Edition 
Edited by 
Ira D. Sasowsky 
University of Akron, Ohio, USA 
and 
John Mylroie Mississippi State University, Mississippi, USA 
A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. 
ISBN-13 978-1-4020-5326-9 (HB) ISBN-13 978-1-4020-5766-3 (e-book) 
Published by Springer, P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
www.springer.com 
Cover Illustrations Insert photo: Stalactites in Poor Farm Cave, Pocohantas County, West Virginia. Photo by lra D. Sasowsky. Background photo: Well-developed folia in Browns Room, Devil ’ 
s Hole, Nevada. Photo by Alan Riggs. 
First published 2004 by Kluwer Academic Publishers / Plenum Publishers, New York Reprinted with corrections 2007 
Printed on acid-free paper 
All Rights Reserved © 2004, 2007 Springer No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. 
PREFACE 
John E. Mylroie and Ira D. Sasowsky* 
Caves occupy incongruous positions in both our culture and our science. The oldest records of modern human culture are the vivid cave paintings from southern France and northern Spain, which are in some cases more than 30,000 years old (Chauvet, et al, 1996). Yet, to call someone a "caveman" is to declare them primitive and ignorant. Caves, being cryptic and mysterious, occupied important roles in many cultures. For example, Greece, a country with abundant karst, had the oracle at Delphi and Hades the god of death working from caves. People are both drawn to and mortified by caves. Written records of cave exploration exist from as early as 852 BC (Shaw, 1992). In the decade of the 1920's, which was rich in news events, the second biggest story (as measured by column inches of newsprint) was the entrapment of Floyd Collins in Sand Cave, Kentucky, USA. This was surpassed only by Lindbergh's flight across the Atlantic (Murray and Brucker, 1979). 
Cave science also has a long history, with many accounts appearing as early as the sixteenth century (Shaw, 1992; 2000). The term speleology has become accepted as the defining term for the scientific study of caves (Moore and Sullivan, 1997), yet the discipline has had difficulty integrating with mainstream sciences. This difficulty has two roots. First, the hidden and arduous nature of most caves means that non-specialists rarely visit them. Second, the bulk of data on caves has come from the recreational caving community, which has cast aspersions on the legitimacy of speleology. Caving for recreation has been considered a fringe activity by society. The journalistic terms "spelunking" and "spelunker", used to describe the activity and the individual, respectively, have emphasized the view that cave explorers are odd people (from personal experience, we can say that a few most certainly are). Those who explore for recreation call themselves "cavers". Over 95% of the cave maps in existence were made by these men and women, who produce them without compensation, for the pure pleasure of creation. And, yet, these maps form the basis for almost all scientific studies within caves. Imagine an analogous situation for the earth sciences, if recreational cartographers drew most of the topographic maps in the world at night, after their day jobs were over. 
Some of the criticism of speleology as an immature science has been justified. The difficult, time-consuming and arduous nature of cave exploration has created a lack of 
used to desivity by society. Thepeleology. Ca 
John E. Mylroie, Dept. of Geology, Mississippi State University, PO Box 2194, Mississippi State, MS 39762 USA, Myiroie@geosci.MsState.edu. fra D. Sasowsky, Dept. of Geology, University of Akron, Akron, OH 44325-4101 USA, ids@uakron.edu. 
J. E. MYLROIE & I. D. SASOWSKY 
manpower in the ranks of cavers and cave scientists. The vast majority of cave scientists around the world began as recreational cavers. Much of the early science done now seems lacking in quality or incomplete. Through time, exploration techniques and technology improved, and concurrently the science of speleology matured. As a result, the science produced has both improved and broadened. 
The studies presented in this book concern caves formed by dissolution of soluble bedrock, as an integral part of the production of a karst landscape. This excludes other types of caves (lava tubes, sea caves, talus caves, etc.), which are different, but interesting in their own right. Today, the earth science study of caves falls into two regimes: applied research (land use problems); and basic research (caves as data repositories). 
The land use problems in cave and karst areas are legion. These include water quality, flooding, and land subsidence. Such problems have attracted significant governmental (from a regulatory viewpoint) and environmental consultant (from a problem-solving viewpoint) interest. Today, a semi-annual conference on the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst (e.g. Beck and Herring., 2001) draws an international audience to a venue filled with case-histories and technique evaluations. 
However, the focus of this book is on the basic quality of caves as data repositories - allowing for the investigation of problems on geologic, not human, timescales. Caves are unique landforms in that they exist within, instead of on, the earth. They create an environment that is predisposed to preservation. As surface landforms age and evolve, the record of their previous condition is destroyed by weathering, and removed by erosion. Not so with caves, where the processes of destruction is greatly delayed, and therefore information is preferentially preserved. Valleys enlarge and deepen as base level lowers, and their former morphology disappears, but in adjacent caves the lowering of base level means the abandonment of conduits and the development of new flow paths deeper down. While active, these cave passages recorded evidence of water flow velocity, water table position, and flow direction in the morphology of their passage walls. In washed clastic sediment, sometimes inter-layered with chemical precipitates, preserve additional data on active conditions. When abandoned, the cave passages may persist for millions of years. In this setting, they collect additional clastic and chemical deposits that reflect conditions of the environment on the surface above. 
The papers in this book have two main stories to tell. One is that retained in the clastic sediments that entered the cave during its active and senescent phases; the chemical precipitates, or speleothems tell the other story. A dominant theme that is carried throughout is the paleoclimatic record that these cave deposits hold. 
The initial chapter by Rachel Bosch and Will White describes how clastic sediments enter into caves, how they are transported in conduits, and how they are deposited. This chapter sets the basic framework for the clastic chapters that follow. In chapter 2, Barbara Mahler and her co-authors examine clastic sediments in terms of their water quality implications, from both the inorganic and organic view. Chapter 3, by R. J. Musgrave and J. A. Webb, provides both a case study from Australia, as well as a detailed discussion of paleomagnetic analysis as a geochronological tool in cave sediment studies. Ira Sasowsky and co-authors present in chapter 4 a U.S. case history of clastic sediment deposition and paleomagnetic analysis that provide a measure of the potential rapidity with which cave sediments can collect. Leo Lynch and co-authors present a case study in chapter 5 that shows how sediment provenance can be determined from X-ray diffraction techniques; their results indicate that sediments that were thought to be autogenic were in fact allogenic, with implications for surface contaminant transfer. Chapter 6, by Elizabeth Knapp and co-authors, shows how use of weathering degree, and paleomagnetic analysis in a Virginia, USA cave can be used to determine the timing and climatic 
PREFACE 
vii 
ce in the speleothems fors 9-11 form a 
conditions of sediment influx into a cave. Paul Burger, in Chapter 7, describes the use of clastic sediments to determine ice advance and retreat events in the Colorado Rockies, USA, in an area of difficult logistics. The clastic section of the book ends with chapter 8, in which France Šušteršič uses the remnants of caves as found on the surface, and their internal deposits, to look at caves in Slovenia as part of degraded cave systems at the end of their useful life as data repositories. 
The second part of the book examines chemical precipitates, or speleothems, as both geochronological tools and paleoclimatic indicators. Chapters 9-11 form a comprehensive resource for scientists interested in the use of speleothems for these indicators, written by people with tremendous experience in the techniques involved. William White, in chapter 9, provides a review of calcite speleothem chemistry and formation, creating the necessary foundation for the later chapters. In chapter 10, Jeff Dorale and co-authors clearly and concisely present an in-depth discussion of the U/Th and related dating techniques as applied to speleothems. Following in chapter 11 is a cautionary presentation by Russ Harmon and co-authors about the use of oxygen isotopes in speleothems for paleoclimatic interpretations. Chapter 12, by Peter Kolesar and Alan Riggs, begins a series of case history studies of speleothems from a variety of sites with an analysis of the depositional environment of the famous Devils Hole calcite. The case histories continue with a series of studies from high altitude or high latitude sites. Cristoph Spötl and co-authors present in chapter 13 an intriguing study of speleothems in a cave in the Austrian Alps that has alternated between ice-cover and ice-free conditions, both in the geologic and the historical record. Chapter 14, by Stein-Erik Lauritzen and Joyce Lundberg, shows how a speleothem from a Norwegian cave at the Arctic Circle reveals the duration and conditions of oxygen isotope stage 11, over 400,000 years ago. Half a world away from Norway, Steven Turgeon and Joyce Lundberg in chapter 15 examined the geochronology and isotope chemistry of speleothems from a cave in Oregon, USA, using growth-rate determinations to carry the speleothem record beyond 500,000 years. In chapter 16, Victor Polyak and Necip Güven present data from caves in the Guadalupe Mountains of New Mexico, USA, where silicates in speleothems were used to show time and temperature conditions needed to mature amorphous silica into trioctahedral smectite and quartz. 
Finally, in chapter 17, Donald McFarlane and Joyce Lundberg show how the interplay between speleothems, clastic deposits, and bones can be used to determine aspects of deposition in caves of the West Indies. This concluding chapter brings together many elements presented in earlier chapters to synthesize both a paleoclimatic and paleontological interpretation. . 
Within this book, we have attempted to present a comprehensive treatment of cave deposits. We are indebted to the patience and skill of the contributing authors. We are also bound to honor and thank the many amateur scientists and cave explorers who have helped cave scientists locate, explore, map and analyze the caves from which important data are collected. We can think of no other scientific discipline where the amateur plays as important a role in the development and advancement of a field. 
REFERENCES CITED 
Beck, B.F., and Herring, J.G., 2001, Geotechnical and environmental applications of karst geology and 
hydrology: Lisse, Balkema, 437 p. Chauvet, J-M., Deschamps, E. B., and Hillaire, C., 1996. Dawn of Art: The Chauvet Cave. Harry N. Abrams, 
New York, 135 p. 
viii 
J. E. MYLROIE & I. D. SASOWSKY 
Moore, G. W., and Sullivan, N., 1997. Speleology: Caves and the Cave Environment. Cave Books, St. Louis, 
176 p. Murray, R. K. and Brucker, R. W., 1979. Trapped! G. P. Putnam's and Sons, New York, 335 p. Shaw, T. R., 1992. History of Cave Science, Sydney Speleological Society, Sydney, 338 p. Shaw, T. R., 2000. Foreign Travellers in the Slovene Karst 1537-1900.Zalozba ZRC, 244 p. 
CONTENTS 
1. LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS IN 
KARSTIC AQUIFERS. Rachel F. Bosch and William B. White 
....... 
1 
2. SEDIMENT AND SEDIMENT-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT 
TRANSPORT THROUGH KARST..... 
............. Barbara J. Mahler, Jean-Christian Personné, F. Leo Lynch, and Peter C. Van Metre 
23 
3. PALAEOMAGNETIC ANALYSIS OF SEDIMENTS ON THE BUCHAN 
CAVES, SOUTHEASTERN AUSTRALIA. PROVIDES A PRE-LATE PLEISTOCENE DATE FOR LANDSCAPE AND CLIMATE EVOLUTION... 
............. R. J. Musgrave and J. A. Webb 
47 
4. PALEOMAGNETIC ANALYSIS OF A LONG-TERM SEDIMENT 
TRAP, KOOKEN CAVE, HUNTINGDON COUNTY, 
PENNSYLVANIA, USA.......... Ira D. Sasowsky, Rebecca A. Clotts, Bryan Crowell, Selena M. Walko, 
Edward J. LaRock, and William Harbert 
5. PROVENANCE OF SUSPENDED SEDIMENT DISCHARGED FROM A 
KARST AQUIFER DETERMINED BY CLAY MINERALOGY ...... F. Leo Lynch, Barbara J. Mahler, and Nico N. Hauwert 
83 
6. READING VIRGINIA'S PALEOCLIMATE FROM THE 
GEOCHEMISTRY AND SEDIMENTOLOGY OF CLASTIC 
CAVE SEDIMENTS ...... Elizabeth P. Knapp, Dennis O. Terry, David J. Harbor, and Robert C. Thren 
7. GLACIALLY-INFLUENCED SEDIMENT CYCLES IN THE LIME 
CREEK KARST, EAGLE COUNTY, COLORADO. Paul A, Burger 
J. E. MYLROIE & I. D. SASOWSKY 
8. CAVE SEDIMENTS AND DENUDED CAVERNS IN THE LAŠKI 
RAVNIK, CLASSICAL KARST OF SLOVENIA ..... .......... France Šušteršič 
123 
9. PALEOCLIMATE RECORDS FROM SPELEOTHEMS IN LIMESTONE 
CAVES..... William B. White 
........ 
135 
177 
10. URANIUM-SERIES DATING OF SPELEOTHEMS: 
CURRENT TECHNIQUES, LIMITS, & APPLICATIONS. 
........ Jeffrey A. Dorale, R. Lawrence Edwards, E. Calvin Alexander, Jr., 
Chan-Chou Shen, David A. Richards, and Hai Cheng 
199 
11. PALEOCLIMATE INFORMATION FROM SPELEOTHEMS: 
THE PRESENT AS A GUIDE TO THE PAST Russell S. Harmon, Henry P. Schwarcz, Mel Gascoyne, John W. Hess, 
and Derek C. Ford 
12. INFLUENCE OF DEPOSITIONAL ENVIRONMENT ON DEVIL'S 
HOLE CALCITE MORPHOLOGY AND PETROLOGY ............. Peter T. Kolesar and Alan C. Riggs 
227 
243 
13. SPELEOTHEMS FROM THE HIGH-ALPINE SPANNAGEL CAVE, 
ZILLERTAL ALPS (AUSTRIA)...... 
........... Christoph Spöti, Augusto Manginia, Stephen J. Burns, Norbert Frank, and Rudolf 
Pavuza 
14. ISOTOPE STAGE 11, THE "SUPER-INTERGLACIAL", FROM A 
NORTH NORWEGIAN SPELEOTHEM.. Stein-Erik Lauritzen and Joyce Lundberg 
......... 
257 
15. ESTABLISHING A SPELEOTHEM CHRONOLOGY FOR 
SOUTHWESTERN OREGON - CLIMATIC CONTROLS AND 
GROWTH MODELLING ... Steven C. Turgeon and Joyce Lundberg 
273 
16. SILICATES IN CARBONATE SPELEOTHEMS, GUADALUPE 
MOUNTAINS, NEW MEXICO, U.S.A. ..... Victor J. Polyak and Necip Güven 
303 
17. RELIQUIAE DILUVIANAE ALTER: LAST INTERGLACIAL FLOOD 
DEPOSITS IN THE CAVES OF THE WEST INDIES......... ....... Donald A. McFarlane and Joyce Lundberg 
313 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC 
SEDIMENTS IN KARSTIC AQUIFERS 
Rachel F. Bosch and William B. White* 
1. ABSTRACT 
Karst aquifers demand continuous transport of clastic sediments if the conduit system is to remain open. Sediments are injected into the aquifer by sinking surface streams and through sinkholes, vertical shafts, open fractures, and other pathways from the land surface of sufficient aperture to permit gravity- and inwash-driven transport. Much transport of clastic sediments tends to be episodic with sediment loads held in storage until moved by infrequent flood events. Although the overall mix of clastic material depends on material available in the source area, distinctly different facies are recognizable depending on the flow dynamics within the conduit system. The facies are most clearly recognized when the source areas provide a wide variety of particle sizes from clays to boulders. In order of decreasing stream power, one can distinguish (i) diamicton facies: masses of unsorted, unstratified clays through boulders carried as a slurry during high energy flood events, (ii) thalweg facies: coarse gravel to cobble size material, well winnowed, forming armoring on underground streams that moves only 
during flood flow, (iii) channel facies: usually well sorted and often well stratified silt though gravel carried as bedload at intermediate stream powers, (iv) slackwater facies: mostly clay and silt carried as suspended load and deposited from floodwaters backfilled into the conduit system, (v) backswamp facies: mostly clay derived from the insoluble residue of the limestone, deposited under phreatic conditions with little lateral transport. 
2. INTRODUCTION 
Caves act as repositories for secondary deposits of many kinds, some locally derived such as breakdown from collapse of cavern roofs, some transported such as sand and silt carried by underground streams, and some the result of chemical deposition in the cavern void space such as calcite and gypsum speleothems. Textbooks on karst hydrology commonly provide descriptions and overall classifications of cave sediments (e.g. Bogli, 
* Department of Geosciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802. 
R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
1980; White, 1988; Ford and Williams, 1989; Gillieson 1996). The classifications are all generally similar although they differ somewhat in detail. The present paper focuses on a specific sub-set of cave sediments: the clastic sediments derived from surface and subsurface weathering and carried into and through the cave system by mainly fluvial processes. 
Most of the investigators of clastic sediments in caves have treated them as static deposits, not different in kind from outcrops of sedimentary rock on the land surface. The stratigraphy and petrologic character of the sediments can be described and used to deduce hydraulic history and provenance. This can yield insights into the geomorphic and climatic history of the cave area. Such studies include work by Schmid (1958), Davies and Chao (1959), Frank (1969, 1971, 1972, 1973, 1974), Helwig (1964), Wolfe (1970), Bull (1978, 1981), Milske et al. (1983) and many others. 
A somewhat different point of view is to consider the sediments to be an essential part of the hydrology of the ground water basin in which the caves are located. There is, in effect, a flow field of clastic sediments in addition to the flow field of ground water. Investigations from this point of view include the early, comprehensive, and often overlooked monograph of Renault (1968). White and White (1968) drew on fluid mechanics to interpret the mechanism of sediment transport in karst systems. Other descriptions of sediment-bearing cave streams likened them to surface drainage systems with braided streams, point bars, stream meanders, deep V-shaped canyons, and cobble armoring. Jones (1971) referred to these features as the "underground floodplain”. Newson (1971) emphasized the importance of flood flows in the transport of clastic materials. Much of the current interest in the hydrology of cave sediments arises because of their role in contaminant transport (Mahler et al., 1999, 2000). 
The transport of sediments in conduit systems is episodic with abrupt movements during storm flow and little movement during low flow conditions. In very few cases have investigators been able to directly observe the effects of flood pulses in rearranging clastic sediments. One such observation was made in Cave Springs Cave near Lexington, Virginia (Doehring and Vierbuchen, 1971). Prior to Hurricane Camille in August, 1969, the cave stream carried a sediment load of primarily mud with some well-rounded chert pebbles. After the storm the sediment remaining in the stream bed was predominantly angular to subangular sand and gravel-sized clasts. A terrace composed of sand and gravel was deposited two meters above the normal stream level. 
The lithologic characteristics of the clastic sediments reflect the hydraulic conditions that transported them. These characteristics can be described by a sedimentary facies:. Our objective in this paper is to consider the various facies of clastic sediments and the relation of these facies to transport mechanisms and the hydrology of ground water flow in karst 
3. CLASTIC SEDIMENTS IN FLUVIOKARST DRAINAGE BASINS 
3.1 Inputs of Clastic Sediments to Caves 
Karst aquifers receive inputs of sediment from sinking streams and from storm runoff into sinkholes. Runoff from overlying caprock may flush sediment down vertical shafts and so carry fragments of the caprock material deep into the carbonate aquifer. In addition, diffuse infiltration through overlying soils and the epikarst may transmit soils 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 3 
vertically into the underlying conduit system. All of these materials are commingled to yield the modern day cave sediment piles. As base levels are lowered, entire flow paths in karst are often abandoned resulting in higher elevation, dryer, ancestral cave passages. Once these passages are abandoned, the sediment deposits in them will not be exposed to erosive forces that might rework them. Cave sediments in abandoned passages preserve the final episode of deposition and have been found to span the time scale from the late Pliocene to the Present (Schmidt, 1982) 
The sources for clastic sediments in the fluviokarst carbonate aquifers found commonly in the eastern United States are shown in schematic form in Figure 1. This conceptual model is appropriate when a portion of the drainage basin lies on non- carbonate rocks. Drainage basins such as this provide the following sources for clastic sediments. 
(i) The clastic load from allogenic surface basins carried into the karst aquifer by sinking streams. The character of these materials depends on the geology and relief of the allogenic drainage basins. In the eastern United States, the rocks underlying allogenic drainage basins are typically shales and sandstones. However, allogenic basins may contribute granitic or basaltic weathering products or indeed any rock material that happens to underlie the allogenic surface stream basins. Influxes of glacial till are common in some basins. Low relief basins may carry only fine silts and clays. High relief allogenic basins may carry loads of pebbles, cobbles and boulders. On those tributaries with no surface overflow routes, any and all clastic materials derived from the allogenic basins will ultimately be carried into the karst aquifer. In the case of sinking streams with no surface overflow routes, simple mass balance arguments demand that transported clastics must be carried through the karst aquifer. 
(ii) Soils and regolith from the karst surface flushed into sinkholes by storm runoff. Also carried underground would be glacial tills, volcanic ash, and any other movable material accumulated on the land surface. Sometimes these materials are injected directly into the karst aquifer through the open throat of the sinkhole. In other cases, the sediments are accumulated in the bottom of the sinkhole and then are released abruptly to the subsurface through piping failures. These materials may or may not be distinct from the allogenic sediments depending on the contrast between the regolith on the carbonate rocks compared with the regolith on the non-carbonate rocks of the allogenic catchments. 
Figure 1. Profile sketch showing various sediment inputs to a fluviokarst aquifer representative of many of the karst areas of the eastern United States. 
R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
(iii) A steady flux of soil carried into the aquifer through open fractures at the base of the epikarst. Often there is a continuum of apertures in the fracture system making up the vadose zone of karst aquifers. Larger aperture fractures allow clastic material to descend to the active ground water system. Some of this material is carried into the conduit system where it becomes part of the sediment load. 
(iv) Sediment influxes from overlying rock formations. Some aquifers receive input from surface runoff and perched ground water bodies above the vadose zone of the main carbonate aquifer. Examples would be the sandstone and shale capped carbonate aquifers of the Cumberland Plateau and the Mammoth Cave area. Clastic material ranging from clays to sandstone boulders are carried into the underlying conduit system by means of vertical shafts and open fractures in the vadose zone. In many cases these coarse grained materials simply crash down the shaft under the action of gravity without intervention of 
fluvial processes. 
(v) Weathering residuum. Dissolution of the bedrock to form the conduit system will leave behind the insoluble residue in the limestone. This weathering residue includes clays, silts and sands as well as silicified fossil fragments and chert rubble. The insoluble component may make up only a few percent of the carbonate bedrock or it may make up a substantial fraction of the entire rock mass. The weathering residuum will be added to the sediment flux derived from other sources. 
(vi) Sediments derived by base-level back-flushing. If the ground water basin discharges to a large surface stream, flooding of the surface stream can flush sediments through the spring orifice back into the karst aquifer. Typically, conduit systems have low gradients so that even modest rises of stage in the surface stream can force water long distances into the aquifer. This is, in effect, an elaborate form of bank storage except that flow reversals carry sediment. Back-flooded sediment depends both on the available source material and on the reversed flow velocity that can be achieved as the flood pulse moves down the surface channel. In Mammoth Cave, back-flooded sediments were found to be fine silts and clays (Hendrickson, 1961). Springer and Kite (1997) found much coarser material in the caves of the Cheat River Gorge in West Virginia. 
3.2 Sediment Flux in Karst Drainage Basins 
The overall flux of sediment through the karst surface and ground water basin system can be expressed in terms of a sediment budget (Fig. 2). The various fluxes are shown as input terms all balanced against a single output term at the karst spring. Back-flushing from the surface stream is included by the £ sign on the spring sediment discharge. A negative sediment discharge would appear in the budget as a positive increase in storage. It is assumed in this model that no other terms can change sign. 
Sa + 
S; + Sd + Sw 
$ 
S 
= IS, 
where Sf is the total sediment flux emerging from the karst aquifer, Sa is the sediment carried underground by sinking streams, S; is the sediment flushed underground by storm 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 5 
Figure 2. 
Flow sheet for sediment budget within a karst aquifer. 
runoff into sinkholes, Sd is the sediment settling into the conduit system through fractures, S w is the weathering residuum from dissolution of carbonate rocks and S s is the quantity of sediment either deposited in storage or removed from storage. Of importance is the storage term. The net storage averaged over long periods of time must satisfy the relation 
Sst 
ave 
3.3 Importance of Storm Flow 
∂⌈ │ ⌊ ∂ ⌉ │ ⌋ ≤ 0 (2) If the net change of sediment in storage does not satisfy equation (2), the conduit system will ultimately clog up, thus blocking the high capacity ground water flow path, and allogenic recharge will be forced back onto surface routes. 
Karst spring hydrographs have a range of responses from those with little or no response to storms to extremely flashy responses with storm flows increased by a factor of 100 over base flows. The flashiness of the response depends on the degree of development of the conduit system and on the fraction of allogenic recharge in the drainage basin. Flashy drainage systems are generally more effective at clastic sediment transport. 
R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
Movement of sediments through karst aquifers is episodic with the main movement taking place when pulses of storm water pass through the system. This is the time during which conduits are often under pipe-full conditions so that, with rare exceptions, no observers are present. It will be necessary to relate sediment facies to flood hydrographs rather than to mean or base flow discharge through the conduit system. Ground water basins with a low storm response can move sediment but the sediments will not show the range of structures found in the more flashy basins. 
4. FACIES OF CAVE SEDIMENTS 
4.1 Previous Systems of Facies Classification 
Pickle (1985) examined the sediments in Parker Cave, Kentucky and divided them into a bank facies and a thalweg facies. The thalweg facies was the coarse grained, winnowed material making up the stream bed while the bank facies formed the banks of the stream. Valen et al. (1997) applied the sediment description derived for glacier caves (Eyles, 1983) to cave deposits. This system is more a stratigraphic labeling for the sediments than a facies. Springer and Kite (1997) examined the caves of the Cheat River Canyon in West Virginia. These caves open directly on the river bank and so are subject to the intense flooding of the Cheat. Springer and Kite divided the cave sediments into three main categories: phreatic, vadose, and residual. Each of the phreatic and vadose categories was subdivided into four facies descriptions. Phreatic facies include a diamicton facies, laminated sand facies, silt clay rhythmite facies, and sandy clay loam facies. The vadose facies include gravity deposit facies, travertine facies, overbank facies, and cave stream facies. The Springer and Kite system includes such sediments as breakdown (gravity deposit facies) and various chemical sediments (travertine facies) which are not included in the present discussion. One of the more mechanism-oriented facies classifications is that of Gillieson (1986) who attempted to classify sediments in terms of water flow type and depositional energy. The key parameters are the particle size and the degree of stratification. Gillieson also introduces a diamicton facies for sediments with a range of grain sizes and lack of stratification. The present work is closer to Gillieson's classification. 
4.2 Proposed Facies 
The various inputs of clastic sediment are commingled in the conduit system. Depending on the transport processes, the sediments are reorganized into distinct facies. The sedimentary facies that were devised based on transport mechanisms are: 
Channel Facies Thalweg Facies Slackwater Facies Diamicton Facies Backswamp Facies 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 7 
The distinction between the facies is mainly made on particle size and on the degree of sorting as indicated schematically in Figure 3. The actual content of any given sedimentary sequence depends on available source material so the contrast between 
Figure 3. 
Schematic representation of sediment facies in terms of sorting and particle size. 
facies types may be indistinct if a range of source materials is not present. The facies types are sketched in Figure 3 to show the populations as completely distinct in order to locate them on the diagram. For most real sedimentary deposits, the facies types would be less distinct and probably overlap. 
4.3 Channel Facies 
The channel facies represent sediments that have been sorted or partially sorted by transport along the conduit. They make up the bulk of the clastic sediments found in cave passages. When seen in stratigraphic section, channel facies are found to consist of distinct beds of silts, sands, and gravels. These materials are often well-sorted within a given bed but bed lithology changes rapidly along the stratigraphic section. A typical “stratigraphy” is illustrated with a drawing from Davies and Chao’s (1959) report (Fig. 4) The 3-meter passage is filled to the roof with bedded sands and gravels which result from various flow conditions at a time when the passage was an active streamway. Channel facies represent a diverse collection of materials that could easily be subdivided into various subfacies as needed to describe specific sites. Because the detailed characteristics of the sediments depend on both flow regime and source materials, it does not seem useful to make further generic subdivisions of the facies. 
8 R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
Figure 4. A representative cross-section of channel facies sediment. The Chaperon, a filled side passage on Rose ’ 
s Pass, Mammoth Cave, Kentucky. From Davies and Chao (1959). 
Channel facies sediments are transported mainly as bedload. The varying particle sizes found from bed to bed appear to represent different flow regimes. The ability of any given flow regime to transport sediment is determined by the boundary shear between the moving water and the movable sediment bed. The boundary shear is related to flow velocity through Newton’s stress law: 
τ = 1 8 ρ fv 2 (3) where τ is the boundary shear in Nm−2, ρ is the density of the fluid in kgm−3, f is a dimensionless friction factor, and v is the water velocity at the boundary in msec−1 
. The critical boundary shear necessary to move particles of a given size has been determined experimentally for a great variety of particles (Vannoni, 1977). For the particle size range from 0.5 to 100 mm, the data can be fitted approximately by least squares regression to the empirical equation 
τ c = 
0.067 D 50 
1.08 
(4) 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 
where Tc is the critical boundary shear and Dso is the average particle size in mm. Because the boundary shear varies as the square of the flow velocity, equations (3) and (4) provide a basis for understanding the winnowing and variation in particle size seen in channel deposits where the material was obtained from the same source area. 
4.4 Thalweg Facies 
In some caves, active streams have cut through the channel facies to form a secondary stream channel with bed material consisting of gravel, cobbles and boulders. This coarse grained material from which most of the sand and clay has been winnowed out is called the thalweg facies following a suggestion by Pickle (1985). The creation of a thalweg facies requires a flowing stream with a moderate flow velocity even during normal flow conditions. A simple calculation of the required boundary shear for sediment movement illustrates the effectiveness of the winnowing process. To move sand and silt requires a boundary shear of only 0.15 Nm*- whereas moving 30 cm cobbles requires a boundary shear of 165 Nm . Moderate flows - annual high flows, not exceptional floods – will provide the boundary shear necessary to strip away sand and silt sized sediment. Only exceptional floods will provide the boundary shear necessary to move cobbles and boulders so these materials tend to accumulate in the stream bed thus forming the thalweg facies. 
4.5 Slackwater Facies 
The term "slackwater” facies is applied to the sequence of fine-grained clays and silts transported into the conduit system as suspended load. Muddy floodwaters back up into all solution openings including blind side passages. These waters become ponded during which time all or a portion of the suspended load has time to settle out. Settling velocity increases with the square of the particle size according to Stokes law 
265-p) gd; 
91 
where w; is the fall velocity of particle i, ps is the density of the sediment particles, p is the density of water, g is the acceleration of gravity, d; is the diameter of particle, i, and n is the viscosity of water. If flood waters are backed up into conduits on the order of one meter in diameter, sand sized particles, even if initially suspended by the flood waters, will deposit within a few meters. Because the fall velocity varies with the square of the particle size, clay and fine silt can be carried distances of hundreds to thousands of meters with a fall of less than the diameter of the conduit. As a result the slackwater facies in most systems is made up of only the smallest particle size material. Slackwater facies can be deposited from suspended load carried in the normal flow direction or from suspended load in water backflooded from surfaced streams, 
Slackwater facies are found in most cave deposits, usually as the final layer to be deposited. The slackwater facies appears at the top of the section in Figure 4 as the laminated clay overlying the channel deposits. Even when passages are nearly plugged 
10 
R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
with sediment or blocked by breakdown, they can still be flooded with muddy water during periods of high water levels. As a result, casual inspection of undisturbed cave sediments often reveals only the topmost clay layer giving the misleading impression that the entire deposit is composed of fine clay and silt. Slackwater deposits overlying the much coarser sand and gravel of the channel facies may have misled J Harlan Bretz (1942) into thinking that the “red unctuous clays” were much more widespread than they really are. Bretz used the red unctuous clays as supporting evidence for his theory of cave origin by slow-moving, deeply percolating ground water. Reams (1968) devoted much of his Ph.D. dissertation into showing that the red unctuous clays are only a superficial layer over what here is being called a channel facies. 
Springer and Kite (1997) used the term "slackwater facies" to describe sediments that backflooded into shallow caves along the Cheat River in West Virginia. With cave entrances opening directly into the river valley, these slackwater sediments have larger particle sizes and also include flotsam that floated into the cave on the flood crest. Otherwise their use of the term is essentially the same as that presented in this paper. 
4.6 Diamicton Facies 
A diamicton facies was introduced by Gillieson (1986) from his studies of the high relief caves of the New Guinea highlands. Diamictons are unsorted and unbedded sediment masses consisting of a chaotic mixture of all particle sizes from clay to boulders. These are interpreted as debris flows in which the entire sediment mass is entrained and moves as suspended load. Some of these masses may result from extreme floods in otherwise air-filled passages. Some debris flows may take place under water. The diamicton facies is recognized by complete absence of bedding and sorting. Such properties are easier to recognize when a wide range of particle sizes is available in the source area. 
Diamicton facies require the most energy for transport of any of the sedimentary facies. They will thus be restricted to high gradient drainage basins. Diamicton facies seem to be uncommon in contemporary drainage basins. Nethertheless, there is much evidence for diamicton facies in old cave deposits suggesting much higher energy flood flows perhaps associated with periglacial climates. 
4.7 Backswamp Facies 
The term “backswamp facies" is here used to label sedimentary deposits that consist mainly of weathering residue of the bedrock and infiltrate material filtering into the conduit system from overlying soils with little or no lateral transport. The term “backswamp” was chosen because some caves, especially maze caves, tend to function hydrologically much like swamps. Large volumes of water move through them but because of the large total cross-section, velocities are very low. As a result, sediment transport is limited and residual weathering products tend to accumulate with little lateral transport. Depending on the percentage of insoluble residue in the parent bedrock, backswamp facies may occupy a substantial portion of passage cross-sections. Backswamp facies generally consist of clay and fine silt sized material although the deposits may contain chert fragments, silicified fossils, and other insoluble residue extracted from the bedrock. 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 
5. FIELD DOCUMENTATION OF CAVE LITHOFACIES 
The sections that follow give specific descriptions of some sites that illustrate the facies concept. Sediment samples were collected, sieved, and weighed to generate particle size distributions. These data are shown on the scale commonly used in sedimentary petrology. The scale is defined 
0 
= 
-182 
182 do 
where lg2 = base 2 logarithm (lg2 x = 3.3219 log x), d = grain size in mm, and do = reference particle size = 1 mm. 
5.1 Channel Facies 
5.1.1 Mammoth Cave: Columbian Avenue 
One of the most comprehensive studies of channel facies was undertaken in Columbian Avenue in the Flint Ridge section of Mammoth Cave. Because the results were reported only in a senior thesis (Carwile and Hawkinson, 1968), a summary of some of the key descriptive information is given here. Channel facies sediments consist of interbedded clays, silts, sands, gravels, cobbles and boulders with widely varying distributions of particle sizes and widely varying degrees of sorting. At any particular location in a cave, the clastic sediments often exhibit a distinct sequence of beds. However, the measurements in Columbian Avenue show that these bed sequences cannot be traced for any great distance along cave passages. 
Columbian Avenue is an 800 m long elliptical tube that has apparently acted as a cutoff passage draining the higher lying Pohl Avenue to the baselevel Eyeless Fish Trail (Fig. 5). Eyeless Fish Trail lies almost at the pool stage of Green River and floods with even modest rises in Green River. Pohl Avenue floods only when Green River stage exceeds 8 – 10 meters. The upper end of Columbian Avenue is 7 meters above pool stage; the downstream end is at 3.7 meters. Sand and silt sediments fill the passage to depths of as much as three meters. 
Carwile and Hawkinson established a series of sections through the entire sediment pile in Columbian Avenue by digging trenches across the passage down to the bedrock floor. They then pressed sections of 5 cm wide x 2 cm deep steel trough against the walls of the pits in order to extract cores of the sediments. From samples of the cores, they determined grain size distributions, analyzed the clay minerals, and constructed stratigraphic columns (Fig. 6). The channel facies are moderately well sorted and well stratified but even in this ideal location - a uniform, low gradient tube with no side passages -- the beds cannot be traced from one section to the next. These characteristics seem to be typical of channel facies in general and indeed the variation in bed thickness and bed continuity is mostly more pronounced than it is in the Columbian Avenue examples. A stratigraphic section can be constructed at any particular point along a cave 
R. 12 F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
Figure 5. 
Map of Columbian Avenue, Flint Ridge section of Mammoth Cave showing location of sediment pits. Underlined numbers are elevations in meters above pool stage of Green River. Base map adapted from Brucker and Burns (1964). 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 13 
Figure 6. Series of stratigraphic columns along Columbian Avenue, Flint Ridge section of Mammoth Cave Kentucky showing lithologic characteristics of channel facies. Columns are keyed to core locations shown in figure 7. Note the total column thickness; original columns were drawn to two different scales. Original data from Carwile and Hawkinson (1968). 
14 
R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
passage, but these sections are not very useful for the interpretation of depositional processes. 
5.1.2 
Mammoth Cave: Logsdon/Hawkins River The karst aquifer of which the Mammoth Cave System is a part consists of a well- defined set of ground water basins each of which has multiple inputs and all of which drain ultimately to springs on Green River (Quinlan and Ewers, 1989). One of the largest is the Turnhole Basin. The master trunk draining to the Turnhole Spring has an internal confluence of two very large tributaries known as Hawkins River and Logsdon River. Stream sediments were sampled at several points upstream from the confluence (Fig. 7). These samples were sieved and distribution functions plotted (Fig. 8). Samples taken from the same tributary produced very similar distribution functions. Comparison between the two tributaries shows that the sediments being transported down the two “rivers” are dramatically different in spite of the similar hydrogeologic setting. 
Logsdon River has been explored upstream from the confluence for more than seven kilometers. It more or less parallels the escarpment at the southern edge of the Mammoth Cave Plateau and is a master drain for the karst as far northeast as Roppel Cave. It is known to receive recharge from valley drains and vertical shafts and also from the sinking streams and sinkhole inputs on the Sinkhole Plain to the southeast. The Logsdon River sediments are mainly silts and fine sands with 40 – 60% of the material smaller than the smallest sieve size used. 
Figure 7. Sketch showing sampling locations at the confluence of Logsdon River and Hawkins River, Mammoth Cave, Kentucky. The PVC pipe is a test well used for hydrologic measurements. 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 15 
Figure 8. Particle size distribution in Hawkins and Logsdon Rivers. Logsdon River: diamonds = site 1; asterisks = site 5; open circles = site 4. Hawkins River: solid square = site 2; triangles = site 3. 
The ultimate source of Hawkins River is not known because the main river sumps a short distance upstream from the confluence. The Hawkins River sediments are more uniformly distributed over the range of silt to gravel with less than 10% of the material smaller than the smallest sieve size used. 
The contrast between the two tributaries could be a matter of provenance, a contrast between sediment derived from the Plateau compared to sediment derived from the Sinkhole Plain. It would also be a matter of transport with Hawkins River being the higher energy stream. 
5.1.3 Rock Spring 
Rock Spring, Centre County, Pennsylvania, is the drain for a 14.2 km2 ground water basin. The basin is elongate along the trend of the Appalachian folding. Roughly one third of the basin is in folded Ordovician limestones; the remainder is underlain by Orodvician and Silurian shales and sandstones that make up Tussey Mountain which trends northeast-southwest along the trend of the Appalachian folding. More than 50% of 
R. 16 F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
the recharge is mountain runoff that sinks in a series of swallets along the flank of the mountain. The master conduit that feeds the spring is developed parallel to strike and thus parallel to the mountain. Rock Spring has been used as a test site for a variety of karst water investigations. See Jacobson and Langmuir (1974) for a more detailed description. 
The conduit that feeds Rock Spring is entirely in the phreatic zone. It has been explored by SCUBA diving for roughly 400 meters. The conduit carries a flux of clastic sediments. The diver reports a lift tube where the flow rises about 4 meters up a slope. Channel facies sediments collected from bottom and top of the lift tube were dried and sieved. The resulting grain size distribution (Fig. 9) reveals little difference between the bottom and the top of the tube. These sediments are being swept down the conduit by pipe flow and quite clearly follow undulations in the pipe. 
5.2 Thalweg Facies 
5.2.1 Tytoona Cave 
Tytoona Cave, Blair County, Pennsylvania provides an example of thalweg facies. Tytoona Cave is a segment of trunk passage carrying an active stream that drains a substantial portion of Sinking Valley (Fig. 10). The cave is subject to flooding. The stream flows in a wide, shallow channel with an armoring of gravel sized sandstone and siltstone derived from the Silurian clastics that make up the ridges bounding Sinking Valley. Surface runoff from the ridges carries the clastic material into the karst drainage system. 
Figure 9. Grain size distribution in feeder conduit of Rock Spring. Diamonds: bottom of lift tube; squares: top of lift tube. 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 17 
Figure 10. Map of Tytoona Cave, Blair County, Pennsylvania showing sample locations. 
The streambed in Tytoona Cave consists of winnowed gravels at the surface. This surface layer is generally about the thickness of the diameter of the largest grain size represented. Near the cave entrance, the largest particles are cobbles and boulders, some as large as 40 cm in diameter. Qualitatively, the armor layer exhibited a fining trend downstream to a largest gravel size of 7 cm just upstream from a pool and low ceiling reach known as the “duckunder”. Downstream from the duckunder are gravels with particles as large as 13 cm. These fine downstream to about 2.5 cm just upstream from the terminal sump. Beneath the winnowed cobble layer is a deposit generally consisting of sands mixed with gravels. Grain sizes beneath the winnowed layer are finer than the armor layer and also appear to exhibit a downstream fining trend. 
Sediment samples were collected from Tytoona Cave with sampling sites spaced at about 30 m intervals (sample sites are shown by number on Figure 10). Two samples were taken at each site using a shovel. The first sample was taken from the well- winnowed armor layer. The second sample came from directly below the first. These were collected to a depth of about 7.5 cm below the bottom of the first sample. Both sets of samples were dried, sieved, and the particle size distribution plotted (Fig. 11-a,b). The sediments sampled from below the armor layer did indeed show a general downstream fining trend. The winnowed armor layer shows a much narrower distribution of sizes than the underlying material. The thalweg facies consists entirely of coarse (8 – 32 mm) grains. Unfortunately, the accessible segment of Tytoona Cave is only a small fraction of the total conduit so that particle size distributions along the entire drainage channel cannot be determined. 
5.2.2 Butler Cave 
The Butler Cave-Sinking Creek System, Bath County, Virginia (White and Hess, 1982) is developed with a master trunk passage along the axis of a syncline. Tributary 
18 Figure 11. Thalweg facies in Tytoona Cave. (a) Armor layer making up the surface of the stream bed sediments. (b) Sediment lying directly below surface layer. There is both a surface and a subsurface distribution for each sample site. These are keyed to the site numbers shown on figure 10: diamonds = site 1; solid squares = site 2; triangles = site 3; open circles = site 4; asterisks = site 5; solid circles = site 6. 
passages are developed along the flank of the syncline. These serve as inlets for clastic sediments flushed down the sides of Jack Mountain into a set of swallets. As a result, the trunk passage contains extensive beds of sand, gravel, and sandstone cobbles. The central portion of the trunk passage presently acts as an overflow channel and carries water only during flood events. Flood flow is injected from the flanks of Jack Mountain at high velocities, and as a result the thalweg facies is very well winnowed with only the coarsest cobble material remaining. The photograph (Fig. 12) was taken in the trunk channel near Sand Canyon (map in White and Hess, 1982) at a location where there are no nearby inlet points. The coarse material is mainly sandstone cobbles which have been carried down the low gradient trunk channel. 
5.3 Slackwater Facies 
Most caves that contain clastic sediments contain slackwater facies. The slackwater facies material consists of the layer of clay or perhaps clay and silt that makes up the topmost layer of the sediment. Caves subject to flooding collect a layer of slackwater facies every time the cave fills with water. 
5.3.1 Mammoth Cave 
Mammoth Cave provides excellent exposures of slackwater facies (Fig. 4). At the tops of most sediment piles is a layer, seldom more than a few cm thick, of thinly layer clay and very fine silt. Some of these sedimentary layers are varved, apparently representing an annual cycle of flooding with the rise and fall of the ancestral Green 
R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 19 
River. X-ray examination of the material reveals mainly quartz. Clay minerals are a relatively minor component. 
5.4 Diamicton Facies 
5.4.1 Mystic Cave 
Diamicton facies, by their nature, do not lend themselves to direct observation. There may be one example known from anecdotal evidence, that of Mystic Cave, Pendleton County, West Virginia. During the great West Virginia flood of 1985 (Clark et al., 1987) a mass of soil and regolith on the order of 1000 m 3 
was torn from a field above one of the cave’s entrances and flushed through the cave (J.J. Van Gundy, personal communication). Mystic Cave consists of a single conduit with a small surface stream sinking at one end, flowing through the cave for roughly 1000 meters to emerge at a spring. A tributary stream enters the cave about two-thirds of the distance downstream. The mass of material torn loose during the storm was flushed through the cave as a single debris flow. Later, masses of unsorted clastic material ranging from clays to cobbles were found piled on flowstone and wedged in crevices, very much like the diamicton facies. The characteristic of the diamicton facies is that entire sediment piles are mobilized and move as a single debris flow. In this particular example, the November, 1985 storm was calculated to have a greater than 500 year return period in the Potomac River Valley of Pendleton County. Diamicton facies appear to record rare events in the cave depositional history. 
Figure 12. Photo of thalweg facies in Butler Cave main stream channel. 
20 R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
5.4.2 Butler Cave 
The Butler Cave - Sinking Creek System, Virginia, USA contains large deposits of what appear to be a diamiction facies, These occur in the tributary caves oriented down the flanks of the syncline (Hess and White, 1982; Chess et al., in preparation). These dip passages have a much steeper gradients than do most cave passages. The upstream ends of the tributaries are along the flanks of Jack Mountains, a quartzite capped ridge that is the source of much of the sediment. Although the updip ends of the passages are now occluded by breakdown and surface weathering material, it appears that the sediment was flushed into the passages from the mountain side. These deposits are plastered into recesses in the passages walls and fill side passages. The sediment is mostly sandtone. There is no evidence of bedding and no sorting. A completely chaotic mix of particle sizes ranges from sandstone clasts 10 to 20 cm across down to fine sand and clays (Fig. 13). The distribution of sediment masses in the dip slope passages suggest a debris flow that swept down the passage under completely pipe-full conditions. Recesses and side passages served to break the dynamics of the flow and thus trap localized masses of sediment. It is suspected, although not proven, that the initiation and transport of the diamicton flows was related to climatic conditions much wetter than presently occur in this part of Virginia. 
Figure 13. Photo of diamiction facies. Dave’s Gallery in Butler Cave. 
LITHOFACIES AND TRANSPORT OF CLASTIC SEDIMENTS 
5.5 Backswamp Facies 
5.5.1 Hineman Cave 
Clean backswamp facies are difficult to identify because weathering residue from the limestone is difficult to separate from other fine grained clastics. Hineman Cave, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania (White, 1976) may provide an example. Hineman Cave, like other complex maze caves developed in the Pennsylvanian Vanport Limestone, has a low gradient and little evidence for stream flow. The sediment consists of fractions of a meter to more than a meter of wet clay. This material appears to have been derived from the insoluble residue from the limestone with some contribution from overlying fireclays and shales, 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
Clastic sediments deposited in conduit systems can be conveniently be divided into five facies depending on the mechanism of deposition. The channel facies comprises most observed sediment piles and can be subdivided further depending on the objectives of a particular investigation. Diamicton facies and slackwater facies are deposited from suspended loads. Channel facies and thalweg facies are transported as bedload. The backswamp facies is defined to describe those residual in infiltrated clastic sediments that are deposited in place with little horizontal transport. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank the Superintendent and staff at Mammoth Cave National Park for access to the Logsdon-Hawkins River section of the cave and the Cave Research Foundation for providing necessary maps. These observations were made in cooperation with a long term project of hydrologic and geochemical measurements in this section of the cave conducted by Joe Meiman of the National Park Service and Prof. Christopher G. Groves of Western Kentucky University. Access to the Butler Cave-Sinking Creek System was made available courtesy of the Butler Cave Conservation Society. We thank the National Speleological Society for access to their Tytoona Cave Preserve. We are very grateful to Prof. James J. Van Gundy of Davis and Elkins College for sharing his observations and photographs of the effect of extreme flooding in Mystic Cave. Cave diver Jon Guizar collected the samples from Rock Spring. 
REFERENCES 
Bogli, A., 1980, Karst Hydrology and Physical Speleology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 284 p. Bretz, J H., 1942. Vadose and phreatic features of limestone caverns, J. Geol. 50:675-811 Brucker, R. W. and Burns, D.P., 1964, The Flint Ridge Cave System, Mammoth Cave National Park, Kentucky, 
Cave Research Foundation, Washington, DC, Folio, 3pp text plus 31 maps. Bull, P.A., 1978, A study of stream gravels from a cave: Agen Allwedd, Powys, South Wales, Zeits. Geomorph. 
22:275-296. Bull, P.A., 1981, Some fine-grained sedimentation phenomena in caves, British Geomorph. Res. Grp. J. 6:11 
22. 
22 
R. F. BOSCH and W. B. WHITE 
Carwile, R.H, and Hawkinson, E.F., 1968, Baselevel sedimentation, Flint Ridge, Kentucky, B.S. Thesis, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 116 pp. Clark, G.M., Jacobson, R.B., Kite, J.S. and Linton, R.C., 1987, Storm-induced catastrophic flooding in Virginia 
and West Virginia, November, 1985, Chap. 17 in Catastropic Flooding, L. Mayer and D. Nash, eds., 
Allen & Unwin, Boston, pp. 355-379. Davies, W.E. and Chao, E.C.T., 1959, Report on the sediments in Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, U.S. Geol. 
Survey Administrative Rpt. to U.S. Natl. Park Service, 117 p. Doehring, D.O. and Vierbuchen, R.C., 1971, Cave development during a catastrophic storm in the Great Valley 
of Virginia, Science 174:1327-1329. Frank, R., 1969, The clastic sediments of Douglas Cave, Stuart Town, New South Wales, Helictite 7:3-13. Frank, R., 1971, The clastic sediments of the Wellington Caves, New South Wales, Helictite 9:3-26. Frank, R.M., 1972 Sedimentary and morphological development of the Borenore Caves, New South Wales, I, 
Helictite 10:75-91. Frank, R.M., 1973, Sedimentary and morphological development of the Borenore Caves, New South Wales, II, 
Melictite 11:27-44. Frank, R., 1974, Sedimentary development of the Walli Caves, New South Wales, Helictite 12:3-30. Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W., 1989, Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology, Unwin-Hyman, London, 601 pp. Gillieson, D., 1986, Cave sedimentation in the New Guinea Highlands, Earth Surf Processes Landforms 
11:533-543. Gillieson, D., 1996, Caves. Processes, Development, Management, Blackwell, Oxford, 324 pp. Helwig, J.A., 1964, Stratigraphy of detrital fills of Carroll Cave, Camden County, Missouri, Missouri Speleol. 
6:1-15. Hendrickson, G.E., 1971, Sources of water in Styx and Echo Rivers, Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, U.S. Geol. 
Survey Prof. Paper 424-D:41-44. Jacobson, R.L. and Langmuir, D., 1974, Controls on the quality variations of some carbonate spring waters, J. 
Hydrol. 23:247-265. Jones, W.K., 1971, Characteristics of the underground floodplain, Natl. Speleol. Soc. Bull. 33:105-114. Mahler, B.J., Lynch, F.L. and Bennett, P.C., 1999, Mobile sediment in an urbanizing karst aquifer: Implications 
for contaminant transport, Environ. Geol. 39:25-38. Mahler, B.J., Personné, J.-C., Lods, G.F. and Drogue, C., 2000, Transport of free and particulate-associated 
bacteria in karst, J. Hydrol. 238:179-193. Milske, J.A., Alexander, Jr., E.C., and Lively, R.S., 1983, Clastic sediments in Mystery Cave, Southeastern 
Minnesota, Natl. Speleol. Soc. Bull. 45:55-75. Newson, M.D., 1971, A model of subterranean limestone erosion in the British Isles based on hydrology, Trans. 
Inst. British Geograph. 54:55-70. Pickle, J.D., 1985, Dynamics of clastic sedimentation and watershed evolution within a low-relief karst 
drainage basin, Mammoth Cave Region, Kentucky, MS Thesis, University of New Mexico, 
Albuquerque, 147 pp. Quinlan, J.F. and Ewers, R.O., 1989, Subsurface drainage in the Mammoth Cave Area, Chap. 3 in Karst 
Hydrology -- Concepts from the Mammoth Cave Area, W.B. White and E.L. White, eds., Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, New York, pp. 65-103. Reams, M.W., 1968, Cave sediments and geomorphic history of the Ozarks, PhD Thesis, Washington 
University, St. Louis, MO, Renault, P., 1968, Contribution a l'étude des actions mécaniques et sédimentologiques dans la spéléogenèse, 
Ann. Spéléol. 23:529-574. Schmid, E., 1958, Höhlenforschung und Sedimentanalyse, Schriften des Institutes für Ur- und Frühgeschichte 
der Schweiz No. 13, 185 pp. Schmidt, V.A., 1982, Magnetostratigraphy of sediments in Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, Science 217:827-829. Springer, G.S, and Kite, J.S., 1997, River-derived slackwater sediments in caves along Cheat River, West 
Virginia, Geomorph. 18:91-100. Underwood, K.L., 1994, Evaluation of pesticide and nitrate mobility in a conduit-flow dominated karst basin, 
M.S. Thesis, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 204 pp. White, E.L. and White, W.B., 1968, Dynamics of sediment transport in limestone caves, Natl. Speleol. Soc. 
Bull. 30:115-129. White, W.B., 1976, The caves of Western Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Geol. Survey Gen, Geol. Rpt. 67, 97 pp. White, W.B. and Hess, J.W., 1982, Geomorphology of Burnsville Cove and the Geology of the Butler Cave - 
Sinking Creek System, Natl. Speleol. Soc. Bull. 44:67-77. White, W.B., 1988, Geomorphology and Hydrology of Karst Terrains, Oxford, New York, 464 p. Wolfe, T.E., 1973, Sedimentation in karst drainage basins along the Allegheny Escarpment in southeastern 
West Virginia, U.S.A, PhD Thesis, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ont., 455 pp. 
1 
SEDIMENT AND SEDIMENT-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT THROUGH KARST 
Barbara J. Mahler, Jean-Christian Personné, F. Leo Lynch, and Peter C. Van Metre 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The unusual characteristics of subterranean flow in karst aquifers allow for the transport of sediment. Karst ground-water systems are created by dissolution of the bedrock matrix coupled with structural and stratigraphic controls. As a result, high flow velocities, large-diameter openings, and turbulent flow, all necessary for the entrainment and transport of particles, are presentat least episodically--in most karst systems. A better understanding of sediment transport in karst is needed to protect these vulnerable systems. Deposition of sediments within the aquifer may decrease aquifer permeability, fill in wells, and cause pumps to seize; their deposition internally or at spring mouths may destroy species habitat; and their presence impairs the esthetic appearance of spring water. Sediment is itself considered a contaminant--the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) (2000) has recently ruled that total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) are required even for stream segments impacted only by high suspended sediment concentrations. Furthermore, mobile sediment in karst may act as a vector for the transport of hydrophobic (“water fearing") contaminants (Ford and Williams, 1989). 
Researchers have long remarked on the mobility of sediment in karst (e.g., Bretz, 1942; White and White, 1968; Ford and Williams, 1989). Sediment characteristics have been used as tools to infer hydraulic conditions in conduits during flood flow (Gale, 1984) and to determine sediment source (White, 1977). It is only recently, however, that focus has been shifted to the importance of the sediments themselves and their impact on water quality. 
This chapter focuses on the environmental implications of sediments mobilized in response to rain events. Three different aspects are discussed: the role of suspended sediment in bacterial transport, temporal changes in sediment geochemistry, and 
Barbara J. Mahler, U.S. Geological Survey, Austin, Texas, 78754. Jean-Christian Personné, Université Montpellier II, 34095 Montpellier, France. F. Leo Lynch, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, Mississippi, 39762. Peter C. Van Metre, U.S. Geological Survey, Austin, Texas, 78754. 
B. J. MAHLER ET AL. 
sampling and analysis of particle-associated hydrophobic contaminants. Presented first are the results of an investigation of the relation between bacterial contamination and suspended sediments in karst, highlighting the importance of surface-water/ground-water interactions at a karst well field in southern France. Second are the results of intensive monitoring of sediment discharging from a karst spring in Austin, Texas, in response to two storm events, during which suspended sediment concentration, mineralogy, and particle size distribution were analyzed. Third is the description of a method to isolate suspended sediment for the direct analysis of sorbed hydrophobic contaminants and the preliminary results of a pilot study designed to determine the effect of urbanization on water quality at a karst spring in Austin, Texas. 
2. TRANSPORT OF SEDIMENT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIA IN KARST 
Bacteria and other microorganisms (viruses, protozoa) tend to adhere to solid surfaces. In porous media, bacterial transport is attenuated by adhesion of bacteria to the sediment matrix (McCaulou et al., 1995; Bales et al., 1995). In karst aquifers, however, sediment is mobile and thus may act as a vehicle for transport of adsorbed contaminants, including bacteria. Furthermore, karst aquifers display other properties that are highly pertinent to the investigation of bacterial contamination. First, karst aquifers often have a direct and rapid connection between surface water and ground water. Second, karst is highly heterogeneous; wells located only a few meters apart may display very different hydrogeologic behavior, indicating that such wells may have different degrees of vulnerability to microbiological contamination. Third, water quality in karst can vary dramatically over short time periods (e.g., Ryan and Meiman, 1996; Mahler and Lynch, 1999); quarterly, weekly, or even daily sampling may be insufficient to describe contamination events. Episodic contamination is of particular concern in the case of pathogenic microorganisms, where ingestion of even a single microorganism can cause illness. 
2.1. Karst Bacteria Field Investigation: Background 
A study of storm-event-based bacterial contamination in the Lez Basin in southern France was undertaken to investigate the importance of sediment-mediated bacterial transport in a heterogeneous karst aquifer. The study site (Figure 1), located in southern France 15 km north of the city of Montpellier, is adjacent to a surface stream that receives discharge from a wastewater treatment plant after rainfall. The objectives of the study were to: (1) determine the relation between bacterial contamination of surface water and ground water; and (2) determine the importance of suspended sediment in transporting bacteria. Samples were collected at the monitoring well field from two neighboring wells with contrasting hydraulic conductivities. The wells were sampled for several days immediately following rainfall that was sufficient to cause the surface stream to flow. Samples were analyzed for total suspended solids (TSS) and fecal coliform, generally assumed to be an indicator of fecal contamination and the presence of fecal-born pathogens. 
The wells sampled for this study, P7 and P8, are spaced 5 m apart. They are 115 mm in diameter and uncased below the top 50 cm. The annular space at the surface is sealed and encased in concrete. Both wells were drilled to a depth of 57 m with a 
SEDIMENTS-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 25 
Figure 1. Location of the Terrieu Creek study site. 
percussion-drilling rig and without the use of drilling mud. Well P7 is known to intercept a zone of slight fracturing at 40 to 50 m, whereas well P8 intercepts highly-fractured zones at 10 to 12 and 42 to 45 m; water-level changes in the two wells in response to rainfall closely mirror one another (Botton, 1984). The effective hydraulic conductivity of the zone penetrated by P7 is 10−7 to 10−9 m/s and that of P8 is 10−1 to 10−3 m/s, as determined by pump test (Drogue, 1974). 
The assumed source of fecal coliform contamination is a wastewater treatment plant located 400 m upstream of the well field. Primary-treated wastewater is collected in a basin; during rain storms, the retention basin sometimes overflows and the treated wastewater flows into Terrieu Creek. Previous research by Malard et al. (1994) at this 
B. 26 
J. MAHLER ET AL. 
Figure 2. Histogram of rainfall and indication of timing of events. 
site demonstrated the relation between the wastewater treatment plant, fecal coliform contamination in Terrieu Creek, and contamination of nearby wells. Primary-treated wastewater is used for irrigation of a pine plantation located between the well field and the treatment plant. There is no known source of bacterial contamination within the confines of the well field. 
2.2 Karst Bacteria Field Investigation: Methods 
Samples were collected before, during, and after a rainfall of 28 mm spread out over about 18 hours (Figure 2). Prior to the sampled storm event, no rain had fallen for 2 weeks, and the surface stream had not flowed for 4 weeks. Downhole pumps were installed, three well volumes purged, and initial samples collected before rainfall began. Water level was monitored in well P20, located in the same well field as P7 and P8. Piezometric level in P20 is highly correlated to that in P7 and P8 (Botton, 1984). A downhole piston and a downhole diaphragm pump were used to pump the wells at a rate of 5.5 L/min. Once rainfall began, samples were collected from the wells and the surface stream every 3 hours initially, then tapering off after the first 48 hours. Total suspended solids were determined by weight difference after vacuum filtration. 
Each sample was split for analysis of the whole (unfiltered) water and analysis of sediment-associated bacteria. Samples for whole-water analysis were sonicated to disaggregate microbial masses and detach bacteria fixed to sediment. Samples for analysis of bacteria associated with suspended sediment were gently agitated and filtered through an 8-μm membrane (for this study the bacteria-sediment conglomerate was operationally defined as having a minimum size of 8 μm to preclude retention of any unadhered bacteria). Sterile distilled water was then passed through the membrane to 
SEDIMENT-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 
rinse the sediment. The membrane was transferred to a flask containing sterile distilled water, which was then sonicated and vortexed. 
The whole-water sample and the sample obtained from the treated membrane were analyzed identically to determine the growth and enumeration of the fecal coliform. Based on their probable contamination, at least 2 aliquots of 0.1 to 100 mL of the prepared samples were filtered through a 0.45-um membrane to filter out all bacteria. The membranes were placed in petri dishes containing TTC + tergitol agar (Diagnostic Pasteur ref. 64454). The dishes were incubated, and then the bacteria were enumerated and expressed as colony forming units (CFU)/100 ml. 
2.3. Karst Bacteria Field Investigation: Results 
Rainfall at the site sufficient to cause Terrieu Creek to flow resulted in marked temporal changes in TSS and bacterial content in both surface and ground water. Both wells P7 and P8 responded quickly to elevated TSS concentrations and bacteria in Terrieu Creek. Temporal changes in TSS and concentrations of free and sediment associated bacteria continued over several days. 
Water level in well P20 and changes in TSS in wells P7 and P8 and in Terrieu are shown in Figure 3a. Water level rose steadily in the wells for the first 24 hours following rainfall, then dropped gradually over the next 11 days. Concentrations of TSS in Terrieu Creek were highest immediately after the ephemeral creek began to flow, then rapidly decreased over the 24 hours following rainfall. Concentrations of TSS in P7, the low conductivity well, showed little response to the rain event. (The dramatic increase in TSS in P7 68 hours after the rain event did not have any apparent correlation to any external events; it may have been produced by a sudden unblocking of a clay-filled fracture as water level fell.) In contrast, TSS in P8, the high-conductivity well, increased for the first 11 hours after the rain, then decreased, attaining a TSS similar to that of the creek and lower than that of P7. 
Fecal coliform density reached extremely high levels in Terrieu Creek and both wells directly after the creek began to flow and again several days later (Fig. 3b). The first peak in bacteria in Terrieu Creek coincided with the TSS peak in the first flush of streamflow. The second increase occurred when creek flow slowed and the water began to pond, peaking just before the creek ceased to flow. Samples of ponded water were not collected after cessation of flow. 
Fecal coliform density in both P7 and P8 increased more than an order of magnitude within 10 hours after flow began in Terrieu Creek. The bacteria then decreased for about 60 hours, before increasing again, peaking 120 hours after rainfall at 30,000 and 25,000 CFU/100 mL, respectively. 
Additional information on the relation between the wells and the surface stream can be shown by directly comparing their bacterial densities (Figure 3b). During the initial period of high bacterial densities (about 30 hours after rainfall began), P8 had bacterial densities about an order of magnitude less than those in Terrieu Creek, whereas densities in P7 were intermediate between the two. In contrast, during the second period both wells had bacterial densities of the same order of magnitude as that of the surface water. 
A substantial proportion of fecal coliform density was associated with suspended particulates (Figure 4a). The fixed proportion varies over time and shows no temporal pattern, but often represents 50% or more of fecal coliform. In contrast, the ratio between fecal coliform associated with sediment in surface water and ground water does show a 
B. 28 
J. MAHLER ET AL. 
Figure 3. Concentrations of TSS (a) and fecal coliform density (b) in wells P7 and P8 and Terrieu Creek in response to a storm. 
temporal pattern (Figure 4b,c), with suspended sediment from both wells initially much less contaminated than that in the surface water. During the latter part of the sampling period, the suspended sediment in both wells, and particularly in the fissured well (P8), had bacterial densities much more similar to that of the surface water. 
2.4 Karst Bacteria Field Investigation: Discussion and Implications 
Ground-water quality responded virtually immediately (less than 3 hours, the sampling interval) to changes in surface-water quality (Figure 3a,b). The source of the first peak in bacterial densities is most likely the upstream wastewater treatment facility, which overflows into Terrieu Creek after heavy rainfall. The source of the second increase in bacterial densities, which occurred long after overland flow had ceased and when flow in the creek had decreased to a trickle, could not have been the wastewater treatment plant. One possibility is that, given the warm daytime air temperatures (~25°C) and the almost stagnant condition of the water in the creekbed, bacterial populations in the ponding water underwent explosive growth, and infiltrated from the surface water into ground water. Alternatively, it is possible that bacteria were 
SEDIMENTS-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 29 
Figure 4. Percent fecal coliform associated with particulates in wells P7 and P8 and Terrieu Creek (a); and comparison of fecal coliform densities in whole water (b) and on suspended sediment (c) in each of the two wells to that in surface water. Ratios are calculated as CFU/L in each well divided by CFU/L in Terrieu Creek for whole water, and CFU/g in each well divided by CFU/g in Terrieu Creek for suspended sediment. 
multiplying simultaneously both in the surface water and in the ground water, resulting in similar densities of bacteria in both surface and ground water during this second peak. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that, during the latter portion of the sampling, bacteria densities in well P8, both in whole water and on suspended sediment (Figure 4b,c), were actually greater than those in the surface water. It may be that conditions within the aquifer were more favorable for the growth and/or survival of bacteria than conditions at the surface. A third possibility is that during the early portion of the response to the storm, fecal coliform and sediment stored in small conduits intercepted by the wells were remobilized. Because the sediment would have been in storage since a previous event, the bacterial counts would be expected to be lower because of die-off. However, the travel time from Terrieu Creek to the wells is sufficiently short that the influence of the creek would have been seen long before the second increase in bacterial levels, 60 hours after the onset of rainfall. 
B.J. MAHLER ET AL. 
Interestingly, well P8, which is situated in a fractured zone and thus might be expected to be more vulnerable to contamination from Terrieu Creek, often had lower fecal coliform densities than well P7, both in whole water and associated with suspended sediment. The differences in bacterial densities between the two wells may reflect varying degrees of dilution of contaminated water and sediment with less-contaminated inputs. One possible explanation is that there are differences in the degree of connection between the epikarstic (subcutaneous) zone and the wells. The epikarstic zone is the upper weathered layer of rock in karst terrain. It has a high permeability that diminishes with depth; during the days immediately following a storm, infiltrated rainwater stored in the epikarstic zone slowly percolates into the subsurface via a few widely spaced master joints (Williams, 1983). If P8 intersects one or more master joints, relatively uncontaminated rain water draining into P8 from the epikarst during the initial portion of the storm would dilute incoming water from the creek, whereas later in the sampling period, after the epikarstic zone had drained, P8 would be more greatly influenced by creek water. Similarly, the difference between the amount of fecal coliform associated with suspended sediment in P8 and Terrieu Creek could be caused by dilution of contaminated sediment from the creek with uncontaminated sediment from the epikarstic zone during the first flush. 
The substantial proportion of bacteria attached to a mobile solid phase adds an additional dimension to the prediction of bacterial fate and transport in karst terrain. Bacteria adhered to particulates have the potential to settle out of flow with the particulates and to be later remobilized with the particulates if flow velocity increases. Furthermore, the attachment of bacteria to a solid phase is a function of temperature (McCaulou et al., 1995), ionic strength (Fontes et al., 1991), and pH (Bales et al., 1995). The wide temporal variation of these parameters in karst ground water in response to influxes of surface water should result in the dynamic attachment and detachment of bacteria to particles. Finally, and perhaps most important from a public health perspective, bacteria associated with particulates are both more persistent in nature and more difficult to remove by treatment. They are protected from many of the predators that graze on free-floating bacteria (Harvey et al., 1984); can better resist chemical attack (Rittman, 1993); and may be able to utilize some of the organic materials associated with sediment particles as an energy source. Moreover, common methods of disinfection (chlorination, ozonation, ultraviolet light) are far less effective if the bacteria are entrapped in particulates, particularly those of fecal origin (Schoenen, 1998). 
3. CHARACTERISTICS OF SEDIMENT DISCHARGING FROM A KARST 
SPRING IN RESPONSE TO A STORM 
The geochemical characteristics of particulates discharging from a karst spring in response to a storm may be related to sediment source and can affect contaminant transport. Only a few studies, however, have characterized suspended sediment in karst from an environmental standpoint. Ryan and Meiman (1996) investigated temporal changes in bacteria and suspended sediment concentrations in springflow in response to rainfall. They found that fecal coliform and turbidity peaked simultaneously in a karst spring in Kentucky, but they did not attempt to characterize the sediment beyond ascertaining the TSS. Atteia and Kozel (1997) analyzed particle-size distributions in sediment discharging from two karst springs. They found that colloids composed 40% of 
SEDIMENTS-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 31 
Figure 5. The three segments of the Edwards (Balcones fault zone) aquifer. 
the particle surface area, potentially lending them an important role in contaminant transport. Characteristics such as mineralogy, surface area, and organic carbon content—all of which influence the degree to which contaminants adsorb to sediments—have yet to be described. 
3.1. Sediment Characteristics Field Investigation: Background 
An investigation of temporal variation in geochemical characteristics of suspended sediment in response to a storm was carried out at Barton Springs, the fifth largest spring in Texas (Mahler and Lynch, 1999). Barton Springs is the primary discharge point for the Barton Springs segment of the Edwards aquifer (hereinafter referred to as the Barton Springs aquifer), located in central Texas, one of the most rapidly urbanizing regions in the United States (Figure 5). The aquifer and its watershed are divided into three areas: the contributing zone, the recharge zone, and the confined zone (Figure 6). The contributing zone is not hydrogeologically connected to the aquifer, but surface water originating in this zone ultimately flows, via five main creeks, onto the highly permeable recharge zone. Once over the recharge zone, defined by the area where the highly 
B. 32 
J. MAHLER ET AL. 
Figure 6. The Barton Springs aquifer and contributing zone and location of sampling sites. 
permeable Edwards and Georgetown Limestones outcrop, water infiltrates into the aquifer through sinkholes and fractures in the creekbeds. Slade et al. (1986) estimate that 85% of aquifer recharge occurs in this way, with the remaining 15% occuring through direct infiltration on the uplands. The confined zone is the artesian portion of the aquifer, where the Edwards and Georgetown Limestones are confined by the relatively impermeable Del Rio Clay. Although surface flow across the aquifer’s watershed is generally from west to east, ground-water flow is predominantly NNE, and about 90% discharges from Barton Springs. The series of NNE-trending high-angle normal faults comprising the Balcones fault zone are responsible for the structurally controlled direction of subsurface flow (Slade et al., 1986). 
The travel time from recharge to discharge is difficult to define, as the distance from the most distal part of the recharge zone to Barton Springs is about 30 km, and recharge occurs through both large and small recharge features in and outside of creekbeds. However, some idea of travel times can be gained from various ground-water traces: a trace carried out during high flow conditions demonstrated that recharge from Williamson Creek discharged from Barton Springs in less than 30 hours (Hauwert et al., 
SEDIMENT-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 
1998); a second trace showed a travel time from the lower portion of Barton Creek to Barton Springs of 10 hours; in contrast, dye injected into Onion Creek took more than 2 weeks to arrive at Barton Springs (Hauwert et al., in press). Travel time can vary greatly with water level. 
Barton Springs is impounded by a dam, creating Barton Springs Pool. Barton Creek, when flowing, is routed around the pool through a bypass. Creek flow does occasionally overwhelm the capacity of the bypass, but this did not occur during the two storms described here. The impoundment of springflow places an artificial head over the springs. When the dam gates are removed, spring discharge (Q) increases as a result of the sudden change in hydraulic gradient, 
During the period of investigation, the dam gates were routinely removed once a week and after storm events for pool cleaning. Two separate rating curves, one for use when the pool is full and the second for when the gates are removed, have been developed by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) for determining discharge from the spring based on water level in a nearby well. Based on the rating curves, the average discharge from the springs of 1.4 m/s increases to 1.9 m/s when the pool level is lowered. 
The water quality of Barton Springs is important for several reasons. It provides a part of Austin's municipal water supply; it is the sole home of the Barton Springs salamander (Eurycea sosorum), listed as an endangered species by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and it is considered a significant addition to Austin's quality of life and an important tourist attraction. 
In general the water quality at Barton Springs is considered "good" (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 1997), but may be declining. Statistically significant increases in conductivity, sulfate, turbidity, and total organic carbon in base flow have been noted (City of Austin, 1999), and soluble pesticides have been detected in both storm discharge and base flow (Mahler and Van Metre, 2000). Analyses of water samples from aquifer wells and small springs have detected petroleum hydrocarbons, pesticides, arsenic, and lead (Hauwert and Vickers, 1994). Reported spills of hazardous materials over the aquifer from 1986 to 1992 included gasoline and diesel fuels, pesticides, trichloroethane, and perchloroethene (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 1997). The sorption of these contaminants onto solid surfaces is a function of the individual contaminant and the organic carbon content, specific surface area, and mineralogy of the solid. Mobile particulates may thus play an important role in the concentration and transport of contaminants through the aquifer. 
3.2. Sediment Characteristics Field Investigation: Methods 
Hourly grab samples were collected from the mouth of one of the main orifices of Barton Springs for 24 hours following two storm events. Storm 1 occurred toward the end of a period of average rainfall. During this event, a total of 85 mm of rain fell. Storm 2, the first substantial event following storm 1, occurred 6 months later. During this event, 44 mm of rain fell. Prior to storm 1, the dam gates had been removed by pool staff for pool cleaning and were replaced just after the beginning of the storm; the gates were removed by pool staff about 12 hours after rainfall for both storms (Figure 7). The samples were collected in 20-L polyethylene containers, two per sample. One-liter samples were removed for analysis of TSS, which was carried out by weight difference after vacuum filtration. The particles on the filters were examined under a binocular 
B. 34 
J. MAHLER ET AL. 
Figure 7. 
Barton Springs discharge (Q) after storms 1 and 2. Note the increase in Q. microscope for visual identification. The particulate fraction in the remaining sample was concentrated by in-line centrifugation: sample was pumped at a steady rate of 120 mL/min through a Servall in-line system rotating at 6,000 rpm; the 3.3-minute residence times corresponds to collection of the >0.3-μm fraction, the operational definition of particulate for this study. Particle-size distributions (PSD) were determined by the Coulter Counter system. Mineralogy was analyzed by powder X-ray diffraction with a Siemens D-500 diffractometer, and the data were interpreted as described in Lynch (1997). Turbidity, pH, and specific conductance (SC) were measured in situ using a Horiba Model U-10. 
3.3. Sediment Characteristics Field Investigation: Results 
The response of Q to the storm events is difficult to ascertain, as it was obscured by the immediate and dramatic increase caused by removal of the dam gates after the storm events (Figure 7). However, it is clear that the spring hydrographs would have peaked at some time less than 26 hours after rainfall. 
Concentrations of TSS began to increase 8 to 9 hours after rainfall began, and peaked at about 12 to 15 hours (Figure 8). The shape of these sedigraphs is similar to those of a typical storm hydrograph, with a steep rising limb and a more gradually-tapering falling limb. The total mass of sediment discharged for storms 1 and 2 was about 805 and 1,013 kg, respectively, based on results of the TSS analysis and Q. 
Inspection of the particles trapped on the filters revealed numerous fibers in a wide range of colors and lengths. Some fibers were coated with what appeared to be dark brown-black organic matter, and others were ensnared in clumps of inorganic particles and organic matter. Individual pieces of organic matter ranged from a few microns to 50 
SEDIMENTS-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 35 
Changes Figure 8. 
in TSS in response to storms 1 and 2. 
μm in diameter. Based on visual inspection, the amount of organic matter seemed to increase with increasing TSS, giving the filter a rich tan color at the peak of the sedigraph. Pieces of quartz, calcite, and dolomite were recognizable on the filters, and other particles 10 to 20 μm in diameter in shades of fuschia-pink, bright green, and turquoise blue were rarer but present. 
Temporal changes in mineralogy were somewhat similar between the two storms, but with some differences (Figure 9). For both storms, clay and dolomite were predominant with lesser amounts of quartz and calcite. After both storms, the amount of clay minerals in the samples increased throughout the response to the event. However, at the beginning of the response to storm 2, calcite was present in a proportion equal to that of clay and dolomite before dropping off about 12 hours after rainfall began. The response to storm 2 also showed a marked peak in dolomite coincident with the TSS peak. 
The particle-size distribution function (PSDF) is expressed as the number of particles per milliliter of solution per class size (particles ml−1 μm−1); a representative PSDF for the storms (as computed for storm 1) is shown in Figure 10. A cubic regression, determined to be the best fit for the data, was used to compute the PSDF at 4 and 10 μm (N4μ and N10μ) and dmax, defined as the particle diameter for which only 10 particles were counted. Changes in these three parameters in response to the storms are shown in Figure 11. 
3.4. Sediment Characteristics Field Investigation: Discussion 
Visual evidence and timing of sediment peaks indicate that some portion of discharging sediments is allogenic. The colored fibers and organic matter are both clearly allogenic. Sediment samples collected from Barton Springs have an organic 
B. 36 
J. MAHLER ET AL. 
Figure 9. Changes in mineralogy in response to storms 1 and 2 as percent by weight of total sediment (a and b) 
and as concentration in milligrams per liter of sample (c and d). 
carbon content of 1.6 to 2.9% by weight (U.S. Geological Survey, unpublished data), similar to that of surface samples and greater than that of sediment from wells and caves in the recharge zone (Mahler et al., 1999). 
Peak concentrations of TSS coincide with changes in specific conductance, indicating flushing of surface water through the aquifer (Mahler and Lynch, 1999) and possibly a surface origin for much of the sediment. Although the removal of the dam gates coincides with increases in TSS during the two storms, the increase cannot be attributed to removal of the gates—note, for example, that although the dam gates were not in place at the beginning of storm 1 (Figure 7), TSS was only 1 mg/L (Figure 8). The gates have been removed dozens of times during routine pool maintenance without resulting in an increase in turbidity, as recorded at 15-minute intervals on a DataSonde installed in the main spring orifice (David Johns, City of Austin, unpublished data). 
SEDIMENTS-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 37 
Figure 10. R epresentative p article-size d istribution function (PSDF) for the storms fit with a cubic regression 
equation. 
Furthermore, TSS increased 12 to 24 hours following rainfall even in instances where the pool gates have not been removed (David Johns, City of Austin, unpublished data). Increases in TSS must therefore be caused either by changes in flow conditions at the surface or in the more distal parts of the aquifer unaffected by a change in head at the spring. Temporal changes in mineralogy indicate a varying contribution of sediment from different sources. The gradual increase in proportions of clay over time was not matched by a gradual decrease in the other three mineralogical constituents over time for either storm. The increase in clay minerals cannot be attributed solely to a hydraulic change causing the small, platy clay minerals to stay in suspension as other minerals drop out, because dolomite both increases and decreases while clay is increasing during storm 2. One hypothesis is that different aquifer compartments are accessed at different stages of the storm surge. Mahler et al. (1999) found statistically significant differences in mineralogy of sediments from the surface, in wells, and in caves in the Barton Springs recharge zone. Surface sediments were calcite rich and may contribute to the initial pulse of sediment discharging from the spring. Furthermore, it is unlikely that the clay and dolomite share the same source, as those compartments found to have a high proportion of dolomite contained little or no clay. 
A second and more likely hypothesis to explain the variability in mineralogic composition of the suspended sediment over time stems from mineralogic differences at the surface. The different members of the Edwards Group outcrop across the aquifer, and each have subtly distinct clay mineralogies. Spatial variation in rainfall and differences in travel time could result in the appearance of these distinct sediment types at the spring at different times. 
Finally, there are five different creek basins contributing flow to Barton Springs, each with discrete recharge points and different flowpaths and travel times. Thus, it cannot be expected that the mineralogic composition of the discharging sediment would be homogeneous. 
38 
Temporal changes in the PSDF may also reflect conditions both within and outside the aquifer. For both storms, dmax reaches a maximum at the same time that TSS peaks, a reflection of maximum flow velocity. The maximum particle size decreases from 8 to 12 hours after rainfall, possibly indicating that an initial flush of water from one source is later followed by an influx from another source. The late flush of clay minerals for storm 2, seen both in the mineralogy and as an increase in N4μm, indicates a newly accessed source of clay minerals. 
Interestingly, the amount of sediment discharged in response to storm 2 was greater than that discharged in response to storm 1, even though only one-half as much rain fell. This may be a function of the intensity and location of rainfall, in which case the source of the sediment must be the surface. Alternatively, it may be the result of seasonal differences in sediment supply. The concept of sediment supply is used to describe and predict sediment transport by surface streams: as the wet season progresses, sediment concentrations for a given stream discharge decrease as sediment supplies are depleted. During the dry period that follows, supplies are “reset” by mass soil erosion processes, which may be caused by land-use practices such as construction and devegetation, or natural phenomena such as landslides (Van Sickle and Beschta, 1983). Storm 1 occurred 
Figure 11. Changes in PSDF parameters N4μm, N10μm, and dmax in response to storms 1 and 2. 
B. J. MAHLER ET AL. 
SEDIMENT-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 
at the end of a wet period and storm 2 after a long dry period. Based on the concept of sediment supply, storm 2 would be expected to transport more sediment than storm 1. This alternative also supports the hypothesis of an allochthonous source for the sediment: the processes that control sediment supply and depletion take place at the surface, not in the subsurface. Additionally, some sediment could be supplied to conduits during small rains, another form of “resetting" the supply, and then resuspended and flushed out during a large storm. Thus, in either case, the difference in the amount of sediment discharged indicates that the primary source of the discharging sediment is allochthonous, which could have important implications for decisions concerning land-use practices. 
4. COLLECTION OF SUSPENDED SEDIMENTS DISCHARGING FROM 
SPRINGS FOR ANALYSIS 
The presence of allochthonous sediment in discharge from Barton Springs raises the question: what role do these sediments play in the transport of hydrophobic contaminants (HCs) through the aquifer? The suspended sediments have a relatively high organic carbon content, and sorption of HCs onto solids is dominated by partitioning into organic carbon. The suspended sediments contain an important fraction of clay minerals, which, because of their large surface area, can also concentrate and transport HCs through direct sorption to the mineral surface. Clearly, these sediments have the potential to transport HCs through the aquifer to discharge at the spring, but are they actually doing so? 
4.1. Large-Volume Filtration: Background 
Occurrence and transport of HCs have important implications for health of biota as well as humans. Of the top 20 contaminants on the USEPA Hazardous Substances Priority List, 15 are hydrophobic (USEPA, 1999). These contaminants include trace elements, organochlorine compounds, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). A major fraction of HCs are transported adhered to suspended sediment (Bradford and Horowitz, 1982; Garbarino et al., 1995; Rostad et al., 1995). 
Using traditional methods of whole-water analysis, concentrations of these HCs are usually underestimated. Indeed, by these methods HCs may not even be detected, although they may occur on sediment at concentrations likely to have toxic effects on biota. The conventional approach for determining the concentration of HCs on suspended sediment is to analyze a whole-water sample and a filtered water sample and to assume that the difference between the two represents the fraction sorbed to suspended sediment. The major problem with this approach is that the amount of suspended sediment and associated contaminant in the whole-water sample may not be sufficient to produce a detection by whole-water analysis methods. This is particularly true if the suspended sediment concentration in the sample is small, as is generally the case for springs relative to surface water. For example, if a sample contains 50 mg/L of suspended sediment, and the sediment contains 300 ug/kg of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) (a concentration likely to adversely affect biota health (Environment Canada, 1998)), the concentration of PCBs in the whole-water sample will be 0.015 ug/L. This concentration is well below most laboratory method detection limits-for example, the USGS National 
B. J. MAHLER ET AL. 
Water Quality Laboratory (NWQL) method detection limit is 0.1 ug/L--yet the solid phase itself is highly contaminated. 
Because of the tendency of HCs to associate with particles, suspended sediment is likely to be the vehicle for the vast majority of the transport of HCs. Once the sediment settles out of flow and settles to the floor of the receiving water body, it can represent a threat to the ecological community. Benzo(a)pyrene, for example, was not detected in any of 100 storm-event samples in residential sites in the Dallas-Fort Worth area and was detected in less than 5% of samples from commercial and industrial sites (Raines et al., 1997). Yet concentrations of benzo[a]pyrene have increased 20-fold in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, coincident with urban development, based on an age-dated sediment core from White Rock Lake in Dallas (Van Metre et al., 2000). 
A more effective approach to determining the concentration of HCs on suspended sediments is to separate the sediment from the water column and analyze it directly. Although there are several approaches to this, as described by Horowitz (1995), the least expensive and most efficient method for use on low-TSS karst spring water is large volume filtration (LVF). This involves in situ filtration of the spring water using an apparatus that allows both a sufficient amount of material to be collected for analysis and the material in a form that lends itself to analysis. 
4.2. Large-Volume Filtration: Methods 
A major motivation for the LVF method is the mass of sediment required to achieve reasonable analytical method detection limits. Target constituents include major and trace elements, organochlorine pesticides, PCBs, and PAHs. The amount of sediment required for the analysis of major and trace elements by the USGS NWQL, for example, is 300 to 500 mg dry weight (R. Sanzalone, USGS, oral commun.). The amount of sediment required for the analysis of the organic compounds is 3 to 5 g dry weight (E. Furlong, USGS, oral commun.). The more material that is supplied, the less the interference and the lower the detection limits (E. Furlong, USGS, oral commun.). 
To obtain sufficient sample for major and trace element analysis, water is pumped through a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter held in an acrylic filter holder. A 145 mm diameter, 0.5-um pore-size PTFE filter is sprayed lightly with methanol to allow water to pass through, and water is pumped through until the filter clogs. (Although the particulate phase is often operationally defined to be >0.3 um, it is very difficult to pass water through a PTFE filter of pore size <0.5 um.) The filter is placed in a sealable plastic bag with a few milliliters of distilled water and massaged until all the sediment has been removed from the filter and is suspended in the small volume of water. More than 98% of the initial suspended sediment can be recovered in this fashion. The water containing the sediment is then poured into a small plastic dish, frozen, and freeze-dried for analysis. A single filter may allow 100 to 500 mg of sediment to be recovered, depending on the organic matter and algal content of the water. 
To obtain sufficient sample for analysis of organochlorine compounds and PAHs, water is pumped through a glass-fiber filter held in a stainless-steel plate filter holder. The filters are pre-cleaned by baking and wrapped in aluminum foil pending use, Initially, water can be pumped through the 298-mm diameter, 0.7-um pore-size glass fiber filter (the minimum pore size available) at a rate of 1 L or more per minute; as the filter begins to clog, the flow rate slows. Once the filter has clogged, air is pumped 
SEDIMENT-ASSOCIATED CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT 
Event date 
Volume filtered 
5/27/99 5/01/00 5/02/00 6/09/00 
Table 1. Details of sampling during three storm events. 
Sample timing 
TSS Rainfall 
(hrs after 
range (mm) 
rainfall onset) 
(mg/L) 11-22 
2-16 12-20 
2-9 12-19 112 
12-14 
28-35 6-10 
36-42 
1,189 1,043 500 
36 
5-9 
6/10/00 
through the filter to remove as much water as possible-drying the filter in this way improves laboratory minimum reporting levels by decreasing interference during the analysis. A graduated container is used to collect outflow from the filter, and the volume of water pumped to clog the filter is recorded. Experience indicates that about 0.5-2 g of sediment is trapped on each filter, so that 2 to 3 clogged filters are required to obtain enough material for analysis. The filters are placed (together) in a baked glass jar and chilled for shipment to the laboratory. Results are reported as mass of organic contaminant per liter of water filtered. The concentration is converted to mass of organic contaminant per mass of sediment based on the volume filtered and the suspended sediment concentration of the original sample; samples for TSS concentrations are collected before and after sample processing. 
For the results presented here, elemental concentrations were determined on concentrated-acid digests using inductivity coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES); concentrations of cadmium, chromium, lead, and zinc were determined on concentrated-acid digests using graphite furnace atomic adsorption (GFAA); and concentrations of mercury were determined by cold-vapor atomic adsorption (CVAA) (Fishman and Friedman, 1989). Organochlorine compounds and PAHs were measured in organic-solvent extracts using a dual capillary-column gas chromatograph with dual electron capture detector (Foreman et al., 1995; Furlong et al., 1996). The filters and the sediment they contain are extracted together. The method uses a soxhlet extraction with dichloromethane and methanol followed by gel permeation and adsorption chromatographic fractionation. 
To date, three storm events have been sampled (Table 1). A sample for each event was collected in situ at Barton Springs. In addition, a flow-weighted composite sample for each event was collected from each of two sites from Barton Creek (Figure 6). The first site is located just upstream of the springs (“Barton Above"), where the watershed has been extensively developed with residential and commercial land-use. Water from this portion of the creek is not thought to recharge Barton Springs; however, Hauwert et al. (in press) determined a travel time of about 10 hours from a point of infiltration about 2 km upstream of this site to the springs. The second site is Barton Creek at Highway 71 (“Barton @ 71"), a reference site in the contributing zone, where there is relatively little development. Water from the contributing zone flows onto the western portion of the recharge zone--infiltration in this area discharges from Cold Springs, a small spring west of Barton Springs (Hauwert et al., 1998). Under high flow conditions, however, as recharge features in the western portion of the recharge zone become saturated, flow from the contributing zone may continue downstream to infiltrate through features in the