Detecting and characterizing unroofed caves by ground penetrating radar
Teja Čeru a,⁎, Ela Šegina b, Martin Knez c,d,e, Čedomir Benac f, Andrej Gosar a

The bare karst surface in the southeastern part of Krk Island (Croatia) is characterized by different surface karst features, such as valley-like shallow linear depressions and partially or fully sediment-filled depressions of variousshapes and sizes. They were noticed due to locally increased thickness of sediment and enhanced vegetationbut had not yet been systematically studied and defined. Considering only the geometry of the investigated surfacefeatures and the rare traces of cave environments detected by field surveys, it was unclear which processes(surface karstification and/or speleogenesis) contributed most to their formation. The low-frequency groundpenetrating radar (GPR) method using a special 50 MHz RTA antenna was applied to study and describe thesekarst features. Three study siteswere chosen and 5 km of GPR profileswere positioned to include various surfacefeatures. The results obtained from the GPR investigation lead to the following conclusions: (1) an increasedthickness of sediment was detected in all the investigated depressions indicating their considerable depth;(2) areas between different depressions expressed as attenuated zones in GPR images reveal their interconnection;(3) transitions between surface and underground features are characterized by a collapsed passage visiblein the GPR data; and (4) an underground continuation of surface valley-like depressions was detected, provingthe speleogenetic origin of such features. Subsurface information obtained using GPR indicates that the valleylikedepressions, irregular depressions completely or partially filled with sediment, and some dolines are associatedwith a nearly 4km-long unroofed cave and developed as a result of karst denudation. In the regional context,these results suggest long-lasting karstification processes in the area, in contrast to the pre-karstic fluvial phasepreviously assumed to have occurred here. This research is the first application of the GPR method to survey unroofedcaves worldwide and the first detailed study of such karst features in Croatia. The low-frequency GPRproved to be an efficient method not only for detecting underground continuations but also for distinguishingand identifying surface features and transition zones between surface and subsurface segments of unroofedcaves and can therefore be used for recognizing similar geomorphological features.
Depressions on karst surfaces can be of various origin, including denudationof underground cavities and enhanced surface dissolution(Ford and Williams, 2007). However, they tend to exhibit a locallyspecific and highly uniformmorphology (Šušteršič, 2006) and the originof a particular feature in its later stages often becomes unrecognizable(Mihevc, 1998).
Historically, karst surfaces and subsurfaceswere typically studied asseparate systems with little to no interplay, and the various types ofsurface depressions have usually been interpreted as types of dolinesor as the result of the lithological properties of rock and its fracturing. The recognition of unroofed caves that appear on the karst surface dueto its denudation (Knez and Slabe, 1999) has linked karst surface andsubsurface features and brought an important turnabout in the understandingand interpretation of karst surface morphology (Knez andŠebela, 1994; Mihevc, 1996, 2001, 2011; Mihevc et al., 1998; Šušteršič,1998; Knez and Slabe, 1999, 2002, 2016). Unroofed caves are karst phenomena that constitute a relativelycommon karst landform(Knez and Slabe, 2016). The extent and importanceof underground formations in shaping recent surfaces have beenthoroughly and systematically studied mostly in the Classical karst of Slovenia, although some published literature describes variousprocesses and mechanisms leading to the formation of unroofed caves elsewhere in the world (Mais, 1999; Osborne, 2001; Bosák et al.,2002; Klimchouk, 2006; Ufrecht, 2008). Given the strong surface reshaping that masks the origin of theinitial karst depression and the scarcity of cave sediment and rock sculpturingas typical proofs of speleogenesis, geophysical methods can help identify the origin of this particular karst feature by demonstrating linkagesbetween the surface and the underground. Among all geophysical methods, ground penetrating radar (GPR) has been used increasingly inthe last decade in karst areas to solve various issues related to environmental, hydrogeological, and geotechnical research. It helps identifyand locate subsurface features such as cavities, conduits, and fractures(Chalikakis et al., 2011). Most of the published studies have focusedon the detection of shallow cavities, their location and geometrical extent(e.g. Chamberlain et al., 2000; Beres et al., 2001; Mcmechan et al.,2002; Mochales et al., 2008; Pueyo-Anchuela et al., 2009; Gosar, 2012;Seren et al., 2012; Vadillo et al., 2012; Łyskowski et al., 2014; Martínez-Moreno et al., 2014; Gosar and Čeru, 2016). According to theoverview of several studies published by Martínez-Moreno et al.(2013), GPR has proven to be an appropriate method for detecting cavities with a depth of up to 30 m. Geoelectrical methods integrated with magnetic and/or gravity methods should be applied to detect deeper caves (40–80 m) (Martínez-Moreno et al., 2013).Although GPR has significant limitations in depth range compared toother geophysical methods, particularly where karst rock is covered by unconsolidated sediment, it provides the most detailed information about near-surface features. Because of this advantage, several recent studies have successfully combined the GPR method with other geophysical methods (mainly various resistivity methods) to describe the internal geometry of dolines and to locate areas prone to the collapse of underground cavities, especially in urban areas (e.g.Batayneh et al., 2002; Kruse et al., 2006; Delle Rose and Leucci, 2010;Valois et al., 2011; Gómez-Ortiz and Martín-Crespo, 2012; Carbonelet al., 2014; Rodriguez et al., 2014; Pueyo-Anchuela et al., 2015;Margiotta et al., 2016; Fabregat et al., 2017). The GPR method is alsocommonly used in investigations of karst aquifers to locate and determine structural features related to the hydrodynamic mechanism of aquifers (e.g. Beres and Haeni, 1991; Al-fares et al., 2002; Carriere et al.,2013; Mount et al., 2014).
In Croatia, 43.7% of the country's surface consists of karst and fluviokarst relief (Bognar et al., 2012). Krk Island is an example of a predominantly karst landscape exhibiting very different karst forms, where two distinct types of karst relief have been identified: one as a typical doline karst and the other as bare (paleo)fluviokarst relief (Benacet al., 2013). On the basis of analysis of data provided from topographic maps and aerial photographs in combination with field investigation,Benac et al. (2013) hypothesized that differences in the recent morphology are the result of varying thickness of the Paleogene impermeable marly cover and/or the intensity of tectonics. However, the bare karst plateau and its related surface karst features in the southeastern partof Krk Island presented in this paper were not included in their study. In general, the various shallow (partially or completely sedimentfilled)depressions of different shapes and sizes (Fig. 1) occurring inthe studied area are poorly understood and have not previously beensystematically analyzed or defined. Most of them, particularly those of circular shape, have been considered dolines, recognizable as closed depressionson the karst surface, with some of them identified ascryptodolines (Čeru et al., 2015; Šegina et al., 2015). On the basis of featuregeometry, partially preserved cave sediment and flowstones, and apreliminary GPR survey, we hypothesized that some of the sediment-filled surface features could be the result of the lowering of the karst surfacedue to denudation leading to the occurrence of unroofed caves.The general purpose of this survey was to research the possibilitiesof using the GPR method to detect surface and subsurface segments of unroofed caves and connect all the recognized features into a cohesivewhole. Along with the known phenomena linked to unroofed caves,such as series of dolines, elongated dolines, and linear segments fully filled with sediments, the study included newly discovered surface(the so-called “valley-like linear depressions”) and subsurface segments (the so-called “transition zones”) of the unroofed caves. All the recognizedand described shapes, the connections between them, and theirorigin are crucial for understanding karst processes in the wider geomorphological community.
The main objectives of the local importance of this research are:(1) to identify valley-like linear depressions and partially to completely sediment-filled depressions of circular to irregular planar shape and define their connections; (2) to explain the formation and evolution of various karst features with different surface manifestations; (3) to prove the existence of the unroofed cave by locating an underground continuation; and (4) to integrate results from GPR data, field investigation, and orthophoto images into a broader geomorphological and tectonic context and thusprovide information for better understanding the karstification processes in this area over time.
2. Geological and geomorphological settings of the study area
Krk Island is located in the Kvarner area of the northeastern part ofthe Adriatic Sea (Fig. 2a). The wider region is a part of the ExternalDinarides, and its major orographic axis and geological structures havea Dinaric strike (NW–SE to NNW–SSE) (Velić and Vlahović, 2009). Theisland consists mainly of carbonate rock (Fig. 2b). Outcrops of Lower Cretaceous (Albian) limestone and dolomitic limestone are found inthe western and southwestern parts of the island and form the coresof large anticlines. Albian-Cenomanian dolomites and diageneticbreccias are located in relatively narrow zones mainly in the centraland western parts of the island. Outcrops of Cenomanian-Senonianrudist limestone occur throughout the island. Paleogene foraminiferallimestone and siliciclastic rock (marls and flysch on top) mainlyoccupy the central depression of the island, but short and narrowstretches are also found along the northeastern and southwesterncoast of the island (Šikić et al., 1969; Mamužić et al., 1969; Šušnjaret al., 1970). Oligocene-Miocene carbonate breccia partially overlies Cretaceous and Paleogene rock in the southwestern part of theisland.
The area of Krk Island was part of the Adriatic carbonate platform during the majority of the Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods. During the Upper Cretaceous, tectonic movements caused the simultaneous uplift of some parts of the platform and the subsidence of other parts. Partsof the Kvarner area, including parts of Krk Island, probably emergedand remained under subaerial conditions from the end of theCretaceous until the start of a new marine transgression in theP aleogene (Vlahović et al., 2005). The present tectonic fabric of KrkIsland can be described simply as the raised area between two submerged Palaeogene flysch basins on the northeast (Vinodol Channel) and southwest (Kvarnerić) (Korbar, 2009; Surić et al., 2014). Thedominant NW-SE strike of these tectonic structures was disturbed by younger diagonal and transversal strike-slip faults during the Plioceneand Quaternary under the influence of a re-oriented, neotectonic regional stress of approximately N\\S direction (Jamičić et al., 1995;Korbar, 2009; Benac et al., 2013).The sea level of the Mediterranean Sea fluctuated between 40 and60mbelowthe present m.s.l. (mean seal level) over a relatively long period(110–30 ka BP) in the Late Pleistocene (Lambeck and Purcell, 2005;Surić, 2009). The erosion processes of surface streamswere probably intense during this period (Benac and Juračić, 1998). Karstification couldhave extended well belowthe present sea level, down to the then absolute erosional base (Late Pleistocene sea level). Thus, in the wider Kvarner area numerous submerged caves have been found as deep as50 m below m.s.l. (Benac et al., 2008). Nowadays, Krk Island has Mediterranean climate conditions, receiving 1200–1500 mm of annual precipitation with relatively frequent daily rainfalls of more than100 mm (Penzar et al., 2001).The recent karst surface on Krk Island is characterized by a gentlyundulating plateau with dolines, while neotectonically disturbed areasare characterized by linear depressions and valleys. Several large depressions have been filled by younger Quaternary deposits (Benacet al., 2013).The study area is located on a bare high karst plateau in the southeastern part of the island at around 350ma.s.l. (Fig. 2c). Here, nearly 4 km of partially or completely sediment-filled, valley-like linear to irregular surface features are visible (Fig. 3). The valley-like lineardepressions are 10–50 m wide and at most 270 m long. Their maximum depth is approximately 3 m but mainly less. Some are completely filled with sediment and level with the surrounding relief. The flanks of the valley-like depressions have gentle slopesthat are usually bounded by man-made dry stone walls and similar structures. In contrast to the bare surroundings, the bottoms of the depressions are covered by a reddish loamy sediment consisting offine sand and silt (terra rossa) of varying thickness and partly modified for agricultural use. In most cases, the terra rossa has apolygenetic origin, and was formed by mixing the insoluble residue of carbonate rocks with weathered and eroded loess, marls, andflysch (Benac and Durn, 1997; Durn, 2003).Pieces of flowstone (Fig. 4a) and flowstone-covered breccia (Fig. 4b) were located at the flank of the valley-like linear depressions. Due to denudation,no cave walls are preserved, so potential cave-originated rockrelief is completely absent. The only remnants of cave sediment otherthan pieces of flowstone are fluvial sediment (pebbles) (Fig. 4c), which is not sufficient to prove the existence of an unroofed cave system.
3. Manifestation of unroofed caves on the karst surface and a simple conceptual model of the study area
Unroofed caves are caves or cave segments filled with sediment that appear on the karst surface as karst denudation removes the rock above them. The shape and visibility of unroofed caves on karst surfaces depends on the cave type and the manner in which the denudation cuts the cave (Fig. 5) (Šušteršič, 1998; Mihevc,2001; Knez and Slabe, 2002).
Denudation of horizontal passages as studied up to now results in elongated dolines (Fig. 5a) or a series of dolines (Fig. 5c) (Mihevc,2015). The unroofed caves studied by Mihevc (2001) appear on the surface as linear to irregular depressions completely filled with sediment, recognizable as patches with less rock and thicker soil, andflysch sediment and occasionally visible flowstone on the surface. When emptied, their walls are vertical or overhanging with notchesand scallops as remnants of underground water flow (Mihevc et al.,1998). The unroofed caves studied by Šušteršič (1998) appear differently on karst surfaces, as overhangs, short fragments, or a number of dipping caverns choked farther down by sediment. They have limited and localized flowstone deposits. The denuded vadose shafts filled with sediment are presumed to transform into dolines (Mihevc et al., 1998) (Fig. 5b). Denuded loops on the surface looklike small solution dolines (Šušteršič, 1998) (Fig. 5c). Many of the shapes have been described as parts of unroofed caves, but valleylike depressions such as the ones observed at the study area have not been the subject of detailed study. It is evident that unroofed caves result in a variety of depressions that may be additionally subject to considerable reshaping processes.The morphological confirmation of an unroofed cave therefore demands additional evidence of speleogenetic origin. Direct proof of speleogenesis such as rock sculpturing (scallops) and cave sediment(flowstones, pebbles, and boulders rounded by an undergroundstream) may appear on a denuded karst surface only if they were present in a former cave and if they survived after being subjectto later destructive erosive processes on the surface. It is quite possible for all such evidence to be obliterated. On the contrary, however,underground linkages between recent surface features and underground continuations of cave passages are undeniable proof oftheir speleogenetic origin.Three study siteswere selected for the GPR investigation on the basisof our previous field examinations, orthophoto analysis, and the preliminaryGPR results (Čeru et al., 2015). The targeted positioning of GPR profiles was carried out at Sites 1, 2, and 3 (Fig. 3) to include all the various karst depressions representing different manifestations of unroofed caves. A simple conceptual model of the development of karst depressions was established to position GPR profiles that could prove their speleogenetic origin (Fig. 6). The theoretical model assumes thatdenudation resulted in the gradual temporal erosion of ceiling of thecave passage upper segments that in the late Pleistocene were subjectto further intense surface reshaping processes as they achieved their recent geomorphological manifestation.If the recent surface features are indeed denuded segments of a cavesystem, as presumed in the theoretical model (Fig. 6), we could expectto detect underground continuations of the cave passage near and betweenthe denuded segments, as shown in the Fig. 7.
4. Methodology
4.1. The GPR method
Ground penetrating radar (GPR), an established non-destructive geophysical tool for obtaining high-resolution images of near surface features, has been increasingly used in the last decade due to its relatively fast and easy measuring abilities. It is an active electromagnetic method that emits short pulses of electromagnetic waves into the subsurface and detects reflected signals from the interfaces between materials with different electromagnetic properties(Blindow et al., 2007). Due to contrasts in dielectric properties,subsurface features of geological origin such as the boundary between sediment and bedrock, groundwater level, changes in soil or rock, geological structures, lithological changes, sedimentary structures, or cavities can generate distinctive reflections on GPR images (Neal, 2004).The main factors that must be considered when choosing the type of GPR system are the depth of penetration and the resolution required for a specific goal. The depth of penetration depends on the electrical, magnetic, and dielectric properties of the ground as well as on the frequency of the signal itself (Reynolds, 2011).The achieved resolution depends on signal frequency, meaning higher frequencies (250 MHz or more) provide better resolutionbut limit the depth of penetration to a couple of meters or less. However,many other natural and artificial factors can strongly affect  electromagnetic properties and influence the GPR reflection configuration.Weather conditions and the characteristics of the material(e.g. grain-size distribution, compaction, porosity, degree of saturation,presence of organic materials, and iron-oxide bands in sediment),surface roughness, vegetation, and surface and subsurfaceinfrastructure may significantly influence the quality of GPR imagesand their depth range (Davis and Annan, 1989; Van Dam, 2001,2010; Neal, 2004; Słowik, 2011, 2012). It is therefore necessary tobear in mind that interpretation of GPR data is not straightforward in karst environments where the properties of the subsurface underground can change very suddenly and unpredictably.
4.2. GPR survey and data processing
This study is based on enhanced data collection during four fieldc ampaigns from May 2015 to December 2016 on the karst plateau inthe southeastern part of Krk Island. A total of 80 profiles were measured over all the field campaigns with a total length of 5025 m. The MalaProEx GPR common-offset survey method was used. Two different antennae,an unshielded 50 MHz RTA (Rough Terrain Antenna) and a shielded 250 MHz antenna, were employed to test which system and frequency provide better performance and results in this specific karst environment.
On the rough karst terrain, the unshielded 50 MHz RTA flexible(9.25 m-long tube) antenna generally proved to be more suitable than the rigid shielded 250 MHz antenna due to its easier maneuvering and better depth penetration needed for detecting underground cavities.The depth of penetration acquired by the 250 MHz antenna was insufficient for most of the geological subsurface targets. Its operationwas also occasionally interrupted due to the inflexible nature of the shielded antennaon the uneven and rugged surface. Comparing the results acquiredwith the 50 MHz and 250 MHz antennae showed that the dataof higher-frequency images did not contribute any additional information essential for the purpose of our study. Furthermore, the part ofthe research (not shown here) where we compared results obtained with different frequencies revealed that areas of increased thickness of sediment are more clearly expressed on the profiles acquired with the50 MHz unshielded antenna compared to results recorded with the250 MHz shielded antenna. Therefore, only a selection of the most representative profiles acquired with the 50 MHz antenna are presentedand analyzed in this paper (shown in Fig. 3).GPR measurements were performed over potential locations where surface and underground continuations of an unroofed cave systemwere presumed to be (Fig. 3). Although the RTA antenna enables easier measurement on rough and uneven karst terrain, its performance was sometimes weakened and interrupted due to karren, vegetation, anddry walls. Measurements were therefore performed on gravel roadswhere possible. Generally, the almost flat terrain and the absence of vegetation provided good conditions for GPR profiling.The main part of the survey was done during dry periods to minimize the impact of the moisture in sediment on signal attenuation andto provide as much as possible similar and optimal terrain conditionsin all measurements sets. Although the GPR surveys were acquired in drought-like conditions during four field campaigns, the time periods without rainfall before the measurement were different but always after at least one week without rainfall before the survey. Thus, wehave to take into account that ground conditions might not be thesame when performing surveys in different seasonal periods. In addition to the free water content in sediment due to weather conditions, the sediments also contain significant proportions of silt and clay andrelated clay minerals that contain absorbed water, and thus attenuateE M wave propagation. In spite of this, a comparison of the profiles from the same locations measured in different seasonal periods gave comparable results, where the expected anomalies are easily distinguished irrespective of the different terrain conditions (for detailed information,see the Supplementary material). The groundwater table could not affect the data quality because the karst aquifer is very deepin the investigated area. The groundwater level is near the sea level,approximately 400 m below the surface.The GPR profiles were located to avoid and minimize above-the surface reflections from dry stone walls and vegetation. All the profileswere oriented almost transversally to the direction of the surface segmentsof the unroofed cave system and the presumed undergroundcontinuation. Due to the rough terrain, employing ‘time triggering’mode was not possible because it requires steady movement. Thus, a‘chain (leash) profile’ encoder with a rotating wheel was used as theonly possible way to achieve good distance control and regular triggering intervals for data acquisition. The acquisition parameters used during the survey are listed in Table 1.
The Reflex-Win software by Sandmeier Geophysical Research was used to process the collected raw GPR data. The following processing steps were employed: subtract-mean (dewow), static correction (correct max. Phase and move start time), background removal, gainand band-pass frequency filtering. Energy decay and Automatic GainControl (AGC) were applied first but did not give satisfying results, so manually-defined exponential gain was performed on all profiles. Comparisons of different gain functions and their effects on the GPRdata are shown and described in the processing scheme of Profile 2 in the Results and Interpretation section. In some profiles the 2D filter(Median XY Filter), which suppresses trace- and time-dependent noise (Sandmeier, 2011), was also used. Due to the terrain, i.e. the slopes along the profiles do not exceed 5°, topographic correction wasnot applied. Depth penetration and the resolution of the GPR signal may be reducedin some areas due to sediment filling in karst depressions that can be strongly conductive depending on the presence of water andthe mineralogical composition compared to bare karst surfaces with athin soil cover. Besides the energy loss of signal due to its geometricals preading, attenuation in highly conductive materials can significantly affect the quality of the GPR data, and therefore the proper gain functionis needed to compensate the signal attenuation. In such conditions, the penetration depth and resolution of the GPR signal may be strongly reduced and the quality of the GPR images is strongly dependent on theproper correction of the attenuation affects (Xavier Neto and Eugêniode Medeiros, 2006). Although proper amplitude compensation andspectral balancing can efficiently correct the attenuations affects and increasethe resolution (Leucci and De Giorgi, 2005; Xavier Neto andEugênio de Medeiros, 2006; Rodriguez et al., 2014; Fernandes et al.,2015), in our case, deconvolution and spectral balancing did not improvethe quality of the data. In addition, for the proper estimation of radar energy attenuation, the conductivity values should be known.The mean conductivity distribution, a very important parameter in calculating radar energy attenuation, can be provided by the electrical resistivity tomography (ERT) method (Leucci and De Giorgi, 2005), andt he ERT method is a good complementary method that can contribute some additional information about the properties of underground materials and enable the amplitude corrections. However, due to the very rough karst terrain on the high plateau and the time-consuming natureof ERT, we decided to apply only the GPR method. Several hyperbolic reflections are visible on some GPR profiles,which allows an accurate velocity analysis to be carried out. The velocities evaluated from the hyperbolae fitting seen in Profiles 1 and 2(Fig. 10) are between 0.10 and 0.11m/ns, which corresponds to the dielectric constant (ε=9.0–7.4) for limestone in the literature (Jol, 2009;Reynolds, 2011).
5. Results and interpretation
The locations of the selected GPR profiles with detected and interpreted anomalies are shown in Fig. 8. The processed GPR profiles with detected features and interpretations are presented in Figs. 9–14.All GPR images are presented as two-way travel time sections in nanoseconds (left vertical axis) and the depth scale in meters (right verticalaxis). The velocity used to convert the two-way travel time to the depthscale in all GPR images is 0.10 m/ns. Although due to its high dielectric constant, sediment reduces propagation velocity and causes the attenuation of a GPR signal in areas of its increased thickness, the dielectric constant of the sediment was not considered in the depth conversion.It should therefore be noted that the velocity and related depth scale represent only a roughly average estimate of the real subsurface conditions,since local differences in the material properties of the subsurface can significantly affect the velocity of signal propagation. The accuracyof the time to depth conversion could not be provided due to the unknown nature of subsurface vertical and horizontal properties that canbe very complex due to heterogeneities in the karst structure system. However, for the purpose of our study, where the main objective wasto detect and define specific features, the accuracy of the depth scaledoes not play a prominent role.The processing steps applied to all profiles are shown in the case of Profile 2 (Fig. 9). Data processing, including trace editing, filtering, and data correction (dewow, time corrections, and background removal),is a routine step and was applied to all profiles. On the other hand, thechoice of the proper gain is not so straightforward and trying different functions and parameters is necessary to achieve a good image. Various gain functions were applied to our data to achieve a good visualization of the GPR images. Energy decay and automatic gain control (AGC)with different time windows were applied first. The results of the energy decay and AGC gain with the most appropriate time window(270 ns) are presented, where the subjects of our interest are identifiable but weakly and not clearly expressed, especially with AGC gain (Figs. 9c, d). Ultimately, manually-defined gain functions gave themost effective result (Fig. 9e), where the area of interest was exponentially gained (max. to 30 db between 150 and 250 ns) for Profile 2. A distinctanomaly from an underground cave is clearly visible. It should be kept in mind that applying a gain alters the data, so some operatorbias is inevitable (Jol, 2009). However, it turned out that that manually-defined gain, where the operator can emphasize the signalin the areas of assumed structures (Sandmeier, 2011), gave the most appropriate results in all the profiles. This can be particularly useful where the depth range is limited. Finally, band-pass frequency filtering and 2Dmedian filter was applied (Fig. 9f).At Site 1 (Fig. 8), Profiles 1, 2, and 4 were positioned across possibleunderground continuations of a presumed unroofed cave. Profile 3 was positioned across a clearly evident valley-like depression to define thedepth of the sediment in this segment of presumed unroofed cave and to verify and compare the GPR reflection pattern across a well-defined segment with the results of the recorded Profiles 5, 6, and 7 at Sites 1,2, and 3, respectively. At these locations, interconnections between depressions are not visibly obvious.Profile 1 was measured at the end of a valley-like depression and Profile 2 at the distance of approximately 10 m from Profile 1 (Figs. 8,10a). The processed Profile 1 revealed several anomalies characterized by the clustering of hyperbolic reflections, most probably related to the occurrence of numerous smaller cavities and/or fractures (Fig. 10b). Based only on the GPR data, it is sometimes difficult to determine with certainty whether cavities and fractures are filled with air or sediment, but this issue has been discussed in several studies where GPR resultswere correlated with borehole data and geological mapping (e.g. Pavlič and Praznik, 2011; Zajc et al., 2015; Fernandes et al., 2015).The signal should be strongly attenuated if the cavities are entirely filledwith sediment (Zajc et al., 2015; Abdallatif et al., 2015). However, this is not characteristic of the anomalies visible in Profile 1. We therefore assume that the cavities are mostly air-filled. In the radargrams, there areseveral reflections ranging from approximately 50 to 150 ns correspondingwith the approximate depth of 7 m. They can be seen in themiddle of the profile (distance 17–45 m) along with a deeper one atthe depth of 18 m (distance 26–32 m). Since the location of the anomalous zone derived from the GPR profile corresponds to the lateral surface morphology of the presumed unroofed cave, we interpreted this area as a transition zone between the surface and near-surface segmentsof an unroofed cave characterized by a collapsed passage. Thetransition zone identified by the GPR results is a passage between the denuded surface segments and the underground part of a cave system.Based on the GPR image, these areas are characterized by numeroussmall voids where the underground cave started to collapse due to its instability as a consequence of nearing the surface during denudation.These hyperbolic diffractions, characteristic of sources which extend in one direction, gave a velocity between 0.10 and 0.11 m/ns. The linear reflections seen in the first 18mand at 40–67mdistance are fromthe drystone walls and vegetation above the ground (straight black lines inFig. 10b).In Profile 2, distinct anomalies (diffraction hyperbolae) appear at the distance between 10 and 30mat a depth of 5 to 15m(Fig. 10c). The response from a subsurface object is mostly dependent upon its depth,shape, and size aswell as survey line orientation relative to the geometrical extent of the cave. Depending on these factors, reflection patternscan have different characteristics regarding the cave features. As other authors have also pointed out, the clustering of hyperbolic anomalies can be related to a wide cavity or roof irregularities within the cavity(Pueyo-Anchuela et al., 2009). In this profile, several hyperbola eappearing in close vicinity (dashed frame in Fig. 10c) reveal the underground continuation of an unroofed cave system. These hyperbolicanomalies are bigger and appear closer to each other compared tothose visible in Profile 1. We interpreted these hyperbolae as the resultof a large cave with an irregular roof surface. Again, the velocity determinedby fitting the hyperbolae gave values of approximately 0.11 m/ns. These values correspond to the relative dielectric constantof 7.5 that is characteristic of limestone. Another profile was measured southwest of Profile 2 where the cave was detected in order to revealits continuation. No underground anomalies were detected, probably because the continuation of the cave is deeper and the 50 MHzantenna with a maximum investigation depth of around 20 m couldnot reach it.
Higher attenuation resulting in the absence of reflections inside thevalley-like depression (Fig. 11a) is clearly visible in the radargram ofProfile 3 (dashed frame in Fig. 11b). It is the result of increased thickness of the sediment. The minimum thickness of sediment derived from theGPR image is approximately 3–4 m.Profile 4 was measured to the east of Profiles 1 and 2 to find the possible continuation of the underground passage (see Fig. 7) in that direction. Based on the GPR image containing no underground anomalies,we hypothesize that this is the location of the completely denuded upper part of a phreatic loop (Fig. 11c).Profiles 5, 6, and 7 were positioned on a gravel road across the expected linkages between linear valley-like depressions, an irregular shallow depression, and a presumed solution doline (Fig. 8). By comparing the dielectric constants acquired for the thicker sediment filling the areas of the presumed continuation of the cave and for the immediate surroundings, the anomalous zones can be clearly distinguished as attenuated areas (Figs. 12, 13, 14). In Profile 5, two main areaswith highersignal attenuation are clearly visible after processing (A and B in Fig. 12). In area B (dashed frame 1 in Fig. 12c) the ring-down (antenna ringing)related to the presence of a thicker sediment is visible. The presence of clay-rich sediment and its thickness results in a periodic ring-downlinked to highly attenuated areas. The ring-down is usually strong inhighly conductive environments, particularly in wet, clay-rich, and heterogeneous soils (Radzevicius et al., 2000; Neal, 2004). Even though antennaring-down can significantly limit the resolution and the deepers tructure may be completely masked if the ring-down is not properlyremoved (Kimet al., 2007), its presence can indirectly indicate horizontal changes in ground conditions.A similarly characteristic ring-down is clearly expressed in Profile 6 between 65 and 85 m (dashed frame in Fig. 13) and in Profile 7 between 66 and 82ma nd 125 and 135m (A and B in Fig. 14), where the bowl-like geometry of the sediment-filled depression is clearly evident (Fig. 13b). Most of the highly attenuated zones are well defined and restrictedto 10–25 m in length. Only one zone (B in Profile 5) is wider, marked by three interrupted areaswith higher attenuation. All the highly attenuatedzones in Profiles 5, 6, and 7 correspond well to the areas of the presumed continuation of the cave system suggested by the orthophoto image (Fig. 8). On the basis of GPR results, field studies, and orthophoto image analysis, we concluded that these zones pertained to sediment filled depressions that were denuded segments of a more or less horizontalbut quite narrow cave passage. Due to the small volume of thecave at this point, the denuded cavitieswere easily and completely filledwith surface-originating sediment that becamelevelwith the surroundingsurface.The types of anomalies evident in all the GPR images show a highcorrespondence with present-day topography. At the location ofProfiles 1 and 2, the surface bends upwards and near-surface signal attenuationis absent. Here, a highly heterogeneous zone at the depth of4–8 m (Fig. 10b, Profile 1) was interpreted as a zone of multiple smallvoids or as a collapsed passage leading from an unroofed cave into thesubsurface (Fig. 15). Uphill, in the parallel Profile 2, we detected an underground cave at a depth that is quite consistentwith the continuationof the same passage (Fig. 10c). It is thus possible to conclude that the recent denudation of the surface cut a well-levelled passage which continues underground in an approximately southwest direction fromProfile 2 (Fig. 15).Profile 2 is located at the elevation of 373 m a.s.l., and the underground passage was detected at the depth of 7 m. This means that theroof of the passage is located at the present altitude of approximately 366 m a.s.l. (Fig. 15). The nearby surface of the unroofed cave does notrise above this elevation, indicating its almost complete denudation, and indeed no other underground anomalies were detected among severalmeasured profiles in the proximity of the unroofed cave. Instead, insome locations of the supposed links between denuded segments of theunroofed cave system, areas of higher signal attenuation were detected (Figs. 12, 13, 14). Attenuated zones are related to the increased thickness of low resistivity sediment that partially or completely fillsnegative depressions on the karst surface. The depth of such depressionsis estimated to be at least 1 m, while at some locations it reachesat least 4 m (Figs. 11b, 12c, 13b, 14b). On bare karst, they appear onthe surface as vegetated areas of circular, irregular, or linear planarshape. Those areas are generally not evident as depressions since theyare completely filled with sediment and level with the surroundingrelief.Despite the limitations of GPR in highly electrically conductive environments(Davis and Annan, 1989; Leucci et al., 2004; Leucci, 2006),areas with thicker sediment can be easily distinguished in GPR imagesfrom their low-attenuating surroundings. This is an important indicationin cases where the extent of an unroofed cave cannot be preciselydetermined only by field observations (Fig. 10a, Profile 6). Such featureslinked some of the surface depressionswhere an underground continuationbetween them was expected (Fig. 6e). Apparently, the course of apassage did not change direction but we assume it narrowed considerablyin these zones so that only negligible depressions were formedduring denudation. Since they quickly filled with sediment they remainquite invisible on the recent karst surface. The present appearance of the investigated unroofed cave shows thatit is in the beginning stage of decay described by Šušteršič (1998) whenthe passage ceiling and the upper parts of itswalls are removed as surface denudation progresses. The washing away of sediment is somewhat faster than the general surface lowering and a small depression therefore develops on the surface (Šušteršič, 1998). On the flank of a doline where GPR detected denuded linkage tothe cave passage an outcrop of cave sediment was located (Fig. 7). The depth of such dolines (approximately 3 m) compared to the surrounding surface and nearby valley-like segments (less than 3 m) demonstrates the effect of enhanced corrosion. In the late Pleistocene,such depressions were subject to intensive weathering and slope processesthat resulted in typical Dinaric doline geometry (Šušteršič,2006): rounding of the upper rim and equilibration of the slopes. The well-developed basic attributes that also characterize a solution dolineshow that individual segments of unroofed caves are able to developthese superficial features, as Mihevc et al. (1998) and Knez and Slabe(2002) have previously established. We presume that denuded cavesegments evolve into dolines at locations where the cave passage widens considerably forming a hall, and where the effective sediment transition into karst underground is established. Weathering and slope processes also affected other denuded segments of an unroofed cave (Fig. 6d). Most probably, they are responsible for the destruction of the rock relief and the original sediment of cave origin.Combining the acquired surface and subsurface information and putting it into a broader regional context offers some new ideas on the evolutionary stages of unroofed caves and the evolution of the local karst surface itself. The underground continuations and the shallow linkagesbetween recent surface features indicate that the valley-like linear depressions,the irregular depressions that are partially or fully filled with sediment, and some dolines in the area are of speleogenetic origin. If the acquired knowledge of the origin of these various surface features is generalized to the wider area, it is possible to hypothesize that they comprisea nearly 4 km-long reshaped unroofed cave passage (Fig. 16).Areas of regionally lower denudation rates, appearing as gentle hills in recent topography, are locations where denudation has not yet cut an underground passage. On hillslope, passage continuations can be traced underground, starting with a transitional collapsed zone (situation atSite 1). On level surfaces, segments of unroofed caves are mainly shallow and widened due to overall denudation. The passage geometry,cave sediment, and rock relief are poorly preserved due to destructive processes in the Pleistocene (Site 1 and 2, and the wider area betweenthe three study sites). The southeastern part of the unroofed cave (south of Site 3) is on theflank of a large karst depression with a diameter of 1.5 km (partly visibleon the right edge of Fig. 16). This part of the unroofed cave was probably modified by fluvial processes in late Pleistocene when the valley-like unroofed cave passage attracted periodical surface runoff (Site 3). The unroofed cave was deepened and phreatic loops (if present) were loweredso that the complete segment obtained a valley-like appearance. Fluvial processes operated only in this part of the unroofed cave due to the increasedinclination of the relief on the flanks of the large karst depression. Most probably, the cave continued further to the southeast at the time,but the traces have been completely lost due to intense tectonic activityin this part of Krk Island (Benac et al., 2013). Neotectonic and recent tectonic movements are evident in the wideKvarner area because of a rotation of the Adria microplate during thePleistocene (Prelogović et al., 1998; Žibret and Vrabec, 2016). For this reason, deformations of the carbonate rock mass have been more rapid than karstification processes on Krk Island, and the origin of unroofed caves can therefore be quite complex.In the regional context, the existence of unroofed caves also suggests that the southern high plateaus of Krk Island have been subject to long lasting karstification processes and excludes the possibility of the previously hypothesized pre-karstic fluvial phase in the area (Benacet al., 2013).In the global context, GPR proved to be a suitable method for surveying various surface and subsurface karst features including butnot limited to unroofed caves and identifying their origin and interconnections to recent surface morphology. The main advantages ofthe GPR method are relatively fast measurements, which also workin very demanding terrains, and high resolution subsurface data.Analyses of the topography and field examinations are mostly insufficientfor the identification of all the various segments of unroofedcaves but can be useful tools in planning the proper location of GPR profiles, so a combination of different methods is recommended. By using the GPR method, transition zones between the surface and underground segments of unroofed caves were revealed and defined.Apart from the previously-known surface shapes of unroofed segments,valley-like depressions of bigger dimensions were confirmedto represent the denuded parts of former underground cave. Another surface manifestation of unroofed cave was recognized and defined,which might broaden the scope of other researchers' work on karst terrains throughout the world.
6. Conclusions
On the bare karst plateau in the southeastern part of Krk Island,Croatia, low-frequency GPR with an RTA antenna was employed to investigate and define numerous valley-like linear depressions and  irregular areas of increased sediment thickness. Through field examinations, orthophoto image analysis, and information obtained by the GPR, an unroofed cave system that is nearly 4 km long wasrevealed.Matching surface and subsurface features associated with the unroofed cave were clearly identified in the GPR images. CharacteristicGPR images that will serve as tools for recognizing similar features inother locations have been defined: (1) a cross-section of a partiallysediment-filled unroofed cave; (2) the transition from an unroofed cave to a cave passage characterized by a ceiling erosion; (3) an underground continuation of an unroofed cave; and (4) a cross-section of unroofed cave narrowing expressed as irregular surface depressions completely filled with sediment. Ground-penetrating radar has provento be of significant importance especially to (1) locate segments of unroofedcaves with weak superficial evidence; and (2) detect underground continuations of unroofed caves that are a manifest indicatorfor their speleogenesis origin. It was established that the geometry ofthe original cave passage crucially affects the recent surface manifestationsof unroofed caves. The narrowing of a cave passage results incompletely sediment-filled depressions of irregular planar shapes,while the widenings of cave passages (in the event of partial sediment evacuation) evolved into dolines.The results obtained with the GPR investigation demonstrate that this method is useful for detecting and describing shallow karst depressions attributed to unroofed caves, in spite of the difficulties caused by karst heterogeneity. This is particularly significant when cave sediment and rock relief are scarce or even absent, preventing adirect interpretation.Low-frequency GPR proved to be an efficient method not only for detecting underground continuations but also for distinguishing andidentifying surface features and transition zones between surface and subsurface segments of an unroofed cave. This study shows that GPRcould be used for recognizing similar features in karst environments and thus represents an important contribution for the comprehensive understanding of karst systems.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geomorph.2017.11.004.