----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

RAZPRAVE                                                                   Dela 43 ● 2015 ● 29–40 

THE PROBLEM OF DISSOLUTION DOLINE  
DEFINITION 

Uroš Stepišnik, PhD. 
Department of Geography, Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana 
Aškerčeva 2, SI-1000 Ljubljana 
E-mail: uros.stepisnik@ff.uni-lj.si 

Original scientific article 
COBISS 1.01 
DOI: 10.4312/dela.43.2.29­40 

Abstract 
Dolines are regularly referred as diagnostic karst landforms, as their formation is usually  
attributed to chemical weathering or dissolution, which is the most typical karst process.  
In this paper, we re-evaluate the formation of the two most typical dissolution dolines,  
provided  by  Cvijić. Within  this  study,  we  stated  that  both  cases,  which  constitute  the  
foundations  of  interpretation  of  dissolution  dolines  formation,  are  actually  not  caused  
by dissolution of the surface. The purpose of the article is to provide a doubt about the  
understanding of formation of the most common karst landform. 

Key words: geomorphology, karst, doline, dissolution, ERI (electrical resistivity ima- 
ging), Dinaric karst, Slovenia 

PROBLEM DEFINICIJE KOROZIJSKIH VRTAČ 

Izvleček 
Vrtače  so  najbolj  pogoste  kraške  oblike  zmerno  toplega  pasu,  saj  njihov  nastanek  
navadno pripisujemo kemičnem preperevanju oziroma koroziji, ki je najbolj tipičen  
proces  na  krasu. V  članku  smo  ponovno  ovrednotili  nastanek  dveh  najbolj  tipičnih  
primerov korozijskih vrtač, ki jih je podal Cvijić. V raziskavi smo ugotovili, da oba  
primera, ki predstavljata temelje korozijske razlage nastanka vrtač, pravzaprav nista  
nastala s korozijo površja. Namen članka je podati dvom o razumevanju nastanka naj- 
bolj tipičnih kraških oblik. 

Ključne besede: geomorfologija, kras, vrtača, korozija, ERI (električna upornost tal),  
dinarski kras, Slovenija 

                                                                                               29 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Uroš Stepišnik / Dela 43 ● 2015 ● 29–40 

 1 INTRODUCTION 

    Dolines are small to middle-sized closed depressions of various shapes. They are  
the most typical unit landform in the temperate latitude karst since they are giving the  
relief  distinctive  pitted  character. The  term  doline  was  first  used  by Austrian  geolo- 
gists in the middle of 19th  century (Šušteršič, 1994; Gams, 2003) while studying the  

Classical karst in Carniola. At that time a number of different typologies of dolines ap- 
peared. Scholars recognized several different types according to their morphographic  
and  morphometric  properties.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  extensive  disagreement  
about  morphogenesis  of  dolines,  whether  they  form  by  a  collapse  of  cave  chamber  
ceiling or predominantly by a dissolution action on the surface. The oldest description  
introduced by early researchers of the Classical karst in Carniola connected the doline  
origin to a collapse (Cvijić, 1893). They recognized the role of dissolution action on  
the surface mostly in a role of doline slope remodeling. Other group of scientists sup- 
ported the findings of Cvijić (1893) who claimed that middle-sized surface depressions  
are formed solely by surface dissolution. They supported his statements with variety of  
examples from different karst environments, which were confirming dominant role of  
dissolution in a dolines formation. 
    The most influential karstologic publication written by Cvijić at the end of 19th cen- 

tury was the monograph titled Das Karstphänomen (1893). Among other topics, he dis- 
cussed morphogenesis of dolines in detail. He claimed that although dolines might be  
formed by other mechanisms, the most characteristic dolines are formed by the action  
of dissolution (Cvijić, 1893). He listed a number of examples from the Dinaric karst but  
he presented only one example of a doline cross-section profile. This example was the  
evidence of a fractured zone that is contributing to a concentrated runoff of rainwater  
and  consequential  accelerated  dissolution  on  which  he  explained  the  morphogenetic  
formation of all dissolution dolines. This illustration of a dissolution doline cross-sec- 
tion became one of the most reproduced in all geomorphologic literature. Cvijić did  
mention a number of areas where comparable examples of dissolution dolines appear.  
Among other examples of such areas he specified only one location where typical ex- 
amples of dissolution dolines are situated. This is an area named Skalčen kamen close  
to Logatec, Slovenia. 
    The aim of the article is to re-evaluate classical examples of dissolution dolines pro- 
vided by Cvijić (1893). The first objective is to discuss and re-evaluate morphogenesis of  
the doline cross-section that became classical example of dissolution doline presented by  
Cvijić (1893). Morphogenesis of this doline at Logatec train station will be established  
through earlier findings recorded in a literature. The second objective is a geomorpho- 
logic analysis of the doline in the Skalčen kamen area. It will be studied through morpho- 
graphic and sediment analysis as well as by application of electrical resistivity imaging  
(ERI). The results of the article will not present a new proposal of doline morphogenesis  
mechanism. However, it will bring to focus reasonable doubt about contemporary under- 
standing of dissolution doline formation. 

30 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

                                                               The problem of dissolution doline definition 

2 THEORETICAL CONCEPTS OF DISSOLUTION DOLINES 

     Contemporary understanding of dissolution doline formation dates back in the end of  
   th  
19    century. The  monographs Der  Karstphänomen  in  German  language,  followed  by  a  
slightly updated version with title Karst in Serbian language, both written by Cvijić (1893;  
1895) have had great impact on karstology as a science. Among many karst phenomena, he  
discussed in detail geomorphologic properties of dolines. He recognized a couple of doline  
forming processes but he finally concluded that the most common dolines are formed by  
dissolution and he even terms them as true dolines (in German: die echte Dolinen; Serbian:  
лравe вртачe) (Cvijić, 1893; 1895). He explained them as the places of more intensive dis- 
solution lowering of the surface, which is controlled by bedrock fractures. 
     Cvijić (1893) even proposed several arguments and evidences against theories of col- 
lapse origin of dolines. He stated that there are no reliable reports in the literature in which  
a bedrock doline would be disturbed by a collapse. In addition, he claimed that majority of  
typical bowl- and funnel-shaped dolines are not connected to caves. Even if dolines lead  
to caves that does not mean that they are automatically to be explained as a product of col- 
lapse. In addition, existence of detritus cones and other debris in the caves does not justify  
the conclusion that dolines are sited over them. Such accumulations may be formed for a  
variety of reasons (Cvijić, 1893). On the other hand, Cvijić offered detailed reports about  
bedrock dolines from various parts of the Dinaric karst. He claimed that those examples are  
a proof that majority of dolines are surface features formed by dissolution. The presented  
examples have no connection with subsurface cavities since bedrock strata beneath them  
are not repositioned. Additionally, bedrock beneath them is fractured by numerous cracks  
that are enlarged by dissolution and filled by terra rossa and fragments of limestone. 
     Though  Cvijić  presented  many  areas  where  dissolution  dolines  appear,  he  offered  
only one example of doline cross-section as an explanatory model of dissolution doline  
formation. The example is positioned within a railway cut at the Logatec train station,  
Slovenia.  This  doline  cross-section  has  become  the  most  reproduced  figure  of  doline  
cross-section in the following literature (Fig. 1). 

Figure 1: Original sketch of the cross­section of a dissolution doline (Cvijić, 1893, p. 63) (left)  
along with photo of present situation of the railway cut (right) (photo: U. Stepišnik) 
Slika 1: Izvirna skica profila korozijske vrtače (Cvijić, 1893, str. 63) (levo) s fotografijo današ- 
njega stanja železniškega useka (desno) (foto: U. Stepišnik) 

                                                                                                          31 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

Uroš Stepišnik / Dela 43 ● 2015 ● 29–40 

    By this cross-section example Cvijić (1893) noted that there is no evidence of un- 
derlying cavity, since all underlying strata are undisturbed. Nevertheless, the bedrock is  
intensively fractured directly under the lowest point of the doline. An area of limestone  
fragments is positioned just below the doline floor in a shape of a wedge (on Fig 1 left  
marked with dotted lines). The wedge is completely fractured and limestone fragments  
are embedded in terra rossa (Cvijić, 1893; 1895). 
    The  definition  and  cross-section  sketch  of  dissolution  dolines  provided  by  Cvijić  
(1893)  had  a  tremendous  impact  on  subsequent  theories  about  doline  morphogenesis.  
Following literature did not question the presented dissolution morphogenesis but it was  
more concerned with distribution and morphometry of dolines. Even contemporary lit- 
erature (e.g. Gams, 2000; Sauro, 2003; 2012; 2013; Williams, 2003) defines dissolution  
dolines following theoretical background of Cvijić (1893) as closed surface depressions  
which were formed in the areas of focused chemical attack on bedrock. 
    Modern  interpretations  of  dissolution  dolines  morphogenesis  were  summarised  by  
Sauro (2012) into three types. The first type is a point-recharge doline which is strongly  
connected to outflow of surface streams into karst subsurface. The second type is a draw- 
down doline. The formation of later is result of focusing of the dissolution inside the  
water infiltration zone of the rock through centripetal convergence of the mainly subsur- 
face water held inside the epikarst. This type of morphogenesis exactly corresponds the  
dissolution dolines proposed by Cvijić (1893). The third type is an inception doline that  
also originates from the centripetal convergence of water; this occurs inside a pre-existing  
hydrogeological structure and is triggered by a change of hydraulic conductivity due to  
lithological and structural factors. 
    The cross-section of the doline at the Logatec train station was partially destroyed and  
built up by a protective wall, so cross-section is not visible any more. But according to  
Šušteršič (1994), who studied morphometry of the surrounding area in detail, the doline  
ground plan is not circular but it is rather lengthened depression along a tectonic crushed  
zone. Therefore, the basic example of the doline cross-section is accordingly not a doline  
but preferably a type of a karst channel termed bogaz (Šušteršič, 1994) or karst corridor  
(Tîrlă, Vijulie, 2013). It means, that most cited and reproduced example of dissolution  
doline is not a dissolution doline at all. 
    Since the structure presented by Cvijić is not a doline, a new holotype of a dissolu- 
tion doline was required. Cvijić did mention numerous areas where similar examples of  
dissolution dolines appear. Among a large number of general locations, he specifically  
noted the area of typical dissolution dolines in the Skalčen kamen about 6 km southeast  
of Logatec, Slovenia. The area is densely covered by dolines of various shapes so it was  
not completely clear which doline Cvijić specifically mentioned. Detailed morphometric  
analysis of dolines in the area was performed by Šušteršič (1994). One doline that is  
positioned closest to the road crossing at the Skalčen kamen with study name SK-022  
was determined as the most typical and was defined as a new holotype of the dissolution  
doline (Šušteršič, 1994). 

32 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

                                                           The problem of dissolution doline definition 

Figure 2: Location of the doline cross­section in railway cut in Logatec (1) and doline SK­022  
in the Skalčen kamen area (2) 
Slika 2: Lokacija profila vrtače v useku železnice v Logatcu (1) in vrtače SK­022 v Skalčnem  
kamnu (2) 

Source/Vir: GURS, 2015 

3 RESEARCH METHODS 

    Morphometric analysis of the doline in Skalčen kamen with study name SK-022 pro- 
vided by Šušteršič (1994) was used to prepare cartographic background for further mor- 
phographic survey. Morphographic analysis included identification of micro-scale fea- 
tures, types of slopes (Stepišnik, Kosec, 2011) as well as identification of the sediments  
exposed on the surface. 
    Since the formation of the dissolution doline cannot be interpreted solely by surface  
morphology, the geophysical method of electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) was applied  
to identify the subsurface structures. The SuperSting R1/IP Earth resistivity meter de- 
veloped  by Advanced  Geosciences  Inc.  was  used  for  the  data  collection.  The  survey  
was conducted with a dipole-dipole array and 20 electrodes were used simultaneously  
with alternation of two currents and two potential electrodes. The data were processed  
to generate two-dimensional resistivity models, using EarthImager 2D resistivity inver- 
sion software developed by Advanced Geosciences Inc. The root-mean-square (RMS)  
error quantifies the difference between the measured resistivity values and those calcu- 
lated from the true resistivity model. A small RMS value indicates small differences. The  

                                                                                                    33 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

Uroš Stepišnik / Dela 43 ● 2015 ● 29–40 

minimum RMS error in the survey was 5.8%, and the maximum error was 13.56%. The  
method turned out to be appropriate for subsurface tomography of karst terrains where  
significant differences of electrical resistivity values of material within the profile exist  
(Stepišnik, Mihevc, 2008; Kaufmann, Deceuster, Quinif, 2012; Mihevc, Stepišnik, 2012;  
Yeboah-Forson, Comax, Whitman, 2014). 

4 GEOMORPHOLOGIC ANALYSIS OF A DISSOLUTION  
DOLINE 

    Within our study we performed detailed geomorphologic analysis of the doline SK-022  
in the area of Skalčen kamen, which was defined as the new holotype of dissolution doline  
(Šušteršič, 1994). The doline is positioned in the northern part of an extensive levelled  
karst area named Logaški ravnik that is morphogenetically interpreted as corrosion plain  
or a relict polje (Šušteršič, Šušteršič, 2003; Šušteršič, 2004). The whole area is levelled  
at elevation of about 530 m. The doline is positioned in close proximity of the only road  
crossing in the area of Skalčen kamen at coordinates 45.883° N 14.296° E (WGS 84). 

Figure 3: The doline SK­022 in the Skalčen kamen area from the southwest (photo: U. Stepišnik) 
Slika 3: Vrtača SK­022 v Skalčnem kamnu od jugozahoda (foto: U. Stepišnik) 

    Detailed survey of the doline revealed that the doline longer axis is 50 m and shorter  
axis 45 m. The depth of the doline is 7.5 m and it covers an area of about 8000 m2. The do- 

line is positioned completely within Upper Jurassic limestone with dip of strata about 30  
degrees towards east. Slopes of the doline are mostly balanced (Stepišnik, Kosec, 2011)  
with inclinations up to 20 degrees. Only southern slopes are steeper, with inclination up  
to 30 degrees and covered by coarse material which is prone to limited mass wasting. On  
the southern slope, there is a section with about 1.5 m high vertical wall. Loamy material  
is exposed in the lower sections of the northern slope as well as in the floor of the doline.  

34 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

                                                            The problem of dissolution doline definition 

Within loamy material fragments of flowstone and up to fine pebble size grains of bauxite  
are to be found. 
    Two ERI profiles were measured through the doline. The first profile (Fig. 4) was con- 
ducted approximately along east-west axis across the lowest point of the doline floor. The  
azimuth of the profile was 260 degrees. Results from the electrical resistivity imaging, with  
electrodes at 3 m spacing, exhibited subsurface resistivity values on the slopes of more than  
1000 ohm-m. The floor of the doline and its subsurface has resistivity values less than 500  
ohm-m to a depth of 8 m and more. Below the floor in depth of about 3 m there are two cir- 
cular structures with a diameter of 4 to 5 m and resistivity more than 1000 ohm-m (Fig. 5). 

Figure 4: The first ERI profile of the doline SK­022 in east­west direction 
Slika 4: Prvi ERI profil vrtače SK­022 od vzhoda proti zahodu 

    The second ERI profile (Fig. 5) was conducted approximately across south-north axis  
across the lowest point of the floor. The azimuth of the profile was 170 degrees. Electri- 
cal resistivity imaging profile was conducted by electrode spacing 3 m. The southern and  
the upper section of the northern slope have resistivity values higher than 1000 ohm-m.  
The same values are in the subsurface below them. Lower section of the northern slope  
and the floor along it exhibit resistivity vales lower than 500 ohm-m. The depth of low  
resistivity structure below it is at least 8 m (Fig. 6). 

Figure 5: The second ERI profile of the doline SK­022 in south­north direction 
Slika 5: Drugi ERI profil vrtače SK­022 od juga proti severu 

5 DISCUSSION 

    Dolines are natural enclosed depressions of different shapes and sizes found in karst  
landscapes. They are considered a diagnostic karst landform. We recognize several dif- 
ferent types of dolines, but the most common are formed due to dissolution, so they are  

                                                                                                      35 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

Uroš Stepišnik / Dela 43 ● 2015 ● 29–40 

termed dissolution dolines (Ford, Williams, 2007). They are believed to have a similar  
function  to  the  drainage  basin  in  fluvial  landscape.  Dolines  are  discharging  rainwater  
into underground via enlarged fissures in the lowest point of the doline (Williams, 2003).  
This interpretation was initiated in 19th century understandings which were summarized  

in work of Cvijić (1893). Contemporary literature recognises several types of dissolution  
dolines (e.g. Gams, 2000; Williams, 2003; Sauro et al., 2009; Sauro, 2012; 2013) which  
have foundation in definition provided by Cvijić (1893). 
    The doline morphometry at Skalčen kamen was initially well documented by Šušteršič  
(1994). We conducted morphographic analysis, which revealed that southern slope is ac- 
tive while other slopes are balanced. The floor and lower sections of northern slopes are  
covered by loamy material. Within the loamy material fragments of flowstone and up to  
fine pebble size grains of bauxite are to be found. Flowstone in the local climate cannot be  
generated on the surface, but only in cave environment. Bauxite deposits were not formed  
in situ. Their only location in the area is about 15 kilometers towards southeast in the wa- 
tershed of the Cerkniščica River (Šušteršič, Šušteršič, 2003). Bauxite is being transported  
into karst aquifer by the Cerkniščica River from the area of the Cerkniško polje. The only  
spots where bauxite-derived deposits can be found in the area are fillings of caves and  
denuded caves (Geršl, Stepišnik, Šušteršič, 1999; Šušteršič, Šušteršič, 2003). Therefore,  
sediments fill analysis suggests that the doline is filled with sediments which are typi- 
cal for caves in the area (Šušteršič, 2004). Those kinds of sediments are typical for cave  
environment and could not be formed inside a dissolution doline that is functioning as a  
vertical drainage for rainwater. 
    ERI profiles exhibit two different sets of electrical conductivity in the doline sub- 
surface. Bedrock has resistivity values higher than 1000 ohm-m while loamy material  
and weathered or fractured bedrock has values lower than 500 ohm-m. Lower resistiv- 
ity values are located beneath the floor of the doline as well as beneath lower sections  
of the northern slopes exactly where patch of loamy sediment is positioned on the sur- 
face. Therefore,  we  know  that  subsurface  profile  values  with  resistivity  less  than  500  
ohm-m are as well of loamy material. Slopes as well as subsurface in those sections are  
built  of  limestone bedrock  which  exhibits  resistivity values  higher  than  1000  ohm-m.  
Consequently,  we  assume  that  subsurface  structure  with  those  values  is  relatively  un- 
disturbed bedrock. Span of those two electrical resistivity values sets are comparable to  
previous applications of this method in various karst surface features on the Slovenian  
karst (Stepišnik, 2007; Stepišnik, Mihevc, 2008; Stepišnik, 2009). Earlier applications of  
the method revealed that the resistivity value for carbonate rock exceeds 1000 ohm-m.  
Soil and weathered bedrock exhibit the resistivity values between 200 and 1000 ohm-m.  
Loamy material has resistivity values lower than 500 ohm-m (Stepišnik, 2007; Stepišnik,  
Mihevc, 2008; Stepišnik, 2009). 
    The depth of loamy material below the doline in the Skalčen kamen area is well exhib- 
ited on both ERI profiles and it exceeds 8 m. Loamy material is not positioned only below  
the doline floor but also beneath a part of its northern slope. Thickness of this loamy fill  
is preventing vertical runoff of rainwater, thus the investigated doline cannot be a result  
of accelerated dissolution due to concentrated vertical runoff. 

36 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

                                                            The problem of dissolution doline definition 

6 CONCLUSIONS 

    Most of the karstologic literature explains formation of dolines through dissolution ef- 
fects of rainwater discharge via fissures in the lowest point of the doline (Williams, 2003;  
Ford, Williams, 2007). It is the most obvious deduction since the dominant process on  
karst is dissolution. Contemporary understanding of doline formation originates from a  
century old theories. Therefore, the aim of the article was to revaluate morphogenesis of  
the most common examples of dissolution dolines. The main objective of the article is not  
to propose new explanation of doline morphogenesis but to put focus upon understanding  
of dissolution doline formation. 
    A dissolution doline holotype introduced by Cvijić (1893) which became a basis for  
understanding dissolution formation of dolines as well as famous for its cross-section  
reproduced by many authors, turned out not to be a dissolution doline at all (Šušteršič,  
1994). Since the first example of doline was recognized to be an elongated tectonic de- 
pression termed bogaz or corrosion corridor, another example of Cvijić (1893) was de- 
fined as a dissolution doline holotype (Šušteršič, 1994). The new holotype is positioned  
in  the  area  of  Skalčen  kamen  close  to  Logatec,  Slovenia,  and  became  a  focus  of  our  
geomorphologic survey. 
    Morphographic analysis of the doline in the Skalčen kamen area revealed that a patch  
of loamy material is covering the floor and lower sections of the northern slope. This  
loamy material would not be uncommon if accelerated corrosion in the doline floor would  
result in formation of insoluble infill (Gams, 2003). Nevertheless, within the loamy mate- 
rial pebble size bauxite clasts as well as pieces of flowstone are found which are typical  
cave sediments in the area (Geršl, Stepišnik, Šušteršič, 1999; Šušteršič, 2004). Excessive  
amount  of  loamy  material below  the  doline  floor  revealed  by  application of  ERI  also  
implies that it could not be solely a residual of a chemical weathering. Consequently,  
vertical runoff through the doline floor is not possible due to impermeable loamy mate- 
rial. Therefore, we must conclude that another holotype of a dissolution doline is rather a  
denuded cave (Mihevc, Slabe, Šebela, 1998; Mihevc, 2007). 
    Technically speaking, we do not have any particular example of a dissolution doline  
for which it was proven that it was formed by a process of dissolution. Furthermore, we  
do understand that epikarst zone seepage concentrated in a vadose zone is forming shafts  
(e.g. Ford, Williams, 2007). Enlarging of fissures in the subsurface beneath dissolution  
dolines would eventually lead to opening of the shaft. Since we have almost no examples  
from any karst area, where shaft entrances in doline floors would be common, we can  
conclude that it is highly unlikely that dissolution dolines would be formed by accelerated  
focused corrosion of epikarst. 

                                                                                                     37 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

Uroš Stepišnik / Dela 43 ● 2015 ● 29–40 

References 
Cvijić,  J.,  1893.  Das  Karstphänomen:  Versuch  einer  morphologischen  Monographie.  
    Wien, Hölzel, 113 pp. 
Cvijić,  J.,  1895.  Karst:  geografska  monografija.  Beograd,  Srpska  akademija  nauka  i  
    umetnosti, 176 pp. 
Ford,  D., Williams,  P.  D.,  2007.  Karst  hydrogeology  and  geomorphology.  Chichester,  
    Wiley, 576 pp. 
Gams, I., 2000. Doline morphogenetic processes from global and local viewpoints. Acta  
    carsologica, 29, 2, p. 123–138. 
Gams, I., 2003. Kras v Sloveniji v prostoru in času. Ljubljana, Založba ZRC, 516 pp. 
Geršl, M., Stepišnik, U., Šušteršič, S., 1999. The “unroofed cave” near the bunker (Laški  
    Ravnik). Acta carsologica, 28, 2, p. 77–90. 
GURS, 2015. Slovenian topographic maps in scale 1 : 50,000. DTK 50. URL: http://  
    www.gu.gov.si (Cited 10. 11. 2015). 
Kaufmann,  O.,  Deceuster,  J.,  Quinif, Y.,  2012. An  electrical  resistivity  imaging-based  
    strategy to enable site-scale planning over covered palaeokarst features in the Tournai- 
    sis area (Belgium). Engineering geology, 133–134, p. 49–65. 
Mihevc, A., 2007. New interpretations of fluvial sediments from the Kras. Dela, 28, p. 15–28. 
Mihevc, A., Slabe, T., Šebela, S., 1998. Denuded caves – an inherited element in the karst  
    morphology, the case from Kras. Acta carsologica, 27, 1, p. 165–174. 
Mihevc, A., Stepišnik, U., 2012. Electrical resistivity imaging of cave Divaška jama, Slove- 
    nia. Journal of caves and karst studies, 74, 3, p. 235–242. DOI: 10.4311/2010ES0138R1 
Sauro, U., 2003. The dolina: emblematic and problematic karst landform. Dela, 20, p. 43–60. 
Sauro, U., 2012. Closed depressions in karst areas. In: White, W. B., Culver, D. C. (Eds.).  
    Encyclopedia of caves (2nd edition). Amsterdam, Academic Press, p. 140–155. 

Sauro, U., 2013. Landforms of mountainous karst in the middle latitudes: reflections, trends  
    and research problems. Acta carsologica, 42, 1, p. 5–16. DOI: 10.3986/ac.v42i1.629 
Sauro, U., Ferrarese, F., Francese, R., Miola, A., Mozzi, P., Rondo, G. Q., Trombino, L.,  
    Valentini, G., 2009. Doline fills – case study of the Faverghera Plateau (Venetian Pre- 
    -Alps, Italy). Acta carsologica, 38, 1, p. 51–63. 
Stepišnik, U., 2007. Loamy sediment fills in collapse dolines near the Ljubljanica River  
    springs, Dinaric Karst, Slovenia. Cave and karst science, 33, 3, p. 105–110. 
Stepišnik, U., 2009. The application of electrical resistivity imaging in collapse doline floors:  
    Divača karst, Slovenia. Studia geomorphologica Carpatho-Balcanica, 42, 1, p. 41–51. 
Stepišnik, U., Kosec, G., 2011. Modelling of slope processes on karst. Acta carsologica,  
    40, 2, p. 267–273. DOI: 10.3986/ac.v40i2.11 
Stepišnik, U., Mihevc, A., 2008. Investigation of structure of various surface karst forma- 
    tions in limestone and dolomite bedrock with application of the electrical resistivity  
    imaging. Acta carsologica, 37, 1, p. 133–140. DOI: 10.3986/ac.v37i1.165 
Šušteršič, F., 1994. Classic dolines of classical site. Acta carsologica, 23, p. 123–154. 
Šušteršič, F., 2004. Cave sediments and denuded caverns in the Laški Ravnik, Classical  
    Karst of Slovenia. In: Sasowsky, I. D., Mylroie, J. (Eds.). Studies of cave sediments.  
    New York, Springer, p. 123–134. 

38 

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

                                                            The problem of dissolution doline definition 

Šušteršič, F., Šušteršič, S., 2003. Formation of the Cerkniščica and the flooding of Cerk- 
    niško polje. Acta carsologica, 32, 2, p. 121–136. 
Tîrlă, L., Vijulie, I., 2013. Structural-tectonic controls and geomorphology of the karst  
    corridors in alpine limestone ridges: Southern Carpathians, Romania. Geomorpho- 
    logy, 197, 1, p. 123–136. 
Williams, P.  D.,  2003.  Doline. In: Goudie, A.  (Ed.). Encyclopedia of  geomorphology.  
    New York, Routledge, p. 266–270. 
Yeboah-Forson, A., Comas, X., Whitman, D., 2014. Integration of electrical resistivity  
    imaging and ground penetrating radar to investigate solution features in the Biscayne  
    aquifer. Journal of hydrology, 515, p. 129–138. 

PROBLEM DEFINICIJE KOROZIJSKIH VRTAČ 

Povzetek 
    Vrtače so majhne do srednje velike kraške kotanje različnih oblik. So najbolj tipič- 
na oblika krasa zmerno toplega podnebja. Začetek znanstvenega preučevanja vrtač sega  
v sredino 19. st., ko so različni krasoslovci pričeli s prvimi opisi in tipizacijami vrtač  
na osnovi njihovih morfografskih in morfometričnih značilnosti. Hkrati so se že takrat  
pojavila prva nesoglasja glede morfogeneze te najpogostejše kraške oblike. Najstarejše  
razlage pripisujejo nastanek vrtač procesu udiranja jamskih stropov. Učinek korozije so  
videli le v preoblikovanju vrtač in ne njihovem nastanku (Gams, 2004). Kasneje je Cvijić  
zavrnil udorni nastanek vrtač in zaključil, da nastanejo izključno z delovanjem površin- 
ske korozije (Cvijić, 1893). Njegovo interpretacijo je sprejela cela vrsta krasoslovcev v  
drugi polovici 19. st. (Cvijić, 1893). 
    Najpomembnejše delo iz konca 19. st., Das Karstphänomen, je objavil Cvijić (1893).  
Med drugimi oblikami in procesi se je Cvijić (1893) podrobno ukvarjal tudi z nastankom  
vrtač. Priznaval je, da lahko vrtače nastanejo na različne načine, tudi z udorom, daleč najpo- 
membnejši in najpogostejši proces oblikovanja vrtač pa je po njegovih ugotovitvah korozija.  
Ta tip vrtač je Cvijić (1893) poimenoval korozijske vrtače oziroma celo prave vrtače  (nem- 
ško die echte Dolinen). V svojem delu je navedel celo vrsto primerov korozijskih vrtač iz  
dinarskega krasa, vendar je predstavil le en primer prečnega profila vrtače (slika 1). V tem  
profilu, ki se nahaja v useku železniške postaje Logatec, je pod vrtačo jasno vidna zdrobljena  
cona, ki naj bi delovala kot zbiralec koncentriranega odtoka padavinske vode v podzemlje in  
posledično tudi pospešene korozije (Cvijić, 1893). Skico tega profila danes najdemo skoraj v  
vseh krasoslovnih knjigah in učbenikih. Cvijić je v svojih delih omenil številna območja, na  
katerih se pojavljajo podobni primeri vrtač, ampak je posebej imenoval le vrtačo v Skalčnem  
kamnu na Logaškem ravniku kot tipičen primer korozijske vrtače (Cvijić, 1893). 
    Šušteršič (1994) je podrobno preučil profil vrtače pri logaški železniški postaji in ugo- 
tovil, da opisana oblika pravzaprav ni vrtača, ampak podolgovato znižanje v reliefu, ki je  
nastalo ob tektonsko zdrobljeni coni. Torej, največkrat navajan primer profila korozijske  
vrtače  pravzaprav  ni  vrtača.  Šušteršič  (1994)  je  tako  za  nov  holotip  korozijske  vrtače  
predlagal vrtačo v Skalčnem kamnu, ki jo je omenil že Cvijić (1893). 

                                                                                                     39 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

Uroš Stepišnik / Dela 43 ● 2015 ● 29–40 

    Naša geomorfološka analiza vrtače v Skalčnem kamnu je pokazala, da sta njeno dno  
in del severnega pobočja prekrita z zaplato ilovnatega materiala. Prisotnost ilovic ni nič  
nenavadnega, saj naj bi v dneh vrtač zaradi pospešene korozije ostajal netopni material  
(Gams, 2003), vendar so v ilovnatem materialu prisotni tudi posamezni manjši prodniki  
boksita in kosi sige. Tako smo lahko zaključili, da sediment v vrtači najverjetneje ni ne- 
topni ostanek, pač pa alogeni material, značilen za jamska polnila na celotnem območju  
Logaškega ravnika (Šušteršič, 2004; Geršl, Stepišnik, Šušteršič, 1999). Pri analiziranju  
zgradbe vrtače pod površjem, ki smo jo opravili z metodo električne upornosti tal (ang.  
electrical resistivity imaging; ERI) smo ugotovili, da je ilovnati sediment v dnu vrtače  
in pod severnim pobočjem globok najmanj 10 metrov. Takšna količina ilovnatega sedi- 
menta ne more biti netopni ostanek kemičnega preperevanja, saj hkrati preprečuje odtok  
padavinske vode skozi dno vrtače v podzemlje. Zaključili smo, da je drugi, novi holotip  
korozijske vrtače najverjetneje brezstropa jama (Mihevc, Slabe, Šebela, 1998). 
    Kljub temu da razumemo nastanek vrtač kot rezultat korozije kraškega površja in dela  
epikraške cone, nimamo primera, ki bi nedvomno dokazoval ta proces. Poleg tega sodob- 
no krasoslovje razume funkcijo epikraške cone kot območje združevanja razpršenih vod- 
nih curkov, ki vodi v oblikovanje vertikalnih votlin vadozne cone oziroma brezen. Ker pa  
so primeri, kjer bi bili v dneh vrtač vhodi v brezna, izredno redki, lahko zaključimo, da je  
malo verjetno, da bi vrtače nastale s korozijo površja oziroma s točkastim raztapljanjem  
razpoklinskih območij epikrasa. 

40 
