collapse breccia :  A mass of rock composed of angular to rounded fragments of limestone or dolomite that has formed as the result of the collapse of the roof of a cave, of an underlying cave, or of an overhanging ledge. See also solution breccia.
collapse sink :  A closed depression formed by the collapse of tie roof of a cave. See also doline.
column :  A flowstone formation, generally cylindrical, formed by the union of a stalactite and stalagmite. See also pillar.
conduit :  A subterranean stream course filled completely with water and always under hydrostatic pressure. See also siphon.
cone karst :  A type of karst topography, common in the tropicr. characterized by star-shaped depressions at the feet of many steep-sided core-shaped hills. A variety of Kegelkarst. See also cockpit karst.
constructive waterfall :  A large rimstone dam on a surface stream.
conulite :  A hollow, cone-shaped speleothem formed when a conical depression is drilled in cave mud by falling water. Subsequent erosion may remove the mud, isolating the calcite lining of the depression. 
corridor :  A fairly level and straight passage that links two or more rooms or chambers in a cave. 
corridor :  Intersecting linear depressions on the surface of the land, related to joints or dikes. See also bogaz; struga; zanjon. 
corrosion : Erosion by solution or chemical action. See also corrasion.
cove :   Narrow steep-sided karst valley flanking limestone plateaus.
covered karst : A terrain of karst features, usually subdued, resulting from the development of solution features in limestone covered by soil; contrasted with naked karst, which is soil free. See also buried karst.
crawl, crawlway :  A cave passage that must be negotiated on hands and knees, crescentic wall niche. See meander niche.
crevice karst : An intricate irregular crevice system that has formed by solution widening of closely spaced joints. Crevices may be as much as 6 meters across and 20 meters deep. Especially well developed near rivers in lowland New Guinea.
crust stone :  A fragile layer of flowstone covering portions of walls of caves; looks like a flaky crust. Found in some Kentucky caves.
crystal cave :  A cave in which much of the surface of the roof, walls, and floor is covered with well-formed mineral crystals.
crystal pool :  In caves a pool, generally having little or no overflow, containing crystals.
cul-de-sac, dead end :  A subterranean passage having only one entry.
