K is a term describing the occurrence of swallow holes and fractures.
An important methodology is the EPIK system, developed in Switzerland and intended particularly for use in the karst of the Jura mountains (Doerfliger et al.
The smaller numbers of larger islands are clusters of steep limestone hills that are typical of fengcong karst — fragments of a spectacular karst that had not evolved through to the fenglin landforms.
A paleocave system is defined as a cave system that is no longer related in time or space to the active karst system that formed it (Loucks, 1999).
A paleocave hydrocarbon reservoir is a reservoir where the pore network consists of karst-related cavernous porosity and/or of cave-collapse-related interclast and fracture porosity.
The phreatic zone is the deep portion of an aquifer that does not experience exchange with stream water, in contrast to the hyporheic zone.
The arêtes are naked, reticulated, saw-topped ridges with spires, with practically vertical side slopes c. 120 m high.
Microrills are the smallest karren form showing a distinctive rilling appearance.
Rainpits are small cup-like hollows, sub-circular in plan and nearly parabolic in cross section, whose diameter ranges from 0.5 – 5 cm and rarely exceed 2 cm in depth; they appear clustered in groups, or even packed by coalescence.
Decantation runnels are rills, which reduce in width and depth downslope because the solvent supply is not directly related to rainfall, but corresponds to overspilling stores of water, such as moss clumps, small snow banks, or soil remnants.
The term “cutters” is commonly used in North America as a synonym for grike, although it is best applied to a variety of grike that develops beneath soil cover.
Karst is terrain with distinctive hydrology and landforms arising from the combination of high rock solubility and well-developed solution channel (secondary) porosity underground.
Aragonite is a main speleothem mineral in some parts of the cave, often in association with calcite.
Halite is known to form seeping water speleothems such as crusts, hair, cotton, and flowers, and dripping water speleothems such as stalactites and stalagmites.
A spectacular form of gypsum is “chandelier” stalactites, such as those that occur in Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico.
