active cave :  Cave containing a running stream. 
active cave :  Cave in which speleothems are growing.  Compare live cave.
aggressive water :  Water having the ability to dissolve rocks. In the context of limestone and dolomite, this term refers especially to water containing dissolved carbon dioxide  or, rarely, other acids.
anastomosis :  A network of tubular passages or holes in a cave or in a solution- sculptured rock. A complex of many irregular and repeatedly connected passages. Synonym, labryrinth. 
anthodite :  A cave formation composed of feathery or radiating masses of long needlelike crystals of gypsum or aragonite, which radiate ortward from a common base. See also cave flower.
apron :  A smooth bulging mass of flowstone covering sloping projections from walls of caves or limestone cliffs.
aquifer :  A ground-water reservoir. Pervious rock that is completely saturated and will yield water to a well or spring.
aragonite :  A mineral composed of calcium carbonate, CaCO2, like calcite but differing in crystal form.
arete and pinnacle karst :  A landscape of naked reticulated saw-topped ridges having almost vertical slopes and a relief of as much as 120 meters. The ridges rise above forest-covered corridors and depressions. Found in New Guinea at elevations of 2,000 meters and more.
backflooding :  Temporarily rising water level in a cave caused downstream passage being too small to pass an abnormally high discharge. The excavation and reexcavation of some caves is ascribed to the enlarger'ent of a passage at or near the water table by gravity flow alternating with periods of calcite precipitation.
bacon :  Thin, elongated, translucent flowstone having parallel colored bands on or projecting from roofs and walls of some caves. See also blanket; curtain; drapery.
balcony :  Any projection on the wall of a cave large enough to support one or more persons.
beachrock :  A friable to indurated rock consisting of sand grains of various minerals cemented by calcium carbonate; occurs in thin beds dipping seaward at less than 15°. Also known as beach standstone.
bedding-plane cave :  A passage formed along a bedding plane, especially when there is a difference in susceptibility to corrosion in the two beds.
blade :  In a cave, a thin sharp projection jutting out from roof, wall, or floor, of which it is an integral part; generally the remains of a partition or bridge.

