Clastic sediments are an important part of the mechanism for storage and transport of contaminants; indeed, solid contaminants can be considered as a form of clastic sediment.
The epiphreatic zone is the range of depths between the highest and lowest levels that the water table fluctuates between.
Specific karstic ablation is the relationship between the volume of limestone taken out of the system and the surface area of the affected region.
Poljes are an important component of karst, where, aside from the bottoms of major dolines, they are one of the rare formations that can support large-scale agriculture.
A blind valley is a gorge that terminates abruptly at a point where the stream sinks.
Ghost rock karstification is an intermediate phenomenon, between karstification stricto sensu and the alteration of fractured rock, for example like in granites, where the action of water occurs only as it filters in through fractures.
Dolines are a sign of the current shaping of the surface by precipitation water that percolates vertically through it and passes through the vadose part of the aquifer to the underground water.
The shape of unroofed caves is the consequence of the type and shape of the cave and the development of the karst aquifer and its surface in various geological, geomorphological, climate, and hydrological conditions.
Karst waters are an essential part of the ecosystem, a natural source and a public and economic good.
In Slovenia, the formation of lakes on the majority of larger karst poljes is the consequence of the difference in the volumes of inflowing and outflowing water.
Karst poljes are natural retainers of discharge surpluses and important regulators of water conditions in rivers in the lower parts of river basins.
The oldest explanation of formation of closed depressions on karstic surfaces is a sudden collapse (Cvijiæ, 1893), according to which the term “collapse doline” was coined.
Equipotential surfaces are locations of equal hydraulic head, which can be measured at piezometers.
Collapse dolines are large depressions that were formed with slow collapsing of roofs above larger underground cavities and afterwards with transformation of slopes.
Caves are an important part of both the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in karst terrains, but are not the only components.
In instances where dissolution is the prevailing mechanism, a bowlshaped doline will probably form.
The first type is a point-recharge doline which is strongly connected to outflow of surface streams into karst subsurface.
The third type is an inception doline that also originates from the centripetal convergence of water; this occurs inside a pre-existing hydrogeological structure and is triggered by a change of hydraulic conductivity due to lithological and structural factors.
