travertine :  Calcium carbonate, CaCO2, light in color and generally concretionary and compact, deposited from solution in ground and surface waters. Extremely porous or cellular varieties are known as calcareous tufa, calcareous sinter, or spring deposit. Compact banded varieties, capable of taking a polish, are called onyx marble or cave onyx.
tube :  A smooth-surfaced cave passage of elliptical or nearly circular cross section.
turlough :   A depression in limestone or in glacial drift over limestone that is liable to flood either from excess surface runoff or from rising ground water. 
uvala :  Large closed depression formed by the coalesence of several dolines; compound doline. 
vadose water :  Water ir the zone of aeration; water above the zone of saturation.
valley sink :   An elongated closed depression or series of interconnecting depressions forming a valleylike depression. 
vauclusian spring :  A large spring or exsurgence of an underground river, generally from limestone, that varies greatly in output and is impenetrable except with diving apparatus. Synonym: gushing spring.
wall slab :  A thin but large block of rock, which has fallen outward from the wall of a cave in limestone in which the dip is nearly vertical. 
water trap :  A place where the roof of a chamber or passage of a cave dips under water but lifts again farther on. Synonym: trap.
well :  A shaft or hole sunk into the earth to obtain water, oil, gas, or minerals. 
well :  A deep vertical rounded hole or shaft in the floor of a cave or at the bottom of a closed depression.
window :  In speleology, a natural opening above the floor of a passage or a room, giving access to an adjoining cavity or to the surface; larger and less symmetrical than a porthole. 
window :  The opening under the arch of a small natural bridge. 
zanjon :   In Puerto Pico, solution trench in limestone. Zanjones range from a few centimeters to about 3 meters in width and from about 1 to 4 meters in depth. Apparently they form by the widening and deepening of joints by solution. 
zone of aeration :  The zone in permeable soil or rock that is above the zone saturated with water; the zone of vadose water.
Zwischenhohle :   Cave in which a river passage, or former river passage, is entered from above or laterally and which can be for owed upstream and downstream some distance but not to daylight.
