pitted plain :  Plain having numerous small closely spaced closed depressions.
pocket :  Solution cavity in ceiling, floor, or walls of a cave, shaped like the interior of a round-bottomed kettle; unrelated to joints or bedding.
polje :   In areas of karst topography, a very large closed depression, in some places several kilometers long and wide, having a flat floor either of bare limestone or covered by alluvium, and surrounded by generally steep walls of limestone. Synonym : interior valley.
polygonal karst :  A karst area where the surface is completely pitted with closed depressions, the divides of which form a crudely polygonal network. Especially common in humid tropical cone-karst terrain, but also found in well-formed temperate doline-karst terrain.
ponor :   Hole in the bottom or side of a closed depression through which water passes to or from an underground channel. Compare swallet, swallow hole.
pool deposit :  Crystalline material deposited in an isolated pool in a cave.
pore deposit :  Mineral matter deposited on the interior of a cave from water entering the cave so slowly through pores and cracks that it does not form drops.
porthole :  A nearly circular natural opening in a thin rock wall in a cave. See also window.
pothole :  A small rounded hole worn into rock in a streambed, at a waterfall, or near sea level by sand, gravel, and stones being spun around by force of the currents; a nature mill. 
pothole :  Term used in England for vertical or steeply inclined shaft in limestone. 
pseudokarst :  Karstlike terrain produced by a process other than the dissolving of rock, such as the rough surface above a lava field, where the ceilings of lava tubes have collapsed Features of pseudokarst include lava tunnels, lava tubes, lava stalactites, and lava stalagmites.
residual clay :  Clay or sandy clay remaining on a rock surface after removal of calcium carbonate by solution. 
resurgence :  Point at which an underground stream reaches the surface and becomes a surface stream. In European literature, the term is reserved for the reemergence of a stream that has earlier sunk upstream; the term exsurgence is applied to a stream without known surface headwaters.
rice paddy :  In a cave, a terraced rimstone pool.
rift :  A long narrow high cave passage controlled by joints or faults.
