The fenglin is defined as limestone towers or peaks that are isolated from each other by flat limestone surfaces, which are generally covered by a thin layer of loose sediment.
Radiolocation is a technique to fix an underground point to the corresponding point on the surface, usually to find out where the extremities of a cave lie and reduce cumulative errors in the survey.
Various names have been ascribed to the towers and the overall landscape: in Chinese, tower karst is known as fenglin (peak forest) where towers are isolated, and fengcong (peak cluster) where groups of residual hills share a common exposed bedrock base; in Spanish the towers are termed mogotes; in French they are tourelles or pitons; in German Turmkarst; elsewhere they are known as “haystacks” and pepinos.
An artificial underground reservoir is a portion of an aquifer that has been improved to control the discharge regime of artificially stored water.
Valleys are a feature of most karst regions, the exceptions ‘ being areas of polygonal karst where the whole surface is pitted by dolines, although even here there may be vestiges of former valley networks.
Pocket valleys (or steepheads) are the reverse of blind valleys, since they occur in association with large springs close to the margins of karst areas.
Sinkholes or dolines are closed land surface depressions with internal drainage typically formed in karst environments (Ford and Williams, 2007).
In most references, uvalas are defined as karst depressions which are formed due to coalescence of several dolines.
In the first edition of their book (Ford & Williams, 1989), four types of dolines are distinguished (solution, collapse, subsidence, suffosion), while in the second edition (2007), there are six types : solution, collapse, dropout, buried, caprock, and suffosion.
Uvalas are hollows with undulating floors made up of more than one doline.
The term uvala is used in a variety of ways and is sometimes applied to youthful poljes or to dry valleys floored by sinkholes.
A typical sinkhole is bowl shaped, with one or more low spots along its bottom.
Paleokarst is karst terrain that has been buried beneath younger sediments.
Basins designed and maintained to filter sediments and pollutants are known as sedimentation and filtration basins.
