The caves are the world’s largest known examples of “flank-margin caves”, a type of cave that develops in carbonate coastlines as a result of sea-water and freshwater mixing inside the coastline.
Morphometry is the measurement and analysis of form (shape).
The outstanding landforms are dissolutional corridors (“streets”) in the limestone that follow major vertical fractures created by the doming (Brook & Ford, 1978).
Paleokarst is a worldwide phenomenon that is found on all continents, including Antarctica, and in the geological record from the early Proterozoic to the Holocene.
Caves without roofs are an important paleokarst landform which has only recently attracted scientific attention.
Paleokarst aquifers are important sources of water and can present a significant flooding hazard to underground mining operations.
Palynology, the study of microscopic organic matter known as palynomorphs (Traverse, 1988), offers enormous potential in karst research since it can provide important evidence about ancient environments.
Palynology is an integral part of many archaeological investigations in caves, since it provides a picture of the flora close to the cave and thus enables environmental and climatic reconstruction.
Paragenesis is the term introduced by Renault (1968) to describe the processes by which cave genesis within the phreatic zone is modified by influxes of sediment.
“Network mazes” are angular grids of intersecting fissures guided by fractures.
“Spongework mazes” are irregular cavities enlarged from primary pores, which interconnect in a three-dimensional array like the holes in a sponge.
Large allogenic streams penetrate farther into the karst in well-defined valleys before they sink, and they produce landforms known as blind valleys, because their valleys usually terminate abruptly in a cliff or steep slope.
A pre-ponor retention is a temporary water accumulation in the surface depression just above the ponor.
Pseudokarstic caves are natural underground spaces, large enough to enter and investigate, extending beyond daylight, and produced by some process other than dissolution.
Emanation is the net radon production rate in the rock walls of a cave, or in unconsolidated sediment within the cave, and ultimately depends on the concentration of uranium (which then decays to radium) in the material.
