Nathaniel awakened as from a heavy, frightful dream; he opened his
eyes, and felt an indescribable sensation of pleasure streaming through
him, with soft heavenly warmth.  He was in bed in his own room, in his
father's house, Clara was stooping over him, and Lothaire and his
mother were standing near.  "At last, at last, oh beloved Nathaniel,
hast thou recovered from thy serious illness--now thou art again mine!"
So spoke Clara, from the very depth of her soul, and clasped Nathaniel
in her arms.  But with mingled sorrow and delight did the brightly
glowing tears fall from his eyes, and he deeply groaned forth: "My
own--my own Clara!"  Sigismund, who had faithfully remained with his
friend in the hour of trouble, now entered.  Nathaniel stretched out
his hand to him.  "And thou, faithful brother, hast not deserted me?"
Every trace of Nathaniel's madness had vanished, and he soon gained
strength amid the care of his mother, his beloved, and his friends.
Good fortune also had visited the house, for an old penurious uncle, of
whom nothing had been expected, had died, and had left the mother,
besides considerable property, an estate in a pleasant spot near the
town.  Thither Nathaniel, with his Clara, whom he now thought of
marrying, his mother, and Lothaire, desired to go.  Nathaniel had now
grown milder and more docile than he had ever been, and he now
understood, for the first time, the heavenly purity and the greatness
of Clara's mind.  No one, by the slightest hint, reminded him of the
past.  Only, when Sigismund took leave of him, Nathaniel said:
"Heavens, brother, I was in an evil way, but a good angel led me
betimes to the path of light!  Ah, that was Clara!"  Sigismund did not
let him carry the discourse further for fear that deeply wounding
recollections might burst forth bright and flaming.  It was about this
time that the four happy persons thought of going to the estate.  They
were crossing, at noon, the streets of the city, where they had made
several purchases, and the high steeple of the town-house already cast
its gigantic shadow over the market-place.  "Oh," said Clara, "let us
ascend it once more, and look at the distant mountains!"  No sooner
said than done.  Nathaniel and Clara both ascended the steps, the
mother returned home with the servant, and Lothaire, not inclined to
clamber up so many steps, chose to remain below.  The two lovers stood
arm in arm in the highest gallery of the tower, and looked down upon
the misty forests, behind which the blue mountains were rising like a
gigantic city.

"Look there at that curious little gray bush, which actually seems as
if it were striding towards us," said Clara.  Nathaniel mechanically
put his hand into his breast pocket--he found Coppola's telescope, and
he looked on one side.  Clara was before the glass.  There was a
convulsive movement in his pulse and veins,--pale as death, he stared
at Clara, but soon streams of fire flashed and glared from his rolling
eyes, and he roared frightfully, like a hunted beast.  Then he sprang
high into the air, and, in the intervals of a horrible laughter,
shrieked out, in a piercing tone, "Wooden doll--turn thyself!"  Seizing
Clara with immense force he wished to hurl her down, but with the
energy of a desperate death-struggle she clutched the railings.
Lothaire heard the raging of the madman--he heard Clara's shriek of
agony--fearful forebodings darted through his mind, he ran up, the door
of the second flight was fastened, and the shrieks of Clara became
louder and louder.  Frantic with rage and anxiety, he dashed against
the door, which, at last, burst open.  Clara's voice became fainter and
fainter.  "Help--help--save me!"--with these words the voice seemed to
die in the air.  "She is gone--murdered by the madman!" cried Lothaire.
The door of the gallery was also closed, but despair gave him a giant's
strength, and he burst it from the hinges.  Heavens--Clara, grasped by
the mad Nathaniel, was hanging in the air over the gallery,--only with
one hand she still held one of the iron railings.  Quick as lightning
Lothaire caught his sister, drew her in, and, at the same moment,
struck the madman in the face with his clenched fist, so that he reeled
and let go his prey.

Lothaire ran down with his fainting sister in his arms.  She was saved.
Nathaniel went raging about the gallery and bounded high in the air,
crying, "Fire circle turn thyself--turn thyself!"  The people collected
at the sound of the wild shriek, and among them, prominent by his
gigantic stature, was the advocate Coppelius, who had just come to the
town, and was proceeding straight to the market-place.  Some wished to
ascend and secure the madman, but Coppelius laughed, saying, "Ha,
ha,--only wait--he will soon come down of his own accord," and looked
up like the rest.  Nathaniel suddenly stood still as if petrified; he
stooped down, perceived Coppelius, and yelling out, "Ah, pretty
eyes--pretty eyes!"--he sprang over the railing.

When Nathaniel lay on the stone pavement, with his head shattered,
Coppelius had disappeared in the crowd.

Many years afterwards it is said that Clara was seen in a remote spot,
sitting hand in hand with a kind-looking man before the door of a
country house, while two lively boys played before her.  From this it
may be inferred that she at last found that quiet domestic happiness
which suited her serene and cheerful mind, and which the morbid
Nathaniel would never have given her.