A tecto-karstic hollow is a closed basin that developed inside a tectonic depression that also evolved through karst processes.
Poljes are the largest closed depressions observed in the karst terrains.
In 1895, Cvijic defined a polje as a large karst depression, with a wide, flat and nearly horizontal floor, completely enclosed between steep slopes.
A peripheral polje is a depression fed by a large internal area of impermeable rocks with a centrifugal stream network.
A base-level polje is a polje with a floor cut entirely across karst rocks and is affected by the vertical oscillations of the water table; consequently, it is inundated during high-level periods.
The precise scientific name is littoral cave, meaning a cave formed within the range of tides.
Sea caves are caves that form by wave erosion in coastal areas that contain exposed bedrock.
The flank margin caves are a series of oval rooms from pore size up to large chambers, which tend to be extensive in the horizontal direction, but limited in the vertical direction, a result of developing in the thinning margin of the freshwater lens (Fig.
Blue holes are defined as subsurface voids that are developed in carbonate banks and islands; are open to the Earth’s surface; contain tidally-influenced waters of fresh, marine, or mixed chemistry; extend below sea level for a majority of their depth; and may provide access to submerged cave passages.
Limonite is a generic term that refers to both mineral and amorphous forms of iron oxides and hydroxides.
The sandstone is a rock made of cemented quartz sand that is very resistant to erosion.
Karst forms are surface and subsurface karst features formed mainly by solutional processes of carbonate rocks of the region which are extremely well folded and fractured due to tectonic events.
Collapse dolines are common features of the Dinaric karst and are especially numerous above known large caves.
Karst poljes are large karst depressions with flat bottoms, which are the result of solutional processes and karst water drainage.
Remnants of old river streams are dry valleys, which lack an active watercourse over all or parts of their length for at least part of the year, because water is lost in karst or is in a much lower position.
