The result is the so-called lampenflora, that is, green plants (generally algae, fern, moss) developing on cave walls or formations close to a light source.
Visitor capacity is defined as the number of visitors to a given cave over a given time period, which does not permanently change the environmental parameters beyond their natural fluctuation range.
Allogeneic waters are defined as stream flow derived from nonlocal sources.
Base level refers to sea level or the lowest level of master stream erosion.
A cover-collapse sinkhole is a subtype of a subsidence sinkhole.
According to European usage, suffosion dolines are small depressions usually only a few meters in diameter and depth.
According to this concept, a sinkhole is part of a long-term process and it may have different forms and surface expressions at different times.
A cave system is a group of several interconnected caves explored separately and later joined by the discovery of interconnecting passages.
Hypogene speleogenesis is defined as the formation of solution-enlarged permeability structures by water that recharges the cavernous zone from below, independent of recharge from the overlying or immediately adjacent surface (Ford, 2006; Klimchouk, 2007).
Fossil vertically extended collapse features known as breccia pipes, collapse columns, or geologic organs, and also termed vertical through structures, are a common by-product of hypogene speleogenesis in a variety of geological settings.
Speleogenesis is a result of dissolution of soluble rocks by groundwater.
Speleothems are deposits of secondary minerals (such as calcite) that form on the ceilings, walls, and floors of caves.
Straw stalactites are hollow tubes, about 5 mm in diameter, and are often very coarsely crystalline with the straw axis corresponding to the c-axis direction of the calcite crystals.
Helictites are an erratic stalactite-like form that occurs when seepage rates are too slow for complete drops to form.
Cave pearls are near-spherical, unattached speleothem hat form in pools agitated by water dripping from considerable heights.
