Calcretes are carbonate deposits forming from groundwater near the water table in arid lands as a result of concentration processes by near-surface evaporation.
Riedl defined the marginal cave by its position at the sea coast, the presence of brackish water, and the presence of troglobiotic species in it, but he also supposed that the origin of such caves was due to wave action and their gradual loss of connection to the sea.
The halocline is a layer where the salinity abruptly changes (sometimes from polyhaline to nearly limnic).
Glaciers are sedimentary formations of seasonal snow that accumulates on the upper elevations of a glacier and buries the previous season ’ s accumulation.
Denuded karst is former intrastratal karst that develops where the soluble rock has been almost completely exposed from beneath the cover, but with substantial inheritance of solution porosity from the preceding stages of intrastratal development.
Open karst is karst that commences only after exposure of the soluble rock, without any significant intrastratal karstification.
Gypsum needles are straight, clear crystals that grow by extrusion from the soil in some caves.
As the name implies, cave cotton is a mass of tangled fibers generally with fiber lengths of a few tens of centimeters but diameters of tens or hundreds of micrometers.
In porous media aquifers, pores between mineral grains are the open spaces available for the storage of water.
Porosity is defined as the ratio of the volume of pores to the volume of bulk rock and is usually expressed as a percentage.
Karst springs are the outlets draining open conduit systems.
Hydrothermal karst is a special case of hypogene karst.
Network caves are angular grids of intersecting passages formed by widening of nearly all major fractures within favorable areas of soluble rocks.
A particular type of ice stalagmite, known as bamboo or thermoindicator, consists of successions of perfectly transparent ice knobs and narrow sections of opaque ice.
Longitudinal rills / flutes are suites of vertical grooves that develop where a water film flows down a high angle rock face.
