The word polje signifies a field or a large plain, and it is still widely used in Slav languages without particular reference to karstic terrain (Sweeting 1972, Roglič 1974), although poljes in the karst of Slovenia are usually called dolina or dol (Gams 1994).
The word ‘tower’ therefore subsumes a myriad of forms, and a variety of terms in different languages has been used to describe them, including turm, mogote, cone, piton, hum and pepino.
Breccia pipes are common features of gypsum karst that are created by progressive stoping above sites of interstratal dissolution.
Gypsum tumuli (bubbles or tents) are hollow domes of freshly formed gypsum that are round or elliptical in plan (Breish and Wefer 1981, Pulido-Bosch 1986, Macaluso and Sauro 1996).
Clasts with microrills are rillensteine (Laudermilk and Woodford 1932).
Solution runnels are normal Hortonian channels, heading where sheetflow or wash on a slope breaks down into linear threads.
Solution dolines are a common feature of karst in humid areas, yet not all carbonate rocks support them.
Pinnacle karst is a spectacular small-scale landform found principally in the humid tropics and subtropics, with the best known examples coming from Gunung Api, Mulu, and Mount Kaijende, New Guinea.
Caves are natural museums, preserving important archaeological evidence as well as sediments and deposits that provide clues to past environments.
Blue holes are water-filled vertical openings in the carbonate rock of the islands, which exhibit complex morphologies, ecologies, and water chemistries.
Blue holes are the composite result of carbonate deposition and dissolution cycles, which have been controlled by glacial sea-level fluctuations.
The term “blue hole” has been used in a variety of ways, but they are best defined as: “subsurface voids that are developed in carbonate banks and islands; are open to the Earth’s surface; contain tidally influenced waters of fresh, marine, or mixed chemistry; extend below sea-level for a majority of their depth; and may provide access to submerged cave passages.
Carbon dioxide in aqueous solution is a critical component in both the solution and precipitation of speleothems and the solution of limestone.
Diagenesis is a term describing processes of compaction and/or cementation of the initially unconsolidated carbonate mud and debris (Moore, 2001).
Dolostone is a major product of diagenesis.
