rill :  Small solution groove on surface exposures of limestone; most common in arid or semiarid areas.
Rillenstein :   Microsolution grooves and pitting on rock surface.
rimstone :  Calcareous deposits formed around the rims of overflowing basins, especially in caves.
rimstone barrage, rimstone barrier, rimstone dam :  A wall-shaped deposit that impounds pools of water in caves, around springs, and in cascades of streams saturated with calcium bicarbonate. Synonym, gour.
rimstone pool :  Pool kept in place by a rimstone dam.
rise :   Spring rising from fractures in limestone. Point at which an underground stream comes to the surface.
rock pillar :  A residual isolated mass of bedrock linking the roof or overhanging wall and floor of a cave, in contrast with a column, which is composed of dripstone or flowstone. 
rock pinnacle :  A tall sharp projection of bedrock rising from the floor of a cave.
rock shelter :  Shallow cave under an overhanging rock ledge. Many sea caves are rock shelters. Also found in limestone and other rock types where streams have undercut their banks at bends, or where there has been abrasion by blowing sand. Common in tropical areas at places where a secondarily hardened layer of limestone forms a ledge that projects over unindurated limestone.
roof crust :  Flowstone deposited on ceilings of caves from thin films of water, which have crept over the rock from pore or crack sources.
room :  A part of a cave system that is wider than a passage. Synonym: chamber.
sand stalagmite :  A stalagmite formed on sand and made of calcite cemented sandstone.
scaling chip :  A thin small rather irregular piece of limestone, commonly crumbly, which has fallen from the ceiling or wall of a eave. A form of cave breakdown.
scaling plate :  A small flat piece of rock of rectangular or polygonal shape, that has fallen to the floor of a cave. A form of cave breakdown in thin-tedded impure limestone cut by closely spaced joints.
scallop :  Oval hollow having an asymmetric cross section along its main axis. Scallops form patterns on tl e walls of caves and in streambeds and were used by Bretz to determine direction of flow of turbulent water, since they are steeper on the upstream side. Commonly called flutes in America.
sea cave :  A cave or cleft in a sea cliff eroded by waves or currerts or dissolved by water. 
