calcilutite :  Clastic limestone or dolomite in which the grains have an average diameter of less than 1/16 millimeter; calcareous mudstone.
calcirudite :  A fragmental limestone in which the particles are generally larger than 2 millimeters.
calcite :  A mineral composed of calcium carbonate, CaCOs, like aragonite but differing in crystal form; the principal constituent of limestone.
calcite bubble :  A hollow sphere formed by the deposition of calcite around a gas bubble; the interior is smooth, and the exterior consists of small jagged crystals.
canopy :  A compound cave formation consisting of flowstone hanging from a sloping wall projection and forming a fringe of shawls or stalactites on the outer edge.
canyon :  A steep-walled chasm, gorge, or ravine cut by running water. 
canyon :  A valley formed by collapse of the roof of a long fairly straight cave; a karst valley.
capillary stalagmite :  Hollow stalagmite formed by saturated karst water pushed up through capillaries and small cracks in a sinter crust; covering permeable fluvial deposits on the floor of a cave; first reported from Cuba, where such stalagmites are composed of aragonite.
carbonate :  A rock consisting mainly of carbonate minerals, such as limestone or dolomite.
cave :  A natural underground room or series of rooms and passages large enough to be entered by a man; generally formed by solution of limestone. 
cave breakdown :  Enlargement of parts of a cave system by fall of rock masses from walls and ceiling. 
cave breakdown :  Heaps of rock that have collapsed from the walls and ceiling of a cave, generally called cave breccia.
cave breccia :  Angular fragments of rock forming a fill in a cave, either cemented together by dripstone or in a matrix of cave earth. See also solution breccia. 
cave coral :  A rough, knobby growth of calcite resembling coral in shape, generally small; found on floor, walls, or ceiling of a cave. Synonym, coral formation. See also knobstone.
cave earth, cave fill :  Insoluble deposits of clay, silt, sand, or gravel flooring or filling a cave passage. In a more restricted sense, cave earth includes only the finer fractions: clay, silt, and fine sand deposits.
