struga :   A corridor formed along a bedding plane in karst country.
subjacent karst :  Karst landscape in noncarbonate rocks due to presence of karstified rocks beneath the surface formation.
submarine spring :  Large offshore emergence, generally from cavernous limestone, but in some areas from beds of lava.
subsidence :  Lowering of the surface of the ground because of removal of support. Caused in karst areas by subterranean solution or collapse of caves.
subterranean river :  Underground stream of flowing water, not necessarily large. 
sump :  A pool of underground water or point on an underground stream that has a submerged extension, the nature of which has not been determined.
swallet, swallow hole :   A place where water disappears urderground in a limestone region. A swallow hole generally implies water loss in a closed depression or blind valley, whereas a swallet may refer to water loss into alluvium at a streambed, even though there is no depression. 
syngenetic karst :  Karst developed in eolian calcarenite where lithification of dune sands and productior of karst phenomena occurred simultaneously.
terraced flowstone :  Shallow rimstone pools on outward-sloping walls. 
threshold :  That part of a cave system to which light penetrates in some degree.
through cave :  Cave through which a stream runs from entrance to exit or formerly did so. Synonym:  Durchgangshohle.
torca :   Large closed depression, more or less circular; a doline. 
torricellian chamber :  A submerged airfilled chamber of a cave at a pressure below atmospheric pressure, sealed by water, having an air-water surface above that of adjacent free air-water surfaces.
tourelle :   A little tower; applied to small flat-topped buttes of limestone in karst areas. Contrasted with pitons, which have pointed tops, and with coupoles, which have rounded tops.
tower karst, Turmkarst :  Karst topography characterized by isolated limestone hills separated by areas of alluvium or other detrital sand; towers are generally steep-sided forest-covered hills, and many have flat tops.
