cupola :  A hemispheric hill of limestone.  Cupole.  Halb-kugel.
current marking :  Shallow asymmetrical hollows, caused by turbulent waterflow, that are distributed in rather regular fashion over limestone surfaces. See also scallop.
curtain :  A wavy or folded sheet of flowstone hanging from the roof or projecting from the wall of a cave; often translucent and resonant. See also bacon; blanket; drapery.
cutter :   Solution crevice in limestone underlying residual phosphate deposits. 
cutter :  A Karren-like groove formed beneath the soil, more commonly referred to as subsoil Karren. See also Karren.
dead cave :  A dry cave in which all solution and precipitation has cersed.
doline :  A basin- or funnel-shaped hollow in limestone, ranging in diameter from a few meters to a kilometer and in depth from a few to several hundred meters. Some dolines are gentle grassy hollows; others are rocky cliff-bounded basins. A distinction may be made between those formed mainly by direct solution of the limestone surface zone, solution dolines, and those formed by collapse over a cave, collapse dolines, but it is generally not possible to establish the origin of individual examples. 
doline lake :  A small karst lake occupying a doline.
dolomite :  A mineral composed of calcium magnesium carbonate. 
dolomite :  Rock chiefly composed of the mineral dolomite. Also called dolostone.
dolomitization :  The process whereby limestone becomes dolomite by the substitution of magnesium carbonate for part of the original calcium carbonate. 
drapery :  A thin sheet of dripstone, equivalent to curtain. See also bacon; blanket.
driphole :  Hole in rock or clay produced by fast-dripping water. 
driphole :  Hollow space surrounded by precipitated material, such as the bottom of a stalactite.
dripstone :  Calcium carbonate deposited from water dripping from the ceiling or wall of a cave or from the overhanging edge of a rock shelter; commonly refers to the rock in stalactites, stalagmites, and other similar speleothems; in some places composed of aragonite or gypsum. See also flowstone.
dry cave :  A cave without a running stream. See also dead cave.
