glade :   Limestone pavement having extensive growth of cedar trees.
grike, gryke :   A vertical or subvertical fissure in a limestone pavement developed by solution along a joint. Synonym:  Kluftkarren.
grotto :  A small cave, natural or artificial. 
grotto :  A room, in a cave system, of moderate dimensions but richly decorated.
gulf :  Steep-walled closed depression having a flat alluviated bottom; in some gulfs a stream flows across the bottom.
gypsum :  A mineral composed of hydrous calcium sulfate.
Halbkugelkarst :   Tropical karst topography containing domeshaped residual hills surrounding depressions, a kind of Kegelkarst. Also called Kugelkarst.
half-blind valley :  Blind valley in which the stream overflows in floodtirae when the swallow hole can not accep t all the water.
half tube :  Trace of a tube remaining in the roof or wall of a cave.  
hall :  In a cave, a lofty chamber which is much longer than it is wide. 
hanging blade :  A blade projecting down from the ceiling. 
haystack hill :   In the tropics, rounded conical hill of limestone developed as a result of solution. Term being replaced by mogote.
helictite :  A curved or angular twiglike lateral projection of calcium carbonate having a tiny central canal, found in caves. Synonym: eccentric stalactite.
heligmite :  An eccentric growing upward from a cave floor or from a shelf in a cave. A curved or angular thin stalagmite.
holokarst :  Cvijić's term for a karst area like that of the Dinaric Karst of Slovenia. Such areas have bare surfaces on thick deposits of limestone that extend below sea level, well-developed Karren, dolines, uvalas, poljes, deep ponors, and extensive cave systems; they have little or no surface drainage.
hum :  Karst inselberg. Residual hill of limestone on a fairly level floor, such as the isolated hills of limestone in poljes. In some tropical areas, used loosely as synonym for mogote.
ice cave :  A cave, generally in lava or limestone, in which the average temperature is below 0°C., and which ordinarily contains perennial ice. Ice may have the form of stalactites, stalagmites, or flowstone. 
