Jamas are shafts of greater dimensions, sinking deep into the carbonate massive.
The zone of vertical circulation is an area with large joints through which the water circulates quickly, predominantly in the ver - tical direction, down to the groundwater level.
Mines are fresh excavations in the bedrock and it is the stress pattern around the opening that determines such hazards as rock bursts, spalling, and roof collapse (Brady and Brown, 1993).
Mineral deposits take on the form of stalactites, stalagmites, flowstone, and other forms known collectively as speleothems.
The underground pathways in limestone through which water moves from sinkholes and sinking streams to the outlets at springs are known as conduits.
A typical aeolian cave is a bowl-shaped chamber carved in solid rock.
Lava conduits (also known as tubes, tunnels, or pyroducts) form on the sides of volcanoes within streams of lava by a process called inflation or by the crusting over of channels.
Biofilms on subaerial cave-wall surfaces, referred to as microbial draperies, cave-wall biofilms, or snottites, have been described from the several active sulfidic caves.
The Slav term doline means “depression” and in a broad sense includes channels and hollows of different types, such as fluvial valleys, dry valleys, blind valleys, uvalas, poljes, and karst dolines.
A tiankeng is a collapse doline at least 100 m long, wide and deep, and with perimeter walls that are close to vertical (Zhu and Waltham, 2006).
A particular type of collapse doline is the cenotes, open depressions in the coastal karst belts giving access to the water table and resulting from the collapse of the roof of submerged cavities.
Subsidence dolines are closed depressions caused by the subsiding of an area.
Intersection dolines are depressions formed when an old cave system, partially or totally filled with sediments, is cut by the topographic surface as a consequence of the lowering of such a surface by chemical erosion.
A compound hollow is a form that originated from the fusion of simpler forms.
A polygenetic sink is a closed depression that clearly evolved through both the karst process and another morphogenetic process.
